For Tuna, A Scent Trail
HUNGRY tuna looking for a meal in the deep, dark ocean typically rely upon their eyes and noses to find nearby seafood.
But with prey species often at a considerable distance, beyond where tuna can see or smell, much energy can be wasted on futile searches for food, unless, of course, the prey give themselves away.
And that, according to marine biologists in Hawaii, is exactly what they do.
Scent cues from prey would normally be rapidly diluted like a drop of food coloring in a gallon of water.


In Unexpected Places, Clues to Ancient and Future Climate; Resetting the Ice Age Clock
SCIENTISTS' understanding of what causes the Earth's great ice ages has been confronted by a major challenge: a record of ancient temperatures that seems directly contradictory to established theory.
The record comes from a deep crack in the Earth in Nevada, called Devils Hole, and consists of a core drilled from layers of minerals deposited on the walls of the crack over the last 560,000 years.
A pattern of isotopes in the Devils Hole core yields both the date each deposit was laid down and the temperature at the time.
Scientists analyzing the record found to their great surprise that the succession of cold periods differed significantly from the accepted chronology of ice ages, as reconstructed from records in sediments on the sea floor.


BURMESE DISSIDENT SEEN IN MORE PERIL
The husband of Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, the Burmese dissident who won the 1991 Nobel Peace Prize, said today that his wife's life was in growing peril because she was now refusing even her own family's offers of food and material support as a way to protest her continuing detention.
"I have reason to believe that the circumstances under which she is held now pose a grave threat to her life," said Michael Aris, a British scholar, who met with reporters today in Oxford.
"I am now very concerned that soon she will have no means at all of sustaining life."


Patterns
The Subject Was China
It was breakfast at Hermes yesterday for 50 executives from the fashion and retailing worlds.
They were there for the latest in an occasional series of breakfast meetings at the 57th Street store at which leading members of the international business community share views on various topics.
The guest speaker at the event was Peter Woo, chairman of World International Holdings Ltd. and Wharf Holdings Ltd. of Hong Kong, who discussed the economic potential of trade with China.


After Being Ever So Humbled, No Place Like Home
A letdown like the one the Knicks suffered against the Detroit Pistons Sunday will do them no good unless they they learn from it.
"If we don't make that step, we won't be a great team; that's the bottom line," said Knicks guard Doc Rivers.
"We won a game Saturday against a great team, Chicago. But then when you come back the next night, you've got to win that game. Until we understand that, we're not going to be a great team. And it takes every individual, myself and everyone. We haven't done that."


Lawsuit Challenges Hospital Surcharges for Care of the Poor
A coalition of trade unions in New York City has filed a lawsuit in Federal court aimed at challenging New York State's system of subsidizing health care for the poor by tacking surcharges onto the hospital bills of all patients.
A similar lawsuit filed by unions in New Jersey led a Federal judge to invalidate that state's indigent-care system in May.
After months of difficult negotiations, the New Jersey Legislature and Gov.
Jim Florio devised a new plan for providing care for poor patients two weeks ago.
The Legislature passed the bill last night.


Police Arrest a Suspect in Series of Rapes
The New York City Police reported last night that they had arrested a suspect wanted in a monthlong series of rapes in the Bedford-Stuyvesant section of Brooklyn after four women picked him out of a lineup and said he was their attacker.
The police identified the suspect as Ulysses Terry, 27 years old, of 370 Decatur Street in Brooklyn.


Selling Addicts on Treatment Rather Than Prison
Gilbert Acevedo had seen many young men like the one who sat before him, pale and in gray prison overalls at Rikers Island.
He saw them on street corners and in dark houses in the Bronx, where for four years he bought cocaine as an undercover police officer.
He saw them in himself when he became addicted to the drug, treating it as a perk of the job, and again when he was thrown off the force.
He looked hard at the 20-year-old accused of selling crack and listened as he and the young man sat on folding chairs in the chaplain's office at Rikers.
Mr.
Acevedo, who says he has been clean for three years, was there as a counselor in an experimental program.
Instead of prison, some first-time offenders in the Bronx and Queens can enter a residential drug-treatment center for free through Phoenix House, the national drug-rehabilitation organization.


Natural Insecticide
Federal researchers hope a natural insecticide made from extracts of a tobacco plant will prove effective against a major agricultural scourge: the sweet potato whitefly.
The pesticide kills an immature whitefly by weakening the waxy protective coating on its body covering, causing it to dry out, said John W. Neal, an entomologist with the Agricultural Research Service.


Making a Game of the Computer
THE Alpha Kids series of books with disks make excellent gifts for computerized families in the holiday season.
Many children are eager to learn about computers and may be less intimidated than their parents.
"Fun With Computers," by Sherry Kinkoph (Alpha Books; $16.95), + is what is known in the trade as an "activity book." That is, the child doesn't just read it, but also practices necessary skills like typing on the keyboard, manipulating the mouse and inserting a floppy disk, as well as doing paper-and-crayon tasks like drawing a path through a maze to help a cat find its way to a mouse.


D.M.B.&amp;B. Confirms Personnel Shifts
D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles in New York yesterday confirmed reports in Advertising Age and Adweek this week that it was making top personnel changes in its creative department.
After a yearlong search, E. Lynn Giordano was named creative director on the agency's Kraft General Foods account, said Herb Katz, a spokesman at D.M.B.&amp; B. Ms.
Giordano, previously European creative director at Ogilvy &amp; Mather London, succeeds David Levine, who left to become senior vice president and creative director at Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising in New York.


Allan Hunter; Investment Banker, 77
Allan Hunter, an investment banker and philanthropist in New York, died on Thursday at his home in Pound Ridge, N.Y.
He was 77 years old.
Mr. Hunter, who also lived in Manhattan, died of cancer, said his son, Andre Hunter.


Accounts
*
Bloomingdale's, New York, said yesterday that it had moved its account in-house, after 10 years at Grey Advertising, New York, confirming a report this week in Adweek.
Billings were not disclosed; Grey handled television advertising for the department store chain.


In Unexpected Places, Clues to Ancient and Future Climate; Warming? Tree Rings Say Not Yet
THE Laboratory of Tree Ring Research at the University of Arizona, a sprawling warren of dim rooms wedged underneath the campus football stadium, harbors about one million specimens of wood.
The samples range in size from fragments the size of a baby's pinkie to enormous slabs sliced from the stumps of giant sequoias around which you could comfortably serve a dinner party of 12.
And every one of those wood specimens, no matter how bland its grain or how charred and pitted its surface, tells an astonishing story.


COMPANY NEWS;
Pepsico Inc. said yesterday that it would take charges of nearly $1 billion in the fourth quarter because it was adopting two mandatory non-cash accounting changes.
Earnings results for each quarter of 1992 will be restated to reflect the accounting changes, Pepsi said.


Review/Television; The Arnolds Tweak Their Detractors' Cheeks
ABC's new Tuesdays-at-9:30 P.M. sitcom, "The Jackie Thomas Show," could be subtitled "Roseanne's Revenge."
Played with manic zest by Tom Arnold, Jackie is the menacingly lovable star of a top-10 comedy series, its backstage chaos bearing a remarkable resemblance to the weeping-and-wailing stories circulating behind the cameras of "Roseanne" a couple of years ago.
Producers dumped, writers booted, an apparently power-crazed star on the rampage: it's all here.
Only now, with Roseanne Arnold and Mr.
Arnold as the executive producers, a new twist is given to the concept of based-on-reality television.
Bad press is being transformed into hilarious television.


The Vest Shrugs Off Its Suit
Add the vest to the roster of sportswear's basic components for spring.
Shirts and blouses, skirts and pants and all kinds of jackets have long been accepted parts of the arsenal of sportswear separates.
The way these parts are combined establishes the character of any given season.
The addition of the vest introduces a special spicy flavoring.
For it is not the snugly buttoned, multipocket garment that is part of the traditional male three-piece suit and has also slid into women's fashions.
Vests for spring take many forms.
Some are made of macrame, others of the crocheted medallions used for antimacassars.
These are from designers like Marc Jacobs of Perry Ellis and Christian Francis Roth, proponents of the grunge school of fashion.


CHRONICLE
GORDANA KNEZEVIC clearly had mixed feelings about being in Washington yesterday on her way to New York, where she is to receive a Courage in Journalism Award today from the International Women's Media Foundation.
Miss Knezevic is the acting editor in chief of Oslobodenje, a daily newspaper in Sarajevo that hasn't missed an issue during the Serbian siege of the city.
Two reporters have been killed and 20 staff members, out of a total of about 70, have been injured.


It's Too Early to Tell, Say Byrd's Doctors
Twenty-four hours after the Jets' Dennis Byrd fractured a vertebra in his lower neck, his doctors said yesterday that it was premature to speculate on the chances of his recovery, or what that recovery might entail.
"It's almost impossible to predict what kind of improvement will occur and how long it will take," said Dr.
Martin B. Camins, the neurosurgeon involved in the case.


Canadian Drug-Price Shift Said to Cost $3.2 Billion
An American pharmaceutical economist said yesterday that repeal of a Canadian prescription drug law would cost Canadians $3.2 billion (United States) in the next 17 years by protecting the prices of 42 drugs.
The products, made by 20 American and European manufacturers, would gain from two months to 13 years of added patent protection under the proposal, staving off competition they would otherwise face from generic copies.


Vatican Held to No 'Official' Cosmology
To the Editor:
"After 350 Years, Vatican Says Galileo Was Right: It Moves" (front page, Oct. 31) implies that the Vatican is about to admit that the Earth is a planet.
The papal commission, which has long been examining the Galileo affair, has no brief to decide on the correctness of heliocentrism.
The issues, as I understand them, are both legal and theological.
Legalities arise because of the use at Galileo's trial of an unsigned memorandum, purporting to summarize Galileo's interview with Robert Cardinal Bellarmine in 1616.
The reliability of the document and its legal status are both open to question.


Conditions in Iran Are Far From Improving
To the Editor:
In 1979, most Americans were surprised by the fall from power of the Shah of Iran.
For decades the United States news media had assured the public Iran was on the road to progress and would soon join the Western world.
The Islamic Revolution of 1979 showed Iran to be a third-world country, underdeveloped and with an illiterate population, that had squandered its wealth on the whims of its ruler.
"Teheran Journal: Sophistication Sets In: Head Scarves by Chanel" (Nov. 13) is a case of deja vu.
You soothe our concerns about the practices of the fundamentalist regime in Iran by telling us: "Music plays from loudspeakers in hotel lobbies, at homes and in taxis. Sale of video tapes and music cassettes are booming. People line up at movies and amusement parks." Also, "Restaurants around town are serving nonalcoholic 'Islamic beer.' "


The Media Business; ABC Creates Unusual Link To Hit Show
In a highly unusual deal certain to be closely watched in the television industry, ABC announced yesterday that it had formed a partnership with the creators of the hit comedy series "Home Improvement" that would guarantee the show three more years on the network and set up a profit-sharing arrangement between ABC and the show's creators for two future comedy series.
In contrast, almost all prime-time shows are renewed on a year-by-year basis, depending on their success in the ratings.


Carter Looks to Playoffs
The Minnesota Vikings have lost their leading receiver, CRIS CARTER, for the rest of the regular season with a broken collarbone.
Carter, injured in Sunday's 31-17 victory over the Los Angeles Rams in Anaheim, Calif., said his goal was to return in time for post-season games.
The Vikings need one more victory or a loss by the Green Bay Packers to clinch the N.F.C Central Division title.


Senator Enters Alcohol Clinic For Evaluation
Senator Bob Packwood of Oregon has entered an alcohol treatment clinic and retained a lawyer to defend him in an expected ethics investigation into accusations that he made sexual advances on several Senate aides and lobbyists, Mr.
Packwood's office said today.
Mr.
Packwood, the 60-year-old ranking Republican on the Finance Committee, has said he would welcome an investigation by the Senate Ethics Committee.
One women's group has requested such an investigation.


U.S.C. Aide to S. Carolina
The Southern California athletic director, MIKE McGEE, was named to the athletic director's post at South Carolina.
McGee said it was a difficult decision to leave Southern Cal after more than eight years there.
But he said he felt he would be "more useful" at South Carolina, which has just completed its first year in football in the Southeastern Conference.
He replaces KING DIXON, who is being reassigned to a yet-to-be determined position. (AP)


SLAYING IN MEXICO SPOTLIGHTS PRESS
As President Carlos Salinas de Gortari arrived at the foreign press club here two weeks ago for a party, a magazine editor named Ignacio Mendoza Castillo stood across the street, protesting quietly with other journalists from the Caribbean state of Quintana Roo.
"Mr. President," one of their banners read, "We Ask You to Investigate Aggression Against the Press by Miguel Borge Martin," the Governor of Quintana Roo.
Among their many complaints were contentions that Mr.
Borge wanted to kill Mr.
Mendoza because he had printed articles criticizing corruption in the state.


'Baby Bells' Rift Threatens An Advanced Phone Service
Just as the telephone industry seemed to have ended nearly a decade of bickering over the best way to modernize phone lines with new technology, a new split threatens to thwart its efforts once again.
Threatened by looming competition from cable television companies and specialized fiber-optic carriers, the telephone companies had counted on a new digital technology to expand the capacity of their aging copper wires.
But the companies have not been able to decide how fast to modernize, how much to charge for new services and, most important, how to choose technical standards that would allow customers using different brands of equipment to communicate with each other.


A New Expert on Shifts in Climate Through the Ages: the Lowly Fish
HEAVY-FOOTED anglers know from hard experience that fish can hear their steps on the river bank and dart away to safety.
The vibrations in the ground propagate through the water, impinge on bones of the fish and then travel to chambers inside the skull on either side of the brain and just behind the eyes.
There the sound waves rattle tiny stones resting in beds of nerve hairs, which communicate signals of the disturbance to the brain.


Conditions in Iran Are Far From Improving; Making Matters Worse
To the Editor:
Iran did not, as you state in "Iran Resurgent" (editorial, Nov. 16), "seize" a strategic Persian Gulf island in September.
Iran has partly controlled the island, Abu Musa, since 1971 under a settlement of gulf territorial disputes by Iran, Britain and the then new United Arab Emirates.
That settlement included: (a) Iran's relinquishing of its claim to Bahrain, with recognition of Bahrain's independence; (b) creation of the United Arab Emirates and its recognition by Iran; (c) repossession of the Tambs Islands by Iran, and (d) establishment of an Iran-Sharjah condominium over Abu Musa.


Man Sentenced to Life in Killing of Exxon Official
In appearances before Federal and state judges today, Arthur D. Seale was sentenced to life in prison for the kidnapping, extortion and murder of Sidney J. Reso, a senior Exxon official.
"What you have done is thoroughly evil," said Judge Garrett E. Brown Jr. of United States District Court in Trenton.
"Your actions were not for any cause. They were not rash or impulsive. They were cold-blooded and calculated. To the extent you seek mercy you will be given the same you gave your innocent victim -- none."


Fluor to Sell Doe Run Lead-Producing Unit
The Fluor Corporation said today that it planned to sell its money-losing Doe Run Company, the nation's largest producer of refined lead, which will result in a charge against profits this year.
The charge of $95 million includes reserves to cover associated environmental liabilities.


COMPANY NEWS
BT, London, the British telecommunications carrier, said it had been awarded a $530 million contract for an advanced private telephone and data network for the New South Wales Government.
CAVALIER HOMES INC., Wichita Falls, Tex., said it had signed a letter of intent to acquire Homestead Homes Inc., a producer of manufactured homes in Cordele, Ga.
Terms of the purchase were not disclosed.


Blanchette Rockefeller, 83, Philanthropist, Dies
Blanchette Ferry Hooker Rockefeller, a major benefactor of the Museum of Modern Art and the widow of John D. Rockefeller 3d, died on Sunday at her home in Briarcliff Manor, N.Y.
She was 83 years old.
A family spokesman said the cause of death was Alzheimer's disease complicated by pneumonia.


Computer as a Cultural Tool: Chatter Mounts on Every Topic
Sinead O'Connor has renounced rock-and-roll and declared her intention to study opera.
The opera fans at Prodigy are ready.
No sooner had Ms.
O'Connor announced her career change than a subscriber to Prodigy, a national computer network, logged onto its music club, called up the topic "classical music" and created a new subject heading: "Sinead and Opera???"
"Sinead is apparently seeking the peace and tranquillity of Opryland after being roughly rejected in her current circles," read one recent note.
"Surprise, Sinead. The manhandling you got from them is nothing compared to what you'll get from us."


Court Refuses to Block Development of an Uninhabited Island
The United States Supreme Court today rejected a bid to block development of Robins Island, an uninhabited 445-acre island in the Great Peconic Bay.
But other litigation will delay a final decision on what will happen to the property.
The Court, without comment, refused to hear a claim by descendants of a British loyalist that New York State illegally seized Robins Island from an ancestor during the American Revolution.


Quinn in Line for Giants Job
Bob Quinn, dismissed in October as the Cincinnati Reds' general manager, will be named general manager of the San Francisco Giants today, a person familiar with the new ownership's search said last night.
Quinn, who was the Yankees' general manager for a year and a half in 1988-89, was not at his Cincinnati home.
He was said to be traveling to San Francisco for a news conference the Giants announced for today.


Absolut Music In Manhattan
Don't be surprised if the bus shelter in your neighborhood suddenly starts singing Christmas carols courtesy of Absolut vodka and its agency, TBWA Advertising.
From 8 A.M. to 11 P.M. daily in December, tapes of the New York Choral Society singing Christmas carols will fill the air from 10 bus shelters around Manhattan.
The music is in addition to Absolut posters appearing on those shelters, an outdoor version of a print advertisement called "Absolut Harmony" now running in national and regional magazines.
They show members of the chorus standing in the shape of an Absolut bottle before the Christmas tree at Rockefeller Center.


Neediest Fund Aids Family's Fresh Start
In the first minutes of the first day in their first apartment, Roger and Deidra Stroud suddenly realized that they (and no one else) were the ones who had to wash the dishes, mop the floor, buy the curtains, scrub the bathtub, cook the food and pay the rent.
And so began their struggle with the responsibilities of living in their own home, courtesy of Catholic Charities of the Archdiocese of New York, one of seven charities aided by The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.


Life Sentence in Murder of Exxon Official


Corrupt Law Officers
A 10-YEAR study of undercover agents suggests that those who are fast-talking, outgoing, daring and motivated by adventure and excitement may also be more likely to have poor impulse control.
Dr.
Michel Girodo, a professor of psychology at the University of Ottawa who wrote the study, said this impulsiveness could sometimes lead to corruption.
The study was presented at a recent conference of the American Psychological Association and the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health in Washington.


Atomic Age Turns 50


Coleman Status: Day-to-Day
Still suffering from the lower back spasms that kept him out of the Nets' last two games on their West Coast trip last week, Derrick Coleman didn't practice with his teammates yesterday.
His status was listed as day-to-day.
The Nets' next game is tomorrow night against the Atlanta Hawks at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
The 6-foot-10-inch Jayson Williams, who has a sprained left ankle he suffered in Saturday night's victory over the Kings in Sacramento, is definitely out for tomorrow's game, so if Coleman is unable to play, the Nets will have only one true power forward, Rick Mahorn, available.


Kovalev Gets Schooled In Some Basic Lessons
As Aleksei Kovalev stick-handled past two players from Fredericton, New Brunswick, for a goal last week, the crowd at Binghamton, N.Y., clambered to its feet and Coach Ron Smith reached for his most scornful expression.
"We had to let him know these were two guys that would never see the National Hockey League," Smith said.
"He might have undressed the guys, but Kovalev has to unlearn some things that worked in the amateurs. Like super puck control."


Germany Arrests a 19-Year-Old In Bombing That Killed 3 Turks
The German police announced today that they had arrested a 19-year-old man in connection with the attack last week that killed three Turks in the city of Molln.
Prosecutors said the suspect was part of a neo-Nazi circle that carried out "violent acts, specifically firebombings, against foreigners living in the Federal Republic."


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The Commerce Department imposed temporary import taxes on steel from France, Italy, Germany, South Korea and eight other countries, saying they had given their domestic producers deals that provided an unfair advantage in the United States.  [ Page D1. ]
The nation's merchandise trade deficit widened sharply in the third quarter.  [ D2. ]  Prices paid to farmers fell.  [ D13. ]


Performers Pay Tribute to Honi Coles


Injury Factor Enters Free-Agency Debate
United States District Judge David Doty, presiding over a dispute involving free agency for more than 600 National Football League players, has been giving both sides more time to reach an out-of-court settlement that would pave the way for a new collective-bargaining agreement.
Thus far, the wheels simply have kept spinning.


Paris and Bonn Seek to End Unease on Joint Force
France and Germany informed their NATO partners today that a planned European army with 35,000 French and German soldiers would be placed under the "operational command" of the Atlantic alliance in the event of a threat to Western Europe's security.
French Government officials said the decision was intended to reassure the United States and Britain that creation of the so-called Eurocorps, which should become operational by 1995, will not weaken the North Atlantic Treaty Organization.


Decision On USAir Approaches
With the Transportation Department nearing its Dec. 24 deadline to rule on a proposal by British Airways to buy a stake in USAir, Sir Colin Marshall, the deputy chairman and chief executive of British Airways, is preparing for rough going.
"Everything has become so emotional," he said, shaking his head during a recent interview at the United States headquarters of British Airways in the Bulova office center in Jamaica, Queens.


Another Blitz To Promote Elvis Stamp
THOSE who felt overwhelmed by the hoopla over the stamp honoring Elvis Presley had best be braced for an even more ambitious assault.
When the public was asked to vote on the stamp's design, it turns out, it was just the beginning of an elaborate foray by the debt-plagued United States Postal Service into selling the dead singer's image to help generate revenues.


Supreme Court Roundup; High Court to Take Up Case on Large Punitive Awards by Juries
The Supreme Court agreed today to decide whether a jury's award of punitive damages can be so excessive in comparison with the actual damages as to violate the constitutional guarantee of due process of law.
The Court's action was a surprise, coming less than two years after the Court last addressed the issue of punitive damages with a 7-to-1 decision that did little to curb the broad discretion juries have traditionally exercised over damage questions.


Appealing Conviction, Man to Stay Free
Vincent James Landano won his first victory in a New Jersey court today in his 15-year battle to overturn his murder conviction in the slaying of a police officer.
A three-judge panel ruled that Mr.
Landano could remain free while he presses appeals that could take another two to three years.
Besides lifting the fear of imminent return to East Jersey State Prison near Rahway, where he served 13 years before winning release in 1989, today's ruling was a tacit recognition of the merits of Mr.
Landano's case.


Executive Changes
FRITO-LAY INC., Plano, Tex., a unit of Pepsico Inc., appointed Lloyd Ward division president for Frito-Lay Central.
Al Carey was named division president of Frito-Lay West.
PARALLAX GRAPHICS, Santa Clara, Calif., a unit of Dynatech Corp., named Frank Florence president.


Q&amp;A
Grasshopper Tobacco
Q.
When I was young, we used to hold a grasshopper to make it spit "tobacco." What is it?
A.
The brownish liquid, which does resemble tobacco juice, is a substance the grasshopper secretes as a defense mechanism against some possible predators, said Dr.
Stuart Green, an entomologist at Cambridge University.


Vatican Held to No 'Official' Cosmology; Next, Contraception
To the Editor:
Three centuries ago, when the Roman Catholic Church opposed Galileo's theory of the earth moving around the sun (front page, Oct. 31), the Earth continued to move around the sun.
Today, the imprudent opposition of the Vatican to safe, efficient contraception, in an era when AIDS is widespread, unfortunately can adversely affect the lives of millions of women and men and children.
The world cannot wait three centuries for a reversal.
ROSE E. FRISCH  Cambridge, Mass., Nov. 18, 1992 The writer is associate professor emeritus of population sciences at the Harvard School of Public Health.


Conditions in Iran Are Far From Improving; Islam in Central Asia
To the Editor:
I am dismayed by the constant refrain of the great danger that Iran and Islam pose for the world, especially now in articles on Afghanistan and Central Asia, particularly Tajikistan.
Having lived for years in all of these countries, I believe that neither the peoples nor the governments wish to spread their influence or that of Islam.
What they want, above all, is peace and stability, and Shiite Persians are not about to convert Sunni Muslims in Central Asia.


Educator Cites Need to Keep Higher Education Affordable
A major challenge for higher education in the 1990's is to keep college open, accessible and affordable to students from all economic circumstances and backgrounds, the president of Harvard University said today.
In a speech at the National Press Club, Neil L. Rudenstine, Harvard's president since July 1991, said that stagnating family income, not just rising tuition costs, had made higher education more expensive today than at any other time in the last two decades.


Reds Hire Jenkins
FERGUSON JENKINS, a Hall of Famer pitcher, was hired by the Cincinnati Reds as pitching coach of their Class AA farm team at Chattanooga, Tenn.
The Reds' spokesman, JON BRAUDE, said the hiring of Jenkins, who is black, was not related to the growing criticism of the Reds' owner, MARGE SCHOTT.


A Winner in the War of Attrition for Pentagon Suppliers
As far as Josephine Finley and her employer were concerned, the nation was on a war footing from September until near the end of November.
A small American flag attached to her work station at the Terry Manufacturing Company here identified the seamstress as one of 32 workers who were trained to move with the finesse of a rapid deployment force from producing uniforms for McDonald's to sewing camouflage battle dress for the United States Army.


Before We Create an 'Institution' in Times Sq.
To the Editor:
New York City should proceed with great caution on the proposal to convert the Times Square Hotel into what David Anderson's Nov. 15 editorial notebook calls "a giant S.R.O."
It is shortsighted to presume that housing perhaps 1,000 or more people, ranging from the mentally ill to the homeless and the working poor, in a single huge "institution" in the middle of a city will not create massive difficulties.
Again and again we have seen the problems that have arisen from trying to concentrate the poor and the troubled into one area.


A Time for ZZZ's: It's Restful and You Get Paid and Even Fed
WHAT a dream job!
Do what you want by day.
Then, around 8:30, punch in, have an evening snack and maybe read The New Yorker waiting by the bedside to induce drowsiness.
At 11, without watching one tale of urban mayhem with the obligatory bloody sidewalk, you doze off in your clock-free private room for at least eight hours of uninterrupted slumber.
Barring overtime, of course.
No car alarms, telephones, not even a neighbor's insomniac German shepherd to disturb your monitored bliss. (All right, a few wires are taped to your head.) But next day, you awaken refreshed, eat breakfast, collect $40 and leave.


Observer; Three Men and a Cutie
People said you had to see "Malcolm X." It was a news event.
Everybody would be talking about it.
It would be the basis for a new philosophy.
If you hadn't seen "Malcolm X," you'd have no right to take part in the great policy debates it would fuel.
It made "Malcolm X" sound like a course in civics.
What ever happened to going to the movies for the fun of it?
Even movies that are supposed to be simple-minded fun for the simple-minded are hard to take nowadays.
Look at the typical shoot-'em-up.
If you like watching heart-transplant surgery and enjoy sitting through a good autopsy you'll love movies of the "Rambo" and "Terminator" school.


Sidney Nolan, 75, Australian Painter Of Ned Kelly Series
Sir Sidney Nolan, one of Australia's best-known and most influential postwar artists, died on Friday in London.
He was 75 years old and lived in Herefordshire, in southwest England.
British newspapers reported that Sir Sidney had been suffering from pneumonia and died of a heart attack.


Off and Running for Mayor: It's All but Official
After months of civic tumult on issues of race, fear and anger that may well affect its outcome, next year's New York City mayoral race is all but officially under way, and the three candidates who have declared their intentions are busy planning their campaigns and raising pots of money to prove it.
Just a year ago, a range of politicians considered Mayor David N. Dinkins gravely wounded, buffeted by severe fiscal problems and his own missteps.
But he has rebounded in the polls in recent months, and last night he celebrated his improved fortunes -- and the challenges still ahead -- with a $1,000-a-plate dinner at the Sheraton New York, presided over by one of the country's favorite funny men and his occasional weekend host, Bill Cosby, and featuring a laser show with smoke machines and beams of light that spelled his name as the ballroom erupted in cheers.


A.P. Indy Retires At the Age of 3
A.P.
Indy, the leading candidate for the title of Horse of the Year, was retired at the age of 3 yesterday and will begin a new career next spring as a stallion at the Lane's End Farm in Kentucky.
The decision was announced by the principal owners of the colt, Tomonori Tsurumaki of Tokyo and William S. Farish of Versailles, Ky., the master of the farm.
Since the horse won the $3 million Breeders' Cup Classic one month ago, they had been trying to decide whether to return him to racing at the age of 4 or to send him to the breeding farm.


Emilio Pucci, Designer of Bright Prints, Dies at 78
Emilio Pucci, the Italian fashion designer whose brilliantly colored prints were an icon of the 1960's, died Sunday morning in a nursing home in Florence.
He was 78 years old.
He died of a heart attack, said Pier Gabriele Bulli, director of the home.


Johannesburg Journal; Will Apartheid's Inner Circle Open Up to Blacks?
Since its founding in 1918, the mysterious society known as the Afrikaner Broederbond has grown from a tiny cultural club into a secret fraternity of the ruling class.
From a stern custodian of apartheid racial doctrine it has mellowed into a pragmatic tactician of compromise.
But whatever else has changed about the Broederbond, or Brotherhood, the rules of admission have remained rigid.
Only white, Afrikaans-speaking, Protestant men were invited into this potent elite.


Court Takes Case on Damages
The Supreme Court agreed to decide whether a jury's award of punitive damages can be so excessive as to violate due process.
Page A22.


Business Scene; Capital Spending: A Mixed Message
IN the midst of the uncertainty about the American economy, capital spending -- the money that Corporate America invests in factories, machinery and other equipment -- has shot up.
That should herald the approach of a strong recovery, after nearly four years of stagnation.
And maybe it does.
But capital spending has surged without yet creating new jobs.
And the economy needs many new jobs to boom.
Capital spending has risen not because companies are expanding and adding workers, but because they are replacing old equipment.
Roughly 25 percent of the $20 billion jump in capital spending since last spring, for example, has been used to replace old tractor-trailer trucks.
Most of the rest has gone for new computers, communications gear and other office devices.
Advances in technology have made the new equipment faster, smaller, and more efficient than that which it replaced.
And, above all, it is labor saving.


Funeral Held for Officer Shot Four Years Ago


Corrections
A caption yesterday with a picture of a line of ballerinas in the New York City Ballet's celebration of the centennial of "The Nutcracker" described the performance incorrectly.
It was a dress rehearsal, not last Friday's matinee.
The caption with a second picture of the ballet, showing a man and a young girl, misidentified the dancers shown.
They were Andre Kramarevski and Ashley Siebert.


Bridge
The biggest Fall National Championships in the history of the American Contract Bridge League ended Sunday night with a team headed by a New York expert capturing a major title.
The Reisinger Board-a-Match Teams was won by Jim Cayne of Manhattan, together with Chuck Burger of West Bloomfield, Mich., Mark Lair of Canyon, Tex., Mike Passell of Dallas, and Gabriel Chagas and Marcelo Branco, both of Rio de Janeiro.
This was only the second time in the 63-year history of the event that players from outside North America have won the Reisinger.
The two Brazilians are the reigning world pair champions.


Burtt Banned in Greece
STEVE BURTT, a former guard in the National Basketball Association and for Iona College, has been banned for life from the Greek basketball league after testing positive for cocaine and hashish, the Greek Basketball Association said yesterday.  (AP)


New Head Of Fox Unit
The Fox Broadcasting Company named Sandy Grushow president of the Fox Entertainment Group yesterday, succeeding Peter Chernin, who was promoted earlier this month to chairman of the network's parent company, 20th Century Fox.
Mr. Grushow will supervise all programming for the Fox network.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
7.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
4.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.37
3.13
5.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.31
3.23
4.37
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.46
3.45
4.41
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.58
6.57
6.85
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.59
7.59
7.90
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.58
8.60
8.93
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.42
6.40
6.86
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Colgate Coach Ousted
MIKE FOLEY, Colgate's head football coach for the past five seasons, will not have his contract renewed, the school announced yesterday.
Foley compiled a 21-34 record as the Red Raiders' head coach.
In Patriot League play under Foley, Colgate tied twice for second place, twice for third and once for fourth.
The team finished with a 4-6 mark this season. (AP)


Reporter's Notebook; Clinton's 4-Day Holiday: Exhaustive Relaxation
What is it with Presidents these days?
The first to fall to whatever afflicts them was George Bush.
He seemed, at first, an unexceptional man in his habits of relaxation.
He liked to fish a little, or play horseshoes or golf, or jog, or go out for Chinese food, or mess around in his boat.


RESULTS PLUS
HOCKEY  Capitals Win Another
Defenseman Al Iafrate had his fifth goal in four games as the Washington Capitals beat the undermanned and overworked Red Wings, 4-1, last night in Detroit.
Playing their fifth game in eight days as part of a stretch in which they play 11 times in 18 days, the Red Wings were without injured forwards Sergei Fedorov and Dallas Drake and rested defenseman Mark Howe.
The Wings are without a victory in three games (0-2-1), after a streak of six victories in seven games.
Washington is 4-1-1 in its last six.
The victory also gave Capital coach Terry Murray a 4-4 career record against his older brother Bryan, who coaches the Red Wings.
Detroit's only bright spot came when they took a 1-0 lead at 6 minutes 15 seconds of the first period.
Ray Sheppard intercepted a pass and broke in alone, beating Don Beaupre for his eighth goal.
The Capitals tied the game at 10:13 when Calle Johannson beat Tim Cheveldae for his sixth of the season.
Washington outshot the Red Wings by 15-8 in the first period and it was more of the same in the second, when they held a 14-7 edge.
This time, though, they got both of the goals in the period.
Paul MacDermid put Washington ahead when he picked up the rebound of Alan May's shot and put it into a vacant net at 2:15.
Iafrate made it 4-1 when he came out of the penalty box, took a pass from Paul Cavallini and scored on a breakaway for his fifth goal of the season at 13:45. (AP)


On My Mind; Deaths in Sarajevo
But if the water is cut for days and weeks how do you get some to drink and wash?
Does your wife have to go out and stand at a tap?
For a moment I thought that the Bosnian official driving us through the streets while we crouched low against the snipers had not heard.
But he had.


Anglers Have Led Way in Fish Conservation
To the Editor:
"Boon to Anglers Turns Into a Disaster for Lakes and Streams" (Science Times, Nov. 17), on the claim that fish-stocking programs may in some cases harm rare species, lacks perspective.
Anglers have always been at the forefront of efforts to conserve native fishes and fish habitats.
Fish stocking is a small part of restoring fish populations and fishing to what it once was.
Land around water is so heavily developed, and water is such a heavily used resource, that practically all aquatic ecosystems are heavily disturbed and suffer from loss of diversity.
Game fish, being at the top of the food pyramid, suffer most from this loss of diversity.
Fish-stocking programs are a feeble effort to restore native populations or to provide nonnative populations in areas that can no longer support native fishes.


Was That Kirby in Boston?
KIRBY PUCKETT, the free-agent center fielder, met Sunday in Boston with Red Sox General Manager LOU GORMAN, and other team officials, The Boston Globe and The Boston Herald reported yesterday.
Gorman would only say that "a high-profile player" discussed coming to his team and that the Red Sox were "in the ball park" to sign him.


Barbara Kauder Cohen, a Children's Author, 60
Barbara Kauder Cohen, the author of more than 30 books for children and young adults, died on Sunday at her home in Bridgewater, N.J.
She was 60 years old.
Her family said she died of cancer.
Mrs.
Cohen's first book, "The Carp in the Bathtub," was published in 1972 when she was 39 years old.
It won acclaim as a modern classic, enough to encourage her to leave her teaching position and devote more of her time to writing.


Independent Police Review Unit Clears City Council Committee
A City Council committee yesterday approved legislation that would create, for the first time, an independent agency to investigate complaints of police misconduct.
The measure, which already had the support of Mayor David N. Dinkins and the Council leadership, is expected to win approval from the full Council in a vote scheduled for Dec. 17.
But the approval by the Public Safety Committee, on a 6-to-3 vote, came only after impassioned arguments by the minority during a three-hour meeting.
They contended that the measure did little to address the feelings of mutual distrust between the Police Department and the communities it protects.


Peter Blume, 86, Painter of Dreamlike Narratives
Peter Blume, a Russian immigrant whose dreamlike, obsessively detailed images made him one of this country's best-known painters in the 1930's and 40's, died yesterday at the Candlewood Nursing Home in New Milford, Conn.
He was 86 years old and lived in Sherman, Conn.
He died of a stroke after a long illness, said Robert Cowley, a family friend.


Robbery Suspect Slain in Theaters Under Carnegie Hall
One suspect was shot to death and another captured yesterday afternoon in an armed robbery at the midtown Cineplex Odeon Carnegie Cinemas that was foiled by undercover police officers who happened to be in the movie house on an anti-robbery detail, the police said.
As a handful of patrons were viewing the films, "Flirting" and "The Efficiency Expert," in the twin basement theaters under Carnegie Hall, two men wearing ski masks entered the manager's basement office at 2:20 P.M., the police said.


Prosecutor Says DNA Evidence May Free Man
A 34-year-old Long Island man who has spent 11 years in jail for rape should be set free because of new DNA evidence, the Suffolk County District Attorney said today.
"The defendant has met his burden of proof," the District Attorney, James M. Catterson, said, referring to tests showing that the defendant's DNA, or genetic imprint, did not match that of sperm found on the rape victim.


Of Competing Buses
COMPUTER users simply want their computers to run faster.
They want their Windows applications to be snappier, they want colorful graphics to pop onto their screens, and they want to wait less time for the hard disk to fetch needed data.
In characteristic fashion, the personal computer industry has sought to address those desires by proposing a series of new and incompatible technical standards, with all the requisite acronyms and initials: OPTi, VL or VESA and PCI, among others.
They fall under the general category of "local bus" technology.


Do It Right in Somalia
President Bush is right to offer as many as 20,000 U.S. troops to a United Nations rescue operation in Somalia.
The realities there are ghastly, and the choices limited.
Famine and a chaotic clan war have put an entire people in peril.
It is intolerable and unthinkable to remain aloof while teen-age hoodlums impede the delivery of emergency food and medicines.
A thousand or more people are dying every day, and up to two million more lives are at risk.
As Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali soberly informed the United Nations yesterday, there is no alternative to the threat or use of force if food is to reach those trapped in a chaotic clan war.


Managers Look to Europe's Bonds
Major institutional fund managers seem to favor European bond markets and the American dollar right now, according to a new quarterly survey by Merrill Lynch.
The American bond market, with its uncertain outlook ahead, gets just a neutral nod.
The Merrill Lynch survey shows that a lot of big fund managers still hope to take advantage of the capital gains possible in European bonds as prices rise with the decline in interest rates.
Yet, at the same time, they are worried enough about a rising dollar erasing their profits from abroad that they are trying to hedge this risk by loading up on dollars now.


Present Since Atom Was Split, Physicist Reflects on Turbulent Era
HE was active at the start 50 years ago and is still at it today.
No other scientist has been as intimately involved in the zigs and zags of the nuclear era, helping build the world's first reactor, flying on the atomic strike against Japan, leading America's bomb makers during the cold war, developing civilian power plants and lately working to speed the dismantling of East-West arsenals.
Dr.
Harold M. Agnew has been active, sometimes even radioactive, at nearly every juncture since man first kindled a sustained nuclear reaction on Dec. 2, 1942.
While no titan of discovery or invention, he has long wielded power and influence, sometimes as a Presidential adviser and always as a gregarious hawk, as restless and unpredictable as the era he helped to define.


Editorial Notebook: The Ghosts of Weimar; Can Germany Control Its Mean Streets?
Here are the jottings of a visitor to Berlin during a black November for German democracy:
On Nov. 7, several hundred thousand Berliners filled the vast Lustgarten Square to protest a wave of violent attacks on foreigners.
What was meant to be a show of democracy's strength, however, became a manifestation of its helplessness.
Volleys of stones and eggs heaved by a few hundred anarchists cut short a speech by President Richard von Weizsacker, a former Mayor of West Berlin.


Books of The Times; Another New Life, the Same James
Henry James The Imagination of Genius By Fred Kaplan Illustrated. 620 pages.
William Morrow &amp; Company. $25.
Another biography of Henry James?
Since the publication of Leon Edel's magisterial and minutely detailed life of James -- the five-volume study was completed in 1972 and is widely acknowledged as one of the pre-eminent examples of the biographer's art -- it would seem an act of hubris or folly to attempt another portrait of the Master.
Mr.
Edel himself issued a drastically edited one-volume version of the biography in 1985, which left the original's interpretative analysis of James intact, while responding to the new research and recent findings of others.
And only last year, R. W. B. Lewis sidestepped the problem of grappling with Mr.
Edel's achievement by writing a group portrait of the James family, which focused on Henry's affectionate rivalry with his brother William.


Transactions
Hockey  National Hockey League
SAN JOSE SHARKS -- Waived Petri Skriko, left wing.


U.S. Taxes Steel From 12 Nations
American steelmakers won the first round today in their struggle for tougher protection from imports, as the Commerce Department imposed temporary import taxes on steel from 12 countries.
The action came as the department determined that France, Italy, Germany, South Korea and eight other countries had given their domestic steel producers a range of special loans and other financial deals that provided them an unfair advantage in the United States steel market.


METRO DIGEST
LATEST SALVO IN ECONOMIC WAR
Open economic warfare broke out between New York and New Jersey after Governor Florio announced a program under which New Jersey would take partial ownership of commercial buildings in exchange for helping to pay for outfitting the buildings and moving tenants into them.
New York's plans to retaliate with a marketing program aimed at persuading New Jersey companies to move across the Hudson would mean the collapse of a so-called non-aggression pact signed in October 1991 by New York State, New York City, New Jersey and Connecticut.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  FERNANDEZ FACES BOARD'S DEFIANCE


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-16  A U.N.
CALL FOR FORCE IN SOMALIA  The United Nations Secretary General called for a military operation to insure that relief workers could safely bring food to the starving in Somalia.
The operation would be empowered to disarm warring factions in the country by force.
A1  The U.S. seeks a delicate balance in planning a Somalia mission.
A10


Sports of The Times; Lessons In the Schott Affair
THE National Pastime, as Major League Baseball likes to call itself, had been a long-standing fraud.
It excluded for nearly two-thirds of its existence one entire segment of society: No blacks allowed, until Jackie Robinson showed his face on the playing field.
Bench jockeying once was severe, and ethnic slurs and racist names commonly streamed from the lips of our heroes of our National Pastime.


Motionless Athlete: An Image Is Relived
The image ranks among the saddest yet most riveting in sports television: shots of an athlete lying motionless on the ground.
The cameras linger.
The medical staff tends to the player.
Teammates and rivals wait and pray.
You wait for that sign that the player can move.
You wait for a report from the announcers, who await word from the team.
The cameras still hover, intimately, providing a view unobtainable from the best seats.


Yeltsin's Ban on Communists Upheld
After five months of intense and sometimes emotional testimony, Russia's highest court today upheld President Boris N. Yeltsin's ban on the Communist Party but sidestepped any broad condemnation of the still potent legacy of Soviet Communism.
The 13-member Constitutional Court found that Mr.
Yeltsin's decrees banning the Soviet and Russian Communist parties after the aborted putsch of August 1991 were basically sound.
But it ruled that the issue of property was for civil courts to decide, and that low-level party units were legitimate.


Jets Try to Deal With a Tough Situation
Nothing this serious had ever happened to one of the team's players before, so the Jets devoted themselves today to coming to grips with the fact that defensive end Dennis Byrd was in a hospital, paralyzed from the waist down.
Tears streamed down Cary Blanchard's cheeks here at the team's training center as he recalled visiting Byrd at Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan on Sunday night.
Blanchard was one of several Jet members of the Fellowship of Christian Athletes who visited Byrd hours after he suffered a broken neck in the loss to Kansas City.
The group often meets at Byrd's home on Wednesdays.


Schott to Be Discussed By the Executive Council
In the face of the escalating outcry over remarks attributed to Marge Schott, the major league executive council, baseball's ruling body in the absence of a commissioner, will meet by telephone conference call today to discuss the Cincinnati Reds owner.
Bud Selig of the Milwaukee Brewers, chairman of the council, had planned to bring up the matter at the council's meeting next week in Louisville, Ky.
But he notified the members yesterday that he would have a conference call today at least to initiate the group's discussion of the matter.


Sports Columnist Slain in Robbery Attempt
A Washington Heights man was shot to death during an attempted robbery last night in the lobby of the apartment house where he lived with his family, the police said.
The victim, Jose Cuevas, 43 years old, was shot in the chest by one of two assailants as he resisted their efforts, the police said.
Mr.
Cuevas was a sports columnist for Listin-USA, a Spanish-language weekly newspaper in Manhattan.


Hermann Prey Recital
The baritone Hermann Prey and James Levine, the artistic director of the Metropolitan Opera, are to give an all-Schubert recital at Carnegie Hall on Dec. 14 to celebrate the 35th anniversary of Mr.
Prey's debut in the hall.
The program, which consists of songs that Schubert wrote in 1828, the year of his death, includes the "Schwanengesang" cycle.
Mr.
Prey initiated the Schubertiade, a presentation of the composer's complete works, at the 92d Street Y in 1987, and the Y is presenting the Carnegie concert.
Tickets are $12 to $42 at the box office or through Carnegie Charge, (212) 247-7800.


School Board in Queens Shuns Fernandez Meeting
In blunt defiance of New York City's Schools Chancellor, the members of a local school board in Queens boycotted a meeting last evening intended to resolve the long, bitter dispute over a curriculum that teaches first graders to respect gay people.
The refusal to attend a meeting required under the state's school decentralization law frees the Chancellor, Joseph A. Fernandez, to take action against the board of District 24.
He could choose to supersede the board and impose the curriculum in the district's schools or to suspend its members outright.


Fletcher Joins Red Sox
Free-agent infielder SCOTT FLETCHER rejected a contract proposal from the Milwaukee Brewers and agreed to a two-year contract with the Boston Red Sox worth about $1 million.
Fletcher, who became the Brewers' regular second baseman last season but was to have had a utility role next year, said he told Brewers General Manager SAL BANDO of his decision.


By Design; The Disappearing Eyebrow
First, eyebrows got thinner. Now they are disappearing altogether.
This trend was invented by the makeup artists who style the models for high-fashion shows and photographs.
"Taking away the brow shows up the bone structure of the face," said Kevyn Aucoin, one of these maestros.
"It makes the eyes look enormous."


Reporter's Notebook; Glen Ridge Abuse Trial Struggles With Two Images of the Accuser
Defense lawyers in the Glen Ridge sex assault trial have tried to paint two images of the mildly retarded woman whom the state says was assaulted with a broomstick and a narrow bat by four former football teammates.
One picture is of an overly sexed, sexually aggressive teen-age girl, who, at ages 15 and 16, peeked at naked boys in a locker room, propositioned a boy at a summer camp as well as a group of athletes in a high school lunch room and enjoyed the sex acts the state has charged were crimes.


Smiley Signs With Reds In 4-Year, $18.5 Million Pact
The free-agent pitcher JOHN SMILEY yesterday agreed to an $18.4 million, four-year contract with the Cincinnati Reds.
The 27-year-old left-hander went 16-9 with Minnesota last season.
In his new deal, Smiley gets a $1.5 million signing bonus, $3.1 million in 1993 and $4.6 million for the following three seasons.


For the American Center in Paris, A New Home and a Bitter Dispute
The American Center, which has for decades been an honorable if humbly scaled Paris forum for visiting American artists and a place to learn English, has embarked on an extraordinary expansion.
Now in handsome temporary quarters, it is to reopen next September in a new building, designed by Frank Gehry, that promises to be of unusual architectural distinction as well as a major Paris site for exhibitions and performances.


Bill's List; Hard Truths for Better Days
We have spent the last couple of years undergoing a reality check.
No, it's not morning in America.
No, we can't have it all.
Yes, deficits matter.
We can't just grow our way out of them.
Traditional values such as hard work, savings, education, workmanship and investment really work.
Indulgence, debt, indifference, greed and instant gratification don't.
The reality is that there is no free-lunch growth policy for the 1990's.
The reality, as candidate Bill Clinton reminded us, is that reviving the steady improvement of our living standards requires more investment in everything that enhances long-term productivity growth: equipment, infrastructure, research and development, retraining, education and preschool care for inner-city children.
The reality is that we must save more to afford this investment, that such savings mean sacrifice and that the struggle will take at least a decade.


U.N. FOLLOWING UP ACCORDS FROM RIO
After difficult negotiations between industrialized and developing countries, the two sides have agreed on the make-up and the powers of an agency to monitor how governments live up to the promises they made in June in Rio de Janeiro at the first Earth Summit.
Under an informal agreement reached by assembly delegates last Wednesday, a new 53-member group, the Sustainable Development Commission, will regularly scrutinize the environmental records of all nations, hearing evidence from both governments and private groups like Greenpeace and Friends of the Earth.


BRIEFS
Debt  *
Chemical Banking Corp., New York, is offering $100 million of two-year noncallable floating-rate notes at a price of 100 to yield 40-hundredths of a percentage point more than the three-month London interbank offered rate.
The offering is through Lehman Brothers.
Yesterday, the London rate was at about 4 percent.
Interest is adjusted and payments made on a quarterly basis, with the issue rated Baa-1 by Moody's Investors Service and A- by Standard &amp; Poor's Corp.
*
Federal National Mortgage Association, Washington, is offering $300 million of noncallable medium-term notes due in 1997 at a price of 100 to yield 6.45 percent through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.


Arkansas Names Ford
As expected, DANNY FORD, who led Clemson to an unofficial national championship in 1981 and left eight seasons later following a dispute with school officials, was chosen to revive the Arkansas football program.
He is the Razorbacks' third head coach in three months. (AP)


Mum's the Word if Seeking Post From Clinton
Beyond the talents required for high Government employment, the people who want to work for Bill Clinton need a particularly rare skill: the ability to broadcast their interest without making noise.
The President-elect and his aides have put out the word that those who are too open in campaigning for posts in the new Administration will be disappointed.


Suns' Johnson Sidelined
The Phoenix Suns placed starting guard KEVIN JOHNSON on the injured list because of a strained left hamstring and a pulled left groin.
Johnson suffered the injuries Friday night during a home game against Golden State.
He missed Saturday night's game against the Warriors at Oakland.
This is the second time Johnson has been on the injured list this season.
He missed the first six games with a groin injury before being activated Nov. 20.
Johnson is eligble to come off the injured list Dec. 11. (AP)


They Will Gladly Take a Check
Victoria Keyes, a nurse at Children's Hospital here, pays a check-cashing store roughly $13 every two weeks to cash her paycheck of about $500.
A bank would charge far less, but there is not one within walking distance of her house in the poor Washington neighborhood of Anacostia.
Miss Keyes, who makes $24,000 a year, closed her last checking account because her bank started requiring minimum monthly balances in lieu of service fees -- neither of which she could afford, she said.
Turning Away From Banks
Miss Keyes knows by experience what consumer groups have come to conclude: the deregulation of financial services in the 1980's has made banking services unavailable or beyond the financial reach of many low-income people.
Many have turned instead to cash-checking outlets that consumer-rights groups and state regulators accuse of widespread price gouging.


Corrections
A brief article by Bloomberg Business News in Business Day on Wednesday misstated plans by Ames Department Stores Inc. to hold going-out-of-business sales.
The chain plans such sales only in 60 stores scheduled to close under its bankruptcy reorganization plan, not at all its stores.


Chess
The drawback of the recently revived knockout system, under which the field is halved in each round of a tournament, was evident in the Interpolis International at Tilburg, the Netherlands, Oct. 9 to 28: many of the favorites, most prominently, Anatoly Karpov, were thinned out in the early rounds.
Karpov was expelled by a former Soviet colleague, Aleksandr Chernin, now of Hungary, in Round 2.
This elite competition had almost all of the world's greatest players, except Gary Kasparov, the champion, who seems to be prudent enough not to trust the vicissitudes of knockout play.
Ilya Smirin, a former Soviet grandmaster who emigrated to Israel, was quoted in Die Schachwoche, a Swiss publication, as saying, "Young people have better nerves." He further pointed out that he, at age 24, was the oldest player to survive to the semifinals.


China Threatens Contracts Reached by Hong Kong
China significantly raised the stakes today in its dispute with Britain over Hong Kong by declaring that all contracts signed by the territorial Government and not approved by Beijing will become invalid when London ends its rule there in 1997.
The Hong Kong Government responded immediately that the declaration violated the Chinese-British Joint Declaration of 1984 and the Basic Law, the documents that govern the transition period and guarantee economic and political freedoms to the territory for 50 years.


Let's Share, Ravitch Tells Baseball's Owners
While baseball club owners ponder whether to reopen their collective-bargaining agreement with the players, they are also wrestling with a comprehensive proposal for extensive sharing of their local revenue among all 28 clubs.
The revenue-sharing proposal, presented by Richard Ravitch, the clubs' chief labor executive, has prompted most of the clubs opposed to the idea to oppose the contract reopener as well.
This division creates uncertainty as to what the owners will do at a scheduled meeting on the matter next Monday in Louisville, Ky.


Market Place; Cleanup Industry Expects Growth
THE passing of the Bush Administration and the likely demise of its regulation-diluting Council on Competitiveness are generally considered good news for companies in the environmental business, analysts say.
Although they caution that the coming Clinton Administration is not likely to fulfill all of the promises made on the campaign trail, mainly because of economic constraints, analysts say the Government's tone will shift in favor of environmental projects.
"We are clearly going to see more enforcement of regulations in the new Administration, more hazardous waste cleanup and maybe more funding for waste water plants," said Vishnu Swarup, an analyst at Prudential Securities Research.
The industry has been weak for the last two years as a result of the economic recession and lax regulation, he said.


Kasparaitis Plays and Waits
Unless they hear otherwise from the National Hockey League office on Tuesday, the Islanders expect Darius Kasparaitis, their feisty rookie defenseman from Lithuania, to be in the lineup Tuesday night when they play the defending Stanley Cup champion Pittsburgh Penguins at Nassau Coliseum.
Kasparaitis received a match penalty for kicking Philadelphia's Kevin Dineen after a fight in Saturday night's 9-3 Islanders' victory.
Gary Meagher, the league's executive director of communications, said today that the incident was being reviewed by Jim Gregory, the vice president of hockey operations.


Rangers Hold Back And Get Passed By
The Rangers tried to sit on a first-period lead last night with all the assertiveness of a team that has learned no important lessons in 52 years.
They dumped the puck, and did not look twice at the Minnesota net.
Their coach, Roger Neilson, used his most grinding players on the power play, a new watermark in caution.


U.N. CURBING TRADE WITH KHMER ROUGE
The Security Council imposed trade sanctions today on areas of Cambodia controlled by the Khmer Rouge, the much- feared Communist guerrilla force, and said it would push ahead with free elections next year in the rest of the country -- without Khmer Rouge participation if necessary.
Although 14 of the Council's 15 members voted in favor of the measures, China -- the Khmer Rouge's main backer in the past -- abstained, thus ending the show of unity that the five powers with permanent seats had maintained on Cambodia.


Hostetler, Still Dizzy, Hints He May Sit Out Again
Eight days after he was wheeled off the field in a cart and then walked groggily into the Giants' locker room, quarterback Jeff Hostetler was still feeling the effects of a concussion he suffered against the Philadelphia Eagles.
It remained uncertain today whether Hostetler would return in time for his team's game Sunday against the Washington Redskins at Giants Stadium, but after spending the day undergoing tests at the Hospital for Special Surgery in Manhattan, he seemed more likely to lean toward caution.
After having seen the retirement last week of Jets wide receiver Al Toon, because of a series of concussions, and then the injury to the Jets' Dennis Byrd on Sunday, Hostetler is apparently willing to wait.


Japan Hints Of Rice Shift
Japanese officials moved closer today to stating that the Government would agree to a slight opening of Japan's rice market if that was necessary to conclude a new global trade treaty.
The Chief Cabinet Secretary, Koichi Kato, said at a news conference today that Japan might eventually make a "political decision" to make a concession so as not to jeopardize the current round of negotiations of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.


U.S. Assesses Risks of Sending Troops to Somalia
As the Pentagon plans a military operation for Somalia, it is seeking a delicate balance: it wants to send enough troops to insure success but is anxious to avoid having them stuck there keeping the peace or turned into a political force charged with setting up a new government.
But American and other Western officials said today that the mission contemplated would be much less risky than trying to deliver assistance to Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Military planners say more favorable geography and fewer potentially hostile troops with less sophisticated weapons distinguish the clan warfare in Somalia from Bosnia.


Corrections
A front-page article last Tuesday about commercial weight-loss programs misstated the amount of weight dieters kept off two years after completing the Optifast program.
It was 10 percent of their body weight, or 50 percent of their original weight loss, not 10 percent of the original loss.


Researchers' Allies: Fish With Rocks in Their Heads


In a Reversal, Fire Official Staying in Job
New York City's Fire Commissioner, Carlos M. Rivera, who said last Wednesday that he would retire next month, announced yesterday that he had changed his mind and would remain in his post.
Mr.
Rivera, who had cited "family reasons and health considerations" in announcing his resignation, said yesterday that he had reversed his decision after talking further with his family.
But mayoral aides, union leaders and other officials suggested other factors that might have led to his sudden change of heart.


New Jersey and New York Collide In New Competition to Lure Jobs
Open economic warfare broke out between New York and New Jersey today after Gov.
Jim Florio announced a statewide program under which New Jersey would take partial ownership of commercial buildings in exchange for helping to pay for outfitting the buildings and moving tenants into them.
Vincent Tese, New York State's director of economic development, said New York would retaliate by starting, within two weeks, a marketing program aimed specifically at persuading New Jersey companies to move across the Hudson.
He had previously threatened to begin such a program in response to New Jersey's growing aggressiveness in wooing New York businesses.


Review/Television; Using Fetal Transplants To Help Improve Lives
At least one group of Americans have personal cause to welcome the change of Administrations in Washington.
People with degenerative ailments like Parkinson's disease can look forward to an early reversal of President Bush's ban on the use of Federal money for research into fetal transplants, which scientists believe holds out a hope for the treatment of afflictions that until now have defied cure.
The political conflict is a footnote to "Brain Transplant," tonight's upbeat offering from "Nova." (The program was held back until the latest findings could be reported in The New England Journal of Medicine; they made headlines last week.)
The story begins in California in 1982, when several young addicts who had taken factory-made facsimile heroin were suddenly unable to move or talk.
Although their minds seemed normal, their bodies were frozen.
Because the condition resembled the symptoms of Parkinson's, which usually strikes the elderly, Dr.
J.
William Langston of Valley Medical Center in San Jose, Calif., put them on the standard medication, a drug called L-dopa.
It replaces dopamine, a chemical that occurs naturally in the brain and enables, for example, the thought of lifting an arm to be translated into the actual lifting.
The treatment worked only for a time.


Milestones of the Nuclear Era: A 50-Year Overview


An Angry Jury Deserves a Hearing
The special Federal grand jury that investigated environmental crimes at the Rocky Flats nuclear weapons plant in Colorado has officially ended its term, but more than half the jurors are still demanding to be heard.
Rockwell International Corporation has been fined $18.5 million after pleading guilty to five felonies and five misdemeanors.
The jurors, however, insist that individual company officials and Energy Department employees be prosecuted as well.
Frustrated by the Justice Department, they've even written President-elect Clinton asking for a special prosecutor.
The grand jury, often denounced as the mere tool of prosecutors, here becomes a would-be runaway grand jury.
That, in turn, raises a broader question: Who has the stronger claim as an agent of justice -- prosecutor or jury?


No Agreement On a Clerk For Nassau
Despite three separate tallies and unprecedented rules for insuring a proper vote count, Nassau County has still failed to agree on who the new county clerk is, even as the Democratic victor took the oath of office and settled into the leather chair occupied for 25 years by Harold W. McConnell, a Republican.
Republicans, who lost the county-wide special election to Doreen Banks by about 700 votes, went to court seeking a recount.
Carl Marcellino, the Republican candidate, said the procedures for tallying absentee and affidavit votes, which required the presence of three observers from each party during the counting and 24-hour police guard of the ballots, were "too cumbersome."


Review/Music; Arditti String Quartet In a Disruptive Mode
The 20th century is now almost a century old, but much of its music remains stubbornly unfamiliar: disoriented and disorienting.
The members of the Arditti String Quartet, who have made a reputation as astute interpreters of this repertory, showed some reasons for the music's unsettling effects on Sunday afternoon in Alice Tully Hall.
The concert's selections seemed preoccupied with interruption and disruption.
Beethoven's Grosse Fugue -- an unusual move by the Arditti into a century that can often seem to anticipate this one in spirit and texture -- began the program with its familiar declarations of uncompromising assertiveness.
This music does not build; it breaks.
The ear is not carried by the theme; it is attacked, shoved, seduced.
Unfortunately, the players -- Irvine Arditti and David Alberman, violinists; Garth Knox, violist, and Rohan de Saram, cellist -- tended to take the music at its word, giving it a committed and severe reading without creating a sense of continuous unfolding that would give the disruptions context.


Caremark Share Offer Set at $13.50
Caremark International Inc., a giant of the home health care industry, applied the final touches today on its preparations to be an independent company, setting the initial price of its stock at $13.50 when trading begins Tuesday on the New York Stock Exchange.
Caremark was assembled during the last decade through acquisitions and internal expansion by Baxter International Inc., the world's largest hospital supply company.
Increasingly, though, the goals of the subsidiary conflicted with those of Baxter's customers, many of which have their own home health care units.
Baxter announced in June that it would spin off Caremark to its shareholders. 70 Million Shares to Be Issued
Caremark will begin life as a public company with about 70 million shares outstanding, with one share issued to Baxter stockholders for each four shares they own in Baxter.
Baxter is based north of here, in Deerfield, Ill.
Caremark has its headquarters nearby in the suburb of Northbrook, Ill.


Some Hope for Byrd, but No Improvement Yet
Doctors said there was no change yesterday in the condition of Jets defensive end Dennis Byrd, whose lower body was paralyzed on Sunday when he fractured a vertebra in his neck in a collison with a teammate, but that there were some signs for a recovery.
Byrd exuded confidence when he spoke with teammates, coaches and team administators who visited him at his room in the intensive care unit of Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan yesterday afternoon.
His optimism was bolstered by some feeling in his toes.


Divorce Suit for Couples
FRED COUPLES, the PGA Player of the Year, is being sued for divorce by his wife, who says he has refused all attempts to repair their 11-year marriage.
In a suit filed Monday in Palm Beach County Circuit Court in Florida, DEBORAH COUPLES says a divorce is warranted in part because of "factors which she has discovered."
Her lawyer, JOHN T. CHRISTIANSEN, would not explain the factors.


Corrections
A nutritional analysis in the Eating Well column in The Living Section last Wednesday misstated the amount of sodium in a recipe for ribollita, a Tuscan bread soup.
Each serving contains 325 milligrams of sodium.


TASTINGS
Marquis d'Angerville, Volnay Champans 1989, Burgundy; about $30.


Frederick Crane, 69, Of Paper Company, Dies After Accident
Frederick G. Crane Jr., a former Crane &amp; Company executive and a leader in land preservation, died Nov. 22 at Berkshire Medical Center in Pittsfield, Mass.
He was 69 years old and lived in nearby Dalton.
He died of injuries from a falling tree during logging on family land, said relatives who reported his death yesterday.


60-Minute Gourmet
WHEN I first came to this country some 40 years ago, many peculiarities of the English language perplexed and amused me.
Even in the culinary arena, in which I felt more than adequately versed, some terms threw me for a loop.
One was "deviled," as in deviled eggs or deviled crab.
Only later did I learn that the term actually has a connection with the pitchfork-toting image associated with things fiery hot.
So-called deviled foods have one element in common: heat.
Not necessarily the jalapeno type of heat, but some ingredient that gives them a slight warmth.


COMPANY NEWS: Easy Riders; Sport-Utility Vehicles Tuned for Women
"Sport-utes," as sport-utility vehicles like the Ford Explorer and Jeep Grand Cherokee are called in auto industry parlance, are straying from their sporty and utilitarian roots.
The reason, it would appear, is a bid by auto makers to attract more women drivers.
The latest example is found in an internal document obtained from the Ford Motor Company by Automotive News, an industry trade publication, about a proposed luxury version of Ford's popular Explorer model.


Bob Evans Farms Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 23


Royal Bank of Canada reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Ashe Asks for Help
ARTHUR ASHE, upset earlier this year that he was forced by the news media to disclose he had AIDS, asked a group of sports editors for help in teaching people about the disease.
"We have to be more creative in how we pass along the information, how we get people to listen," Ashe said Monday night at The Associated Press Sport Editors Northeast Region meeting in Mystic, Conn.
"We have to educate, even cajole -- coerce, if necessary -- people into listening to the facts."


Settlement for Dye
PAT DYE, the former Auburn coach, will receive more than $1.1 million over seven years as part of the settlement he reached with the university for his resignation, The Birmingham News reported yesterday.
Dye, 53 years old, resigned after 12 years as Auburn's coach in the wake of National Collegiate Athletic Association charges accusing his football program of nine rules violations.
The resignation settlement was signed Nov. 25 by Dye and WILLIAM V. MUSE, the Auburn president.


Lows Leveling The Jets' Highs
Dick Steinberg, general manager of the Jets, approached this season cautiously.
He had a team that made the playoffs last year with an 8-8 record, but he was grooming an inexperienced quarterback, Browning Nagle, for the starting job.
"I never thought we'd be great," he said. "But I thought we'd be decent."
Even after the Jets won all five of their preseason games and giddy optimism took hold, Steinberg remained cautious, assessing his team as "middle of the pack" in terms of National Football League talent.


U.N. Council Essentially Agrees to U.S. Command in Somalia
The Security Council reached a broad agreement tonight that an American general should command the new multinational force it plans to send into Somalia to disarm the warring factions there and insure that international aid reaches that country's starving people.
But the Council is continuing to discuss how much control the United Nations should exercise over such a military enforcement operation, with most members pressing for the Security Council to be given greater powers of oversight than it had during the Persian Gulf war.


The Military Can Successfully Integrate Gays; Equal Dying Rights
To the Editor:
The big mistake gays made was in asserting their right to serve in the military.
It is now obvious they should have said that they should not have to serve.
If they had followed that tack, homophobes would have demanded that they be forced to serve like everyone else.


First Lady Rises to Defense of Successor
Barbara Bush initiated the holiday season at the White House today with a message of good will toward one woman: she asked the Washington press corps to lay off Hillary Clinton.
"Give her a break," Mrs.
Bush told reporters at a ceremony for the arrival of the White House Christmas tree and the traditional start of Washington's holiday season.
"I don't think you have yet. I think the cartoons are ugly."
Mrs.
Bush, who did not say what news reports had inspired her comments, cautioned the reporters to "treat her like you treated me."


Studies Find No Disadvantage In Growing Up in a Gay Home
MICHAEL McCANDLISH, 12 years old, spends five nights a week with his mother and two with his stepmother.
And every now and then, he spends time with his Dad.
But even in this day of ever-mutating family ties, Michael's situation stands out as unusual.
While his "Mom," Dr.
Barbara McCandlish, is his biological mother, the woman he calls his "Step-Mom" was his mother's lesbian lover -- and co-parent -- until they separated when Michael was 5.
Michael's "Dad" is his biological father, a gay man who was an anonymous sperm donor at the time Michael was conceived, but whom Michael has since got to know.


TOP GENERALS EASE STANCE ON GAY BAN
After weeks of public debate on the merits of allowing homosexuals to serve in the armed forces, senior military officials are now adopting a slightly more conciliatory tone about the possibility of lifting the ban on homosexuals.
Gen.
Colin L. Powell, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and Gen.
Gordon R. Sullivan, the Army Chief of Staff, said in separate statements on Monday night that they were pleased President-elect Bill Clinton would consult with them before ending the ban.


Big Wine Tax Still in Force
To the consternation of wine importers, the Bush Administration has not yet formally canceled its decision to impose 200 percent taxes next Saturday on white wine from the European Community.
But trade officials say not to worry.
The Administration agreed on Nov. 20 to forgo the import taxes as part of a broad deal with the community to limit farm subsidies.
But the extra taxes have already been published in the Federal Register and will automatically take effect on Saturday unless officially canceled.


METRO DIGEST
METRO DIGEST  NEW YORK CITY FERNANDEZ SUSPENDS DEFIANT BOARD
Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez has suspended a Queens school board that has refused to adopt a multicultural curriculum that, among other things, teaches first graders to respect and appreciate gay people.
Mr.
Fernandez appointed three executives from his staff to take over the day-to-day operation of District 24 in Queens and to devise, with parents and teachers, a curriculum that includes lessons about gay men and lesbians.
A1.
FEDERAL PROSECUTOR TO LEAVE POST
Andrew J. Maloney, who successfully prosecuted John Gotti this year, is resigning as the United States Attorney in Brooklyn.
Mr.
Maloney, who has served more than six years in what is usually a four-year position, retained his post longer than usual at the request of the Justice Department.
He said he stayed because he wanted to complete "unfinished business" that included convicting Mr.
Gotti.
B3.
DISPUTE OVER CROWN HEIGHTS BEATING
A homeless black man was beaten by a group of Hasidic men behind Lubavitcher headquarters in Crown Heights, where blacks and Hasidim have long lived in uneasy coexistence.
The police arrested a Hasidic man in connection with the beating.
As the police were holding the man, a crowd of more than 200 Hasidic protesters gathered outside the 71st Precinct station house to demand his release, saying that the arrest was motivated by politics.
B3.
ZUCKERMAN FIGHT WITH UNION INTENSIFIES
Mortimer Zuckerman's path toward his planned takeover of The Daily News has grown rockier with a virtual state of war erupting between Mr.
Zuckerman and one of the newspaper's unions.
Mr.
Zuckerman says he is beginning an effort to hire under individual contracts some current members of the New York Newspaper Guild, which represents editorial, advertising and circulation employees, because he has not yet reached an agreement with the union.
B3.
REGION  RAPE CONVICTION IS OVERTURNED
The conviction of a man who served 11 years in prison for rape was overturned in a case that lawyers and forensic experts say reflects the increasing use of DNA testing by defense lawyers seeking to have cases reconsidered.
Kerry Kotler was freed after a judge ruled that new DNA tests, which were unavailable when Mr.
Kotler was tried in 1982, showed that there was more than a reasonable doubt of his guilt.
B6.
A NEW HEALTH-CARE SYSTEM IN NEW JERSEY
Ushered into law with marginal political support, New Jersey's new health-care system has come to life under a cloud of doubt and the threat of protracted legal fighting.
With a month to go before the changes take effect, there were rumors today of political deals to make major revisions in the legislation.
B6.
PREPARING FOR A SPECIAL WITNESS
Prosecutors in the Glen Ridge sex assault trial want special courtroom arrangements to provide a nonintimidating atmosphere when the mildly retarded woman central to the case testifies next week.
Among the requests: front-row seating for her family and friends, restrictions on movements of defense lawyers, and a half-hour recess after every hour of testimony.
B6.
Passaic Mayor resigns after conviction.
B8.
About New York by Michael T. Kaufman B3 Neediest Cases B5 Chronicle B8


Ex-Official Is Named A Director
Clayton K. Yeutter, the one-time United States trade representative and Agriculture Secretary, today was named to the board of Texas Instruments Inc., the computer chip maker.
A spokeswoman said the Dallas-based company would pay Dr.
Yeutter the yearly fee of $40,000 that each of its 14 other directors receives, plus other fees of at least $5,000 or $10,000 for each of various committees on which he might serve.


Zuckerman and Guild Battle as Sale of The News Nears
Mortimer Zuckerman's path to take over The Daily News grew rockier yesterday as negotiations with one of the newspaper's unions fell apart and Mr.
Zuckerman said he would offer individual contracts to some of the newspaper's writers and editors.
"We were unable to close the gap between their position and ours," Mr.
Zuckerman said after a negotiating session yesterday with the New York Newspaper Guild, which represents editorial, advertising and circulation employees.


Rebecca Grand; Teacher, 84
Rebecca Grand, a former teacher and assistant principal in New York City public schools, died on Sunday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 84 years old.
Miss Grand fell last winter and grew progressively weaker afterward, said her lawyer, Hazel Schizer.


Electronics, Missiles &amp; Communications Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Certainty: Giants' Offensive Line Going Nowhere
Before their season unraveled, before the three straight losses that essentially removed them from the playoffs, before their first game, and perhaps even before training camp opened last summer, the Giants could at least be certain about one thing: the offensive line.
It was their strength in the beginning, but it has now become the Giants' primary weakness, arguably the central reason for their sudden swoon.
When Coach Ray Handley spoke last week about making changes, there was little question where he was going to start.


Twice Appreciated When Given Just Once
WHILE it has always been possible to give a gift by making a donation to charity, the knowledge that good has been done in one's name may be satisfying only to the truly generous or the materially sated.
Increasingly, though, businesses and organizations are selling products that benefit others by giving a percentage of sales to a political or social cause.
A wine maker is contributing money to help save eagles; African elephants are the beneficiaries of some garlic farmers, and sales of chocolates are being used to help preserve the rain forests.


New System Lets Computer Identify Pictures and Images
New technology that may help solve one of the thorniest problems in computer science -- teaching machines to recognize pictures -- was announced yesterday by officials of the David Sarnoff Research Center in Princeton, N.J.
The center, a laboratory owned by SRI International, a research organization based in Menlo Park, Calif., said the new development, which it calls Smart Sensing, would allow the processing of pictures thousands of times faster than existing technology.


Equity Trade Head Named At Lehman
In yet another management shuffle in its equity department, Lehman Brothers announced yesterday that Donald L. Crooks, a veteran trader, had joined the firm as a managing director and head of equity trading.
Mr.
Crooks, who is 46 years old, was an executive vice president and head of over-the-counter trading at Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Company since May.


Leslie's Poolmart reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Howard Grad Dies; An Ex-Engineer, 79
Howard Grad, a retired managing partner in the Grad Partnership, a New Jersey architectural firm, died on Sunday at his home in Verona, N.J.
He was 79 years old and also kept a home in Monmouth, Me.
He died of cancer after a long illness, his family said.


Kelowna Journal; Nessie's Canadian Cousin: Scientists Are Believers
Even though underwater probes by Japanese television turned up no convincing proof that a long-necked reptilian creature inhabits a lake nestled here in the mountains of south-central British Columbia, Arlene Gaal remains a believer.
"I know something exists," Mrs.
Gaal, a local newspaper reporter, said at her home.
"There have been hundreds of sightings, too many to be explained away by any other cause,"


Redmen Continue to Coast In Lapchick Tournament
St.
John's, kicking off a new basketball season with a new coach and a new starting lineup, got the same old result last night in the opening round of the annual Joe Lapchick Memorial Tournament: a lopsided victory.
Led by Shawnelle Scott's 21 points, the Redmen, speeding up the pace more than in recent years under Brian Mahoney, the new coach, easily raced past St.
Francis, 101-68, before 5,290 at Alumni Hall.
St.
John's, which is now 35-0 in Lapchick tournaments, will meet Iona tonight in the championship round of the tournament.
The Gaels earned that matchup by defeating Columbia, 80-68, in the other first-round contest.


Special Steps Asked for Figure Central to Sex Assault Trial
Prosecutors in the Glen Ridge sex assault trial asked today for special courtroom arrangements to provide a nonintimidating atmosphere when the mildly retarded woman central to the case testifies next week.
Among them: front-row seating for her family and friends, restrictions on movements of defense lawyers, and a half-hour recess after every hour of testimony.
"The victim has stated a tremendous amount of fear and trepidation," a prosecutor, Elizabeth Miller-Hall, told the judge at a hearing conducted without the jury present.
"She's afraid of the courtroom setting. We are dealing with a mentally retarded girl and we feel reasonable courtroom decorum should be observed when she's on the witness stand."


Officer Wounded by Colleague
A transit police officer's semiautomatic gun discharged early yesterday in a Brooklyn subway station, the police said, firing a round that struck another officer's bulletproof vest and injured his shoulder.
The incident again raised the question of the safety of the 9-millimeter semiautomatic pistol that is used by half the transit officers in the 4,200-member department.
The gun is being tested for use by the 28,500-member New York City Police Department.


Review/Dance; Of a Dynamic (Though Disparate) Duo
As a vanity production for two aging dancers, Twyla Tharp's full-evening choreography for a new tour, billed as "Tharp and Baryshnikov," is certainly not without its high points.
Mikhail Baryshnikov, at age 44, still has the flexibility and purity of classical style that create instant charisma onstage; Miss Tharp, now 51, can still slink and slouch in her own idiom with the best of the nine young performers she has also recruited for this 24-city tour that opened here over the weekend.


Mesa Airlines Inc. reports earnings for Year Sept 30


G.M. Retreats on Claims About Fatal Truck Fires
The General Motors Corporation said yesterday that it may have provided Federal highway officials with potentially misleading statistics to bolster its claims about the safety of millions of pickup trucks now under investigation.
Federal officials are deciding whether to recall about five million Chevrolet and G.M.C. full-sized pickup trucks made from 1973 to 1987 because a possible flaw in their fuel tanks makes them a fire hazard.


Transition Team Stalled on Ethics Rules
Nearly three weeks after President-elect Bill Clinton said tighter ethics rules for Administration appointees would be forthcoming, transition officials acknowledged today that they were having trouble producing the restrictions.
The timing is important because aides said Mr.
Clinton is on the verge of making his first round of appointments, with announcements for major economic posts tentatively planned for late next week, after he returns from a two-day trip to Washington.
Before accepting a position in the new Administration, candidates would presumably want to know how their lobbying would be restricted after they left Government, one of the issues to be addressed by the rules.


Arthur A. Herman; Judge, 73
Arthur A. Herman, a retired administrative law judge for the National Labor Relations Board, died on Monday at his home in Long Beach, L.I.
He was 73 years old and also had a home in Pompano Beach, Fla.
He died after suffering a heart attack, his family said.


Telescope Sights Distant Galaxies, Offering Proof of Their Evolution
Peering far away and deeper in time, the Hubble Space Telescope has caught a clear glimpse of more than 300 galaxies clustered four billion light-years away, giving astronomers their first detailed view of galactic structure at a time when the solar system was just beginning.
The new observations, described yesterday by astronomers, showed that star-forming activity was much more prevalent in galaxies then than it is now.
Analysis of the pictures also revealed that disk-shaped spiral galaxies were much more common then, but that the giant conglomerations of stars were undergoing major structural change through collisions with each other, galactic merging and other turbulent forces.


Islanders Need a Wake-Up Call
The difference between first and last place was clear for all to see tonight.
The Pittsburgh Penguins, winners of the last two Stanley Cup championships and leaders of the Patrick Division, embarrassed the cellar-dwelling Islanders, 7-3, before 9,865 at Nassau Coliseum.
"It was like men against boys," said General Manager Don Maloney of the Islanders.
"We stood in awe of the champions."


U.N. Council Essentially Agrees to U.S. Command in Somalia; Doubts at the C.I.A.
President Bush made his proposal to send troops on a short-term mission to deliver food and restore order to Somalia despite the analysis of the Central Intelligence Agency that prospects for the restoration of a stable Somali Government are bleak, senior Administration officials said today.
The officials said that Robert M. Gates, the Director of Central Intelligence, and his senior analysts agree with the assessment of policy makers and military leaders in the Administration that in its narrow definition, the military operation to distribute aid can be carried out quickly.


The Military Can Successfully Integrate Gays; Like Truman's Stand
To the Editor:
Resistance to President-elect Clinton's plan ending the ban on homosexuals in the military is hauntingly similar to resistance President Truman faced when he ended racial segregation of the armed forces more than 40 years ago.


Food Notes
A $2 Bakery Sale
To celebrate its second anniversary, City Bakery, 22 East 17th Street, is offering its individual tartlets and some other desserts like pumpkin bread pudding for $2, instead of the usual $3.50 to $4.
The sale price will be in effect through Tuesday, the actual anniversary date.
After Haagen-Dazs
Ruben Mattus, who created Haagen-Dazs ice cream and began selling it in New York in 1959, has come up with a new low-fat ice cream called Mattus'.
It is now being introduced in shops and supermarkets in the region.


YELTSIN, ADMITTING ECONOMIC DISTRESS, ASKS FOR PATIENCE
President Boris N. Yeltsin, opening a session of the Russian Congress, acknowledged today that his economic changes were shriveling the living standards of most Russians.
But he insisted that a change in course was not the answer.
In a speech to 1,041 deputies in the glittering Grand Kremlin Palace, Mr.
Yeltsin asked for "a respite of a year to a year and a half" from the disputes over his program, but preliminary skirmishes suggested that the session would not pass peacefully.


Sources of Financial Aid for Students
College financial aid experts advise prospective college students to give themselves plenty of time in applying for scholarships, loans and work-study programs.
The first step is to apply for need-based financial aid by completing a standardized form available from high school guidance offices or colleges.
These forms are typically mailed to processing centers, indicated on the application, in January.
They are then forwarded to the colleges and universities specified by the applicant.


The Talk of Hollywood; Hollywood Hubbub: Back Gay Rights Or Party in Aspen?
This town is engulfed by virtual civil war.
The rich are in turmoil.
Statements are flying over the fax machine.
There are angry phone calls.
What's a politically correct entertainment personage to do?
Go to Aspen over Christmas or not?
The underlying issue: Barbra Streisand's recent suggestion that she would be willing to join a boycott of Colorado, the state whose voters last month overturned laws guaranteeing civil rights to homosexuals.
But following a tsunami of negative reaction from stars and power brokers who were already ordering mechanics in Aspen to tune up their $40,000 Land-Rovers for the holidays, Ms.
Streisand backed off.
It was as if the singer and director had dared to propose that her friends in Hollywood actually . . .
sacrifice.


Hurricane's Damage Persists, In Disrupted Lives and Hopes
Juanita Mosley says she still finds it hard to accept the loss of her house, which Hurricane Andrew's 145-mile-an-hour winds ruined along with everything in it and the hairdressing salon she owned and ran for 22 years.
"There are days I feel like I am just going to pass out," she said.


A Brighter Day for Choice
Justice Harry Blackmun, the author of Roe v.
Wade, has often lamented that every abortion case reaches the Supreme Court with the four votes necessary to gain full review -- and only one vote shy of the number required to overturn Roe.
On Monday, however, only three Justices voted to hear a Guam abortion case.
As a result, the Court let stand a ruling that struck down Guam's harsh anti-abortion law.
Ordinarily, the Court's refusal to hear a case has scant legal significance, but this time a fresh inference is available.
Four Justices may still be chafing to overrule Roe, but five hold to its core, forcing its detractors at least to save their powder for future battles.


The Military Can Successfully Integrate Gays; Toll on Leadership
To the Editor:
Re "Lift the Ban on Gay Soldiers" (editorial, Nov. 15): I would like to communicate why the military should not allow homosexuals in their ranks.
It has nothing to do with a gay person's ability to do an individual job.
Gays run the gamut of ability as does everyone else.
It also does not have a lot to do with AIDS.
It has everything to do with followership.


Metropolitan Diary
THE scene: A crosstown bus on 96th Street.
Lead players:
Two grandmotherly women and Uli Monaco of Nyack, N.Y., who overhears their conversation.


Market Place; New Troubles For Tokos
THE Tokos Medical Corporation, an eight-year-old provider of health care to pregnant women, is no stranger to controversy.
Tokos uses a drug and technology system for a purpose not yet approved by the Government -- a legal though tricky business that limits the company's ability to promote the system.
The medical community is split over whether some of the Tokos treatments do any good for the purpose -- which is to decrease the number of pre-term births.
Some experts even contend that the type of drug used could be harmful to pregnant women.


Seton Hall Is Taught Humility By Rider
Seton Hall 87, Rider 74
Seton Hall, ranked among the the top 10 teams nationally, had to overcome a 35-point performance by Darrick Suber tonight to defeat unheralded Rider College, 87-74, in front of 3,200 fans at Walsh Gymnasium.
"I thought we got outplayed," Coach P. J. Carlesimo of the Pirates (4-1) said.
"Rider played harder and executed better than we did. We have a real problem in our backcourt, and we're not playing well as a team."


Duty Free International reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Are Bulls Overplaying Their Hand?
Michael Jordan
really
said this after last Saturday's dreadful 37-point loss to the Knicks:
"If we play better, I think we can beat this team without a problem."


Tougher Rules Set For Gull Shooting
Officials of Kennedy International Airport will face a more stringent review process when they seek state approval next year to resume shooting thousands of seagulls in an effort to reduce of the number of birds colliding into airplanes over one of the nation's busiest airports.
Officials of Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, which operates the airport, say that shooting the birds has so far proved to be the most effective tactic in reducing collisions, which can have potentially catastrophic consequences.


Accounts
*
Today's Man, Moorestown, N.J., to Kaiser Feinberg &amp; Associates, Moorestown, to handle the men's apparel retail chain, previously at Cox Landey &amp; Partners, New York.
Billings were estimated at $2.5 million to $3 million. *
American Telco, Houston, to the Hively Agency Inc., Houston, to handle the long-distance telecommunications company's account, previously at Freed Advertising, Houston.
Billings were not disclosed.


COMPANY NEWS;
NWA Inc., the parent of Northwest Airlines, may be able to assemble an infusion of $250 million to shore up its cash position by the end of this week, provided its banks agree to permit new lenders a share of the carrier's assets, an industry executive familiar with the discussions said yesterday.
The executive also said that Northwest had asked its banks to defer $270 million in loan payments and to grant other relief steps that would help ease the pressure on the company in meeting payments on its $4 billion in debt amid an industrywide slump.


Hostility Greets Students at Black School in White Area of Detroit
When the virtually all-black Malcolm X Academy moved into a virtually all-white pocket of Detroit this fall, the reception was so hostile it reminded many people of Little Rock in 1957, not Detroit in 1992.
About 30 police officers patrolled the school and a police helicopter circled overhead.


John J. Bagatta, 71, R. H. Macy Executive
John J. Bagatta, whose 44-year career at R. H. Macy &amp; Company took him from stockman to senior vice president, died on Sunday at St.
Vincent's Hospital.
He was 71 years old and lived in Huntington Station, L.I.
He died after a long illness, his family said.


COLLEGE HOCKEY REPORT
Two Referees
Major college hockey is being played this season with two referees and one linesman rather than one referee and two linesmen, as in the past.
The reasons, as explained by Joe Bertagna, executive director of the Eastern College Athletic Conference's hockey league, are simple enough: "It was felt that two referees calling penalties would provide more control. The game had become too fast, and the players too big, for one referee to see all that was going on."


Pupil Has Gun at School
The police took a 6-year-old pupil at Elementary School 90 in the South Bronx into custody yesterday after he was seen tapping an unloaded .38-caliber revolver on a table in the lunchroom.
A police spokesman said cartridges for the pistol were found in his pockets.
The child was taken to the 44th Precinct and his mother was called.
No charges were filed.
Officers could not determine who owned the weapon.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The Federal Reserve Board chairman told a key Congressman that the central bank was considering whether to reduce its targets for money supply growth next year.
Such a move could upset politicians who have criticized the Fed for falling below its monetary growth targets, saying that this was an important reason the economic recovery has been so weak.  [ Page D1. ]
The index of leading indicators, the Government's main forecasting index, advanced four-tenths of 1 percent for October after two straight monthly declines.  [ D1. ]


Review/Television; Holding Off the State Executioner
In 1978, Harold Lamont Otey, known around the race track as "Walking Wili," was sentenced to death in Omaha for raping and murdering a 26-year-old woman.
Since then his lawyers have been keeping him alive with appeals to state and Federal courts.
Whether you see the case as an example of the way the law prevents rushes to judgment or of how the system can be manipulated to prevent justice from being carried out is likely to be related to your attitude toward capital punishment.
Richard Schlesinger, the reporter of tonight's dramatically paced episode of "48 Hours," picks up the story in 1991, as prison officials are once again checking on their electric chair -- "the smooth delivery of service," one of them says of the switch-throwing -- and Mr.
Otey's supporters are once again devising new pleas on his behalf.


ISRAEL REPRIMANDS FOREIGN REPORTERS
The Israeli Government indefinitely suspended the press credentials of two foreign correspondents and reprimanded four others today, charging them with having violated censorship laws in their reporting on a fatal army training accident last month.
A Government statement accused the reporters, two Americans and four Britons, of having created "a threat to the security of the state of Israel," a charge the journalists denied.


Mainstream Nonconformist Is Dr Pepper's Self-Identity
DR PEPPER is faring better in the intensely competitive soft-drink industry after undergoing an image transplant, an operation increasingly prevalent among consumer-product marketers.
After spending the 1970's and early 1980's portraying itself as a niche brand, the nation's best-selling noncola soft drink has remade itself by broadening its appeal with a more mainstream approach.


Copley Pharmaceutical reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


George Bush's Unfinished Business
Though President Bush may be brooding about his defeat, rewarding work awaits him in his final weeks.
One major priority is to complete a task nobly begun -- disarming the nuclear-armed republics of the former Soviet Union.
He will have powerful allies should he decide to finish that task.
Senators Sam Nunn and Richard Lugar recently went to Moscow and Kiev to move the disarmament deal along.
But the job can't be done without the President's help.
And it ought not to wait until Bill Clinton takes office.


The Military Can Successfully Integrate Gays; Not First Reinstatement
To the Editor:
While I praise your increased coverage of gay issues, I was disappointed with recent news articles about Keith Meinhold, the gay sailor who is challenging his discharge.


Problems for McEnroe
JOHN McENROE acknowledged yesterday that he and his wife, the actress TATUM O'NEAL, had hired lawyers to try to resolve problems in their six-year marriage.
In a statement released by his lawyer, MARTIN LONDON, McEnroe said: "Tatum and I are having marital problems, just as many other married couples do. I intend to work hard at finding a sensible solution that's best for our entire family."


Drabek to Astros and Guzman to Cubs
The magic number is four, but this is one time the Pittsburgh Pirates won't reach it.
The dismantling of the three-time National League East champions continued yesterday as Doug Drabek, the Pirates' No. 1 pitcher, signed with his hometown Houston Astros for $19.5 million over four years.
A short while later, Jose Guzman, another free-agent pitcher, who won 16 games for the Texas Rangers last season, reached agreement with the Chicago Cubs on a four-year, $14.35 million contract.


Economic Indicators Rise by 0.4%
More evidence of economic pickup emerged today as the Government's main forecasting index posted an advance of four-tenths of 1 percent for October after two straight monthly declines.
The broad-based, albeit modest, rise in the index of leading indicators came as the Commerce Department reported a 1 percent gain in spending on new construction for the month.
And in a third report, this one covering November, an index of manufacturing activity by the nation's purchasing managers showed a sharp jump to 55 percent from 50.6 percent.  [ Page D2. ]


Cascade Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


L.A. GEAR EXPECTS TO REPORT OPERATING LOSS
Sneaker maker L.A.
Gear Inc. said yesterday that it expects to report an operating loss of between $69 million and $73 million for its latest fiscal year and sees no turnaround through the first half of next year.
Last year the company, which is in the midst of a restructuring, lost $45 million from continuing operations.
L.A.
Gear, which is based in Los Angeles, said it expects operational losses for the fourth quarter ended Nov. 30 to total $27 million to $31 million, including restructuring charges of about $10 million.
L.A.
Gear's stock ended at $11.875, off 37.5 cents, on the New York Stock Exchange.


Charges Withdrawn
An assault charge was withdrawn yesterday against PHIL ESPOSITO, president and general manager of the Tampa Bay Lightning.
The charge stemmed from an Oct. 15 confrontation between Esposito and BOB McKENZIE, columnist with The Toronto Star.


Byrd to Have Surgery Today
Dennis Byrd, the Jets defensive end who was paralyzed from the waist down after breaking his neck in a collision with a teammate during Sunday's game, underwent a preoperation evaluation yesterday in preparation for surgery at Lenox Hill Hospital today.
The four-hour operation will be performed by Dr.
Patrick O'Leary, an orthopedic surgeon, and Dr.
Martin Camins, a neurosurgeon.
It will attempt to stabilize a nondisplaced fracture in Byrd's fifth cervical vertabrae.
His neck is now being stabilized by a device called a halo brace.
Byrd is expected to remain hospitalized for the next two weeks, until decisions about where he will complete his rehabilitation are made.


Shorewood Packaging reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Review/Film; Defining Cartoons by the Gay Vargas
Tom of Finland is a household name in households well-equipped with biker gear and leather regalia.
And "Daddy and the Muscle Academy," a documentary by the Finnish film maker Ilppo Pohjola, attests to the dedication of Tom's fans.
As a legendary purveyor of gay erotica, one whose work (in the words of one interviewee heard here) is "almost a blueprint for the appearance of gay men in the latter part of the 20th century," Tom exerted a palpable influence on both fashion and fantasy.
This 55-minute film, opening today at the Film Forum, tries to explain why.
The film spends most of its time studying Tom's drawings, analyzing the elements of Tom's mystique.
The explicit nature of his art made it imperative that Tom, who died last year at the age of 71, work under a pseudonym, as he did. ("The sad thing about the name is that I don't represent Finland," says Tom, who appears here mostly as a talking head. "It's a more personal thing.")


Eli A. Bohnen; Rabbi, 83
Rabbi Eli A. Bohnen, a former head of the Rabbinical Assembly, died yesterday at the Miriam Hospital in Providence, R.I.
He was 83 years old and lived in Providence.
Rabbi Bohnen had suffered from Alzheimer's Disease, his son, Michael, said.


The Military Can Successfully Integrate Gays
To the Editor:
Our military leaders have begun a well-orchestrated campaign to persuade President-elect Clinton to abandon his pledge to end the Pentagon's ban on service by openly gay and lesbian Americans.
They insist that the morale and efficiency of the armed forces would be destroyed by allowing openly gay people to serve, because nongay service members will revolt against working and living side by side with gays.


Experts Disagree on Football Injury Prevention
Experts in the field of sports medicine differed yesterday on whether football-related spinal cord injuries like the one that has left Dennis Byrd of the Jets partly paralyzed are preventable.
Dr.
Joseph S. Torg, a surgeon who heads the Sports Medicine Center at the University of Pennsylvania, said one way to minimize spinal injuries would be to teach athletes never to use the helmet as the point of attack in trying to make a tackle.


Paul A. Anderson, 43; Helped AIDS Projects
Paul A. Anderson, a Chicago commodity trader and a benefactor of AIDS-related projects, died Nov. 18 at his home in San Francisco.
He was 43 years old and also lived in Chicago.
Word of his death was received yesterday from Martin Delaney, a friend in San Francisco who said Mr.
Anderson died from AIDS.


Craig Is Dismissed As Manager of Giants
Even though their purchase is not yet official, the new owners of the San Francisco Giants put their mark on the franchise yesterday when they dismissed Manager ROGER CRAIG and hired BOB QUINN as general manager.
PETER MAGOWAN, head of the group that has agreed to buy the Giants from BOB LURIE, took the first major steps toward revamping the team he saved for the city.
He told the 62-year-old Craig he would be replaced, gave the 54-year-old Quinn a three-year contract and also hired LARRY BAER, a CBS executive, as executive vice president.
Baseball owners are scheduled to vote on the $100 million sale of the Giants at their winter meetings next week.


Rape Conviction Overturned on DNA Tests
The conviction of a man who served 11 years in prison for rape was overturned today in a case that lawyers and forensic experts say reflects the increasing use of DNA testing by defense lawyers seeking to have cases reconsidered.
Kerry Kotler, 34 years old, was freed from the Suffolk County Jail in Riverhead this afternoon after Judge Rudolph L. Mazzei of Suffolk County Court ruled that new DNA tests, which were unavailable when Mr.
Kotler was tried in 1982, showed that there was more than a reasonable doubt of his guilt.


Matisse Show Is Extended
With the agreement of all the lenders of paintings for the exhibition "Henri Matisse: A Retrospective," the Museum of Modern Art has extended the show by one week, through Jan. 19.
Tickets to the show, which cost $12.50 ($10 for the elderly; $2 for ages 6 to 15), are available in the museum lobby at 11 West 53d Street or through Ticketmaster (for locations, 212-307-7171; for orders, 212-307-4545).


Queens School Board Suspended In Fight on Gay-Life Curriculum
New York City's Schools Chancellor, Joseph A. Fernandez, yesterday suspended a school board in Queens that has adamantly refused to adopt a multicultural curriculum that, among other things, teaches first graders to respect and appreciate gay people.
Accusing the board's members of waging "a malicious and highly organized campaign" to distort the curriculum and alarm parents, Mr.
Fernandez appointed three executives from his staff to take over the day-to-day operation of District 24 in Queens and to devise, with parents and teachers, a curriculum that includes lessons about gay men and lesbians.


The Answer: Managed Competition; For America's Health
President-elect Clinton has promised to deliver worthy health care reform legislation to the Democratic Congress in his first hundred days.
Victory assured.
Or is it?
Managed competition -- the best plan for reforming the recklessly costly health care system -- is in danger of losing by winning.
During the campaign, the idea was stretched almost beyond recognition.
What started out as a plan to control costs through competition became, in some renditions, an excuse to impose price controls.


U.S. Commander Favored
The Security Council reached a broad agreement tonight that an American general should command the force it plans to send to Somalia.
Page A18.


Faster Play Goal of PGA
The PGA Tour's policy board yesterday approved a new set of proposed guidelines designed to speed up play in its tournaments.
Under the new policy, which is expected to be ratified in March, a player whose group is a full hole or more behind the group ahead receives a warning if an official times him taking more than 40 seconds to hit a shot.
Upon a second "bad time," the player would be fined $1,000 and assessed a one-stroke penalty.
A third bad time would bring the same penalty again, while a fourth would cause disqualification.


The Military Can Successfully Integrate Gays; Then and Now
To the Editor:
The present Defense Department policy concerning the utilization, or lack thereof, of gays and lesbians is of relatively recent times: during World War II their presence and service were known and at least tolerated by the military.
That service did not bring an end to the military then and it will not now.


American Insured Mortgage Investors reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Street Fashion, Stress Or Maybe Self-Mockery
ON the M train in Brooklyn last week the Old Guy stared at a young man who was unselfconsciously sucking on a pacifier while nodding in hip-hop rhythm to sounds from his Walkman.
When the youth, who was old enough to shave, noticed the Old Guy looking at him, he smiled back but did not remove the nipple.
Two days later the Old Guy saw a young mother pushing a stroller down 92d Street at Broadway.
Her child had a pacifier in her mouth and so did the mother.
The Old Guy didn't get it.
He realized, of course, that the pacifiers were yet another affectation churned up by the yeasty mix of street culture and commerce, but young adults with teething rings were a pretty far and frightening cry from baseball caps worn backward and pre-slashed jeans.
What did they mean?


Purchasers' Survey Finds an Upturn
The manufacturing economy expanded robustly in November, led by sharp increases in new orders and industrial production, according to a monthly survey of the nation's purchasing managers.
The report, along with other data released yesterday by the Commerce Department, provided additional signs of economic recovery, economists said.


Fed Chief Weighing Policy Shift
Alan Greenspan, chairman of the Federal Reserve, in a letter released today told a key Congressman that the central bank was seriously considering reducing its targets for money supply growth next year.
Such a move would underscore the Fed's seriousness about combating inflation, but would also probably upset politicians who fear that it could hurt economic growth.


With New Food Marriages, People Who Hate Decisions Never Have to Make Them
AND now, for the generation that begs for choices but hates to choose, here's Mix-In Cuisine.
There is ice cream with candy mixed in.
Cookies with ice cream sandwiched between them.
Chocolate bars with cookies crumbled in them.
A cheese spread with jalapenos and corn chips mixed in.
At grocery stores in Columbus, Ohio, one of the nation's test-market capitals, familiar snacks, desserts and convenience products have been nudged aside by a new generation of packaged foods that combine several products or even well-known brand names, like Hershey's chocolate pudding with York Peppermint Patties mixed in.


Amy Fisher Gets a Maximum of 15 Years
Amy Fisher, the Long Island teen-ager who inspired tabloid headlines, an instant book and three made-for-television movies, was sentenced today to up to 15 years in prison for shooting the wife of her purported lover.
"You are a disgrace to yourself, your family and your friends," Judge Marvin Goodman of Nassau County Court told Miss Fisher, her hands clasped and trembling, as he imposed the maximum sentence for first-degree assault.


Suspension Issued by Fernandez Will Set Up a Test of His Power
Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez's suspension of the District 24 school board sets up one of the most volatile confrontations in the 22-year history of decentralization.
Because the dispute is over a matter of curriculum rather than corruption or mismanagement, Mr.
Fernandez's action yesterday puts into sharp focus how far the Chancellor can go in asserting his authority and what power community boards were intended to have under decentralization.


Recession in Japan Brings End to Shortage of Labor
Japan's longtime labor shortage officially ended today, setting the stage for the nation's low unemployment rate to increase in the deepening recession.
For the first time in four and a half years, there are more people in Japan looking for jobs than there are jobs offered, the Labor Ministry reported today.


Kentucky Chickens With Je Ne Sais Quoi
FOR the last year or so, flocks of French chickens have been pecking and scratching their way from the gentle hills of southern Kentucky to some fine dinner tables.
They are the only French chickens being raised commercially in this country.
It was the doggedness of David Wilson, a former squab farmer, that brought these chickens here.
Mr.
Wilson, whose easy bluegrass twang is peppered with phrases like "raison d'etre," became intrigued with French chickens nearly five years ago after some of the chefs who were buying his squabs kept telling him how good they were.


Mitchell Energy &amp; Development Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Koor Industries Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Stanley Weintraub, Businessman, 87, Dies
Stanley Weintraub, a businessman and philanthropist, died on Saturday at St.
Vincent's Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 87 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of cancer, said his wife, Livia.


In Cajun Country, a Quick, and Quiet, Tackling of Storm Repairs
Officially, Ellery and Albert Lirrette's small yellow house on the banks of Bayou DuLarge did not survive Hurricane Andrew.
When the barn blew into the house early on Aug. 26, the walls broke open and even the bathtub split.
Most of the roof flew away, and a shed roof blew inside.
Ceilings collapsed, and insulation covered the interior like snow.


Personal Health
What can you come up with this year as holiday gifts for your elderly relatives and friends who may already "have everything" or "don't need anything," perhaps because they don't go anywhere?
You can give a gift of great love and caring, a gift that promotes health or eases the lives of those who may be chronically ill or disabled or simply not as agile as they once were.
"Choosing healthful gifts shows you are interested in someone's well-being," noted Barb King, a geriatric nurse practitioner at the University of Wisconsin Hospital and Clinics.
But it challenges ingenuity to come up with something more appreciated or far better used than yet another sweater, silk scarf or crystal bowl.
These gifts require consideration not just of the person's present way of life but of activities not being enjoyed because of fear or disability.


Revision Discussed for One-Day-Old Health Plan
Ushered into law with marginal political support and faint praise from its creators, New Jersey's new health care system already has brought talk of major revisions and the threat of protracted legal fighting.
Gov.
Jim Florio signed the sweeping overhaul of the state's health care system Monday night, only minutes after the Republican-controlled Legislature approved the package of bills, which includes a plan to pay for hospital care for the poor by diverting $1.6 billion from the state's unemployment insurance fund.


Leafs Can't Hold the Devils' New Line
The Devils showed no respect tonight for the league's top defensive team as they came up with the largest production of the season and might have ended their scoring slump.
The Devils gave the Toronto Maple Leafs an 8-3 spanking, which came after their 6-3 triumph at Quebec on Saturday night.
The consecutive victories followed three losses in which the Devils had scored only two goals.


Public &amp; Private; We Are Not Amused
With the devastating fire at Windsor Castle the Queen of England was forced to conclude that the monarchy was in trouble and it was time to pay taxes.
Left-leaning politicos were contemptuous of her loss.
Leno mocked her on late night.
But some sympathized.
Four hundred years it takes you to get the house just the way you want it, and then -- poof! -- gone.
And who knows how many attractive head scarves Elizabeth R lost along with the paintings and the dining room that seated 124 comfortably?


Review/Rock; Sound and Look of Rave
The rave scene, like any collision between youth culture, music and the market, possesses an ambiance as well as a sound.
Backpacks and striped stocking caps, whistles and slouchy clothes constitute rave's look.
Behavior patterns range from narcissistic rapture to childlike abandon, as people enjoy an innocent sensuality beyond the usual realm of dance-floor conquest.
But rave is becoming mainstream.
Only a few people wore its fashions at the Palladium on Saturday night; most of the young crowd there dressed in jeans or mini-skirts, unremarkable weekend fare.
Teen-age boys gave one another high-fives as the young women commiserated over romantic possibilities; this could have been a 1950's hop or a 70's disco.
Despite the scheduled appearance of the popular techno band the Movement (techno is a newer, more frenzied offshoot of rave) and the up-to-the-minute mix concocted by D. J. Charlie Casanova, the night's essence had very little to do with trends.


Japan Does Right Thing on Plutonium
To the Editor:
You covered the shipment of reactor-grade plutonium from France to Japan, but your editorial dismisses the key point ("Japan: Off Course on Plutonium," Nov. 10).


National Symphony Cancels
The National Symphony Orchestra has canceled its scheduled concert at Avery Fisher Hall on Sunday afternoon because Mstislav Rostropovich, the ensemble's conductor, is to receive a Kennedy Center Honor at the White House at that time.
Tickets may be exchanged for other events in the Great Performers at Lincoln Center series.
Information: (212) 875-5020.


Thomas Gambino: It's All in the Name
The Apparel Industry Chapter of the American ORT Federation's cocktail party next week will have all the trappings of a typical $150-a-person fund-raiser: An elegant three-color invitation.
An open bar.
A buffet with smoked salmon and chefs carving away.
But the guest of honor will not be so typical: Thomas Gambino.
Yes, the Thomas Gambino who pleaded guilty at his corruption and racketeering trial nine months ago, the Thomas Gambino who prosecutors say is an organized-crime captain and the Thomas Gambino who promised to get out of the short-haul trucking business in the garment industry after paying a $12 million fine.


Belgian Finds a Score Berlioz Said He Burned
The score of Hector Berlioz's first major work, a 14-movement Messe Solonelle composed in 1824, has recently come to light.
The piece, which Berlioz claimed to have burned after performances in Paris in 1827, was discovered late last year at the St.
Charles Borromee Church in Antwerp, Belgium, by Frans Moors, a schoolteacher and organist.
But the score was authenticated only recently, when it was examined and pronounced genuine by Hugh MacDonald, the general editor of the New Berlioz Edition, a critical version of Berlioz's complete works to be published by Editions Barenreiter, of Kassel, Germany.
Mr.
MacDonald, a British musicologist who teaches at Washington University in St.
Louis, said in a telephone interview from London last week that he expected the work to be published as part of the Berlioz critical edition next October.
Scored for full orchestra, chorus and three soloists, it runs about 80 minutes.


U.S. CITES WASTE IN ITS CONTRACTS
After years of effort to transfer Government work to private companies, the White House acknowledged today that contractors were squandering vast sums because Federal agencies failed to supervise how hundreds of billions of dollars were spent each year.
In a report prepared for Richard G. Darman, the director of the Office of Management and Budget, Federal auditors from the White House and 12 agencies said private companies had been paid for unauthorized and, at times, illegal expenses, including tickets to sporting events, lavish cruises and excessive salaries for executives.


Campus Journal; Push for Higher Admission Standards
The University of Texas at Arlington is sandwiched between Dallas and Fort Worth, but it has labored for decades under the annoying shadow of Austin, site of the University of Texas, the flagship campus of the state university system.
Austin's athletic teams are the fabled Longhorns; Arlington's mascot is the shorthorn.
Austin is nationally known as a research center; Arlington's mission has primarily been teaching.
On the whole, the Austin campus, with an enrollment nearly twice that of UT-Arlington, also attracts better students.


Eating Well
JOHN ROBBINS, crusader, animal-rights activist and idealist, shares household chores with his wife, Deo, and their 18-year-old son, Ocean.
He does about 40 percent of the cooking and washes the dishes.
"Deo does the bathrooms," Mr.
Robbins said as he sat in the study of his 1950's house, with 1950's carpet that was probably orange and yellow and brown when it was new.
"That's because I weasel out of that."


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-18  YELTSIN STAYS FIRM ON REFORM
President Boris N. Yeltsin, opening a session of the full Russian Congress, acknowledged that his economic changes were reducing the living standards of most Russians but insisted that the answer to their problems was not to change the course of reform.
A1  KREMLIN WHEELING AND DEALING
Democracy is making an impact on the Great Kremlin Palace, once used by Russian czars as their Moscow residence and by the Soviet rulers as an imitation of a parliament.
Now, in an era when Russian politicians are just getting the hang of pressure groups, hallway lobbying and wheeling and dealing, it resembles a high-school gym at election time.
A1


INSIDE
Clinton Ethics Rules Delayed
The President-elect's aides said they were having trouble writing his Administration's ethics rules.
Page B10.
Act Now or Pay Later
Two Disney executives sidestepped possible changes in the tax laws with a $200 million stock deal.
Page D1. 13 Die in Air Force Crashes
At least 13 crew members died in the collision of two Air Force planes and the crash of a third.
Page B11.
DNA Tests in Rape Cases
A rape conviction was overturned in a case that experts say reflects the growing use of DNA testing.
Page B6.
Battle Over a Schoolhouse
A black school's move into a white neighborhood in Detroit has led to racial strife.
Education, page B12.


Pay Dips at Hot Corner, Second Base and Outfield
Not everyone who plays major league baseball is making more money than ever.
According to salary information given to the Players Association executive board at its meeting in Boca Raton, Fla., yesterday, the average salaries of shortstops, third basemen and outfielders decreased this year.
Not since 1987 have so many positions lost money.
The overall 1992 major league average soared, rising 20.8 percent to $1,028,667, the first time the average reached $1 million.
Fourteen clubs averaged more than $1 million compared with eight last year.


Black Is Victim of Beating By Hasidim in Crown Hts.
A homeless black man was beaten early yesterday morning by a group of Hasidic men behind Lubavitcher headquarters in Crown Heights, the Brooklyn neighborhood where blacks and Hasidim have long lived in uneasy coexistence.
The police arrested a Hasidic man last night in connection with the beating.
Moshe Katzman, of 888 Montgomery Street, a 24-year-old graduate student, was charged with assaulting the victim and violating his civil rights.


Alabamian Is Said to Profit Selling Comptronix Short
Federal regulators investigating the unusual activity in the Comptronix Corporation's securities are focusing on a Huntsville businessman who may have turned a quick profit before the company disclosed that its senior management had inflated its earnings, according to individuals involved in the investigation.
The businessman, Domer Ishler, has close ties to a senior Comptronix director, Richard F. Adler, who is part of a three-man internal committee investigating the company's books.
Word of the investigation raises fresh questions about when the company's outside directors learned of the problem, and what they did with that information.


Intercan Leasing reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Next Trade War Target May Be Dogs
A new trade war is breaking out in an unlikely industry: dog breeding.
The Canadian Government, responding to public unease about the health of thousands of puppies bought each year from the United States, is preparing new regulations that would severely curb the flourishing North American canine trade.


YUGOSLAV PREMIER TO CHALLENGE SERB
The Prime Minister of Yugoslavia announced today that he would attempt to unseat the Serbian republic's hard-line nationalist President, Slobodan Milosevic, in elections set for Dec. 20.
Mr.
Milosevic is widely held to be the person most responsible for the bloody aftermath of the breakup of Yugoslavia, and the candidacy of the federal Prime Minister, Milan Panic, is the strongest challenge to Mr.
Milosevic's grip on power here since he took over as Serbia's Communist Party chairman in 1987.


WORKING OUT WITH: Lenda Murray; Wonder Woman In the Flesh
WHEN Lenda Murray struts into a weight-lifting room, grown men freeze in mid-grunt.
Those lats!


Executive Changes
AMWAY CORP., Ada, Mich., a supplier of home-care and personal-care products, named Thomas W. Eggleston chief operating officer and executive vice president for worldwide direct sales.
THE COMMON FUND, Westport, Conn., an educational asset management institution, appointed Curt R. Tobey senior vice president.


CHRONICLE
They're coming from all parts of the country and most of the decades of LADY BIRD JOHNSON'S life to wish her a happy 80th birthday in Austin, Tex., this weekend.
The festivities get under way Friday evening with a black-tie dinner for 750 in the Lyndon Baines Johnson Library, at which tributes will be given by Laurance S. Rockefeller, John Gardner and Sargent Shriver.
A film by Charles Guggenheim, "A Life: The Story of Lady Bird Johnson," will be shown, and Nellie Connally; former Representative Lindy Boggs; Mary Love Bailey, a longtime friend, and Cecile Marshall, Mrs.
Johnson's roommate at the University of Texas, will read from her diaries and speeches.


Book Notes
On the Trail Again
It may sound hard to believe, but Hunter S. Thompson, the cynical, drug-infused, strange, gonzo guru and expert on self-medication, actually sounded giddy, like a pee-wee football player whose team had won its first game.
"You
can
beat City Hall," he said in a telephone interview from his home in Woody Creek, Colo., where he is still obviously high (emotionally) over Bill Clinton's defeat of George Bush in the Presidential election.
"It was fun, real fun," he said of the campaign and the victory, about which he is writing in his next book, "Better Than Sex: Fear and Loathing on the Campaign Trail 1992," due in the spring from Random House.
"When I covered the campaign trail in '72, that was fun. I did it again in '76 with Jimmy Carter, but that was not fun. I tried to stay out of it this time, avoid it. Stay away. Made a conscious decision not to get involved. But it crept into my life like kudzu vine. Just took over." Original 'Fear' Still Popular
Mr.
Thompson (who prefers the honorific Dr., although no one is sure what he is doctor of) gave a wild and generational spin to the traditional campaign book with his classic "Fear and Loathing on the Campaign Trail '72" (Warner Books, 1974), his psychedelic and psychotropic record of George S. McGovern's failed run against Richard M. Nixon for the Presidency.
That book continues to be very popular, and since 1985, when Random House Inc. began keeping computerized records, it has sold more than 700,000 copies in its Ballantine paperback edition, said David Rosenthal, Mr.
Thompson's editor at the Random House adult trade division.
The book has sold more than 1.5 million copies overall in paperback and hard cover.
Random House has scheduled a 100,000-copy first printing for the new book (for which the company paid in the mid-six figures, people involved in the negotiations said).
His new book will not be so much a chronicle as the original, Mr.
Thompson said.
He admits having become intensely involved with the Clinton staff.
"I was down there for election night, day week, taking care of business," he said, his voice a raspy trail.
"I'm a junkie -- for campaigns. Even as I tried to stay away to write my novel -- it's about sex; I'm halfway through it -- I knew it would happen." There's Always Paraguay
He describes the book as a collection of documents, memos, communications, and notes between himself and members of the Clinton staff.
And he is completely open about the book's partisan nature.
He said he was planning to move to Paraguay if Mr.
Bush had been re-elected.
"It's a weird little place," said Mr.
Thompson, who is 54 years old.
"It's about as far away from anything as you can imagine. Old Nazis go there. It's 50, maybe 100 years behind everything."
Four more years of a Bush Administration, he said, "would have pretty much closed down this generation, my generation, in politics."
He said he felt "vaguely responsible" for Mr.
Clinton's victory.
"I made a very strong statement urging people to aggressively vote for him, and then I got deeply involved with him and his staff people," Mr.
Thompson said.
"It would have been humiliating to lose against that creature again." 3 on Thompson
Mr.
Thompson has apparently become an official totem of his generation: three biographies of him are planned for early next year.
And in case there was any doubt what kind of impression Mr.
Thompson has left on the American psyche, one need only observe the subtitles of the three impending books.
"Fear and Loathing: The Strange and Terrible Saga of Hunter S. Thompson," by Paul Perry, is to be published by Thunder's Mouth Press in January.
A month later, E. P. Dutton is to release "Hunter: The Strange and Savage Life of Hunter S. Thompson," by E. Jean Carroll.
For April, Hyperion has planned "When the Going Gets Weird: The Twisted Life and Times of Hunter S. Thompson," by Peter Whitmer.
When Mr.
Thompson learned that three biographies about him were in the works, he responded, "Man, even Faulkner didn't have that many books written about him before he died." Ready for Expansion
Poets and Writers Inc., the only national nonprofit literary organization that both acts as a clearinghouse for information and offers financial support for fiction writers and poets, has a lot to celebrate at its annual fund-raising dinner-dance, tomorrow night at the University Club in Manhattan.
The group, founded in 1970, recently announced that it received a $1 million grant from the Lila Wallace-Reader's Digest Fund to expand its readings and workshops program to nine Midwestern states beginning next year.
The program, which has been active in New York State for 22 years and in California since 1989, supports poets, fiction writers and literary performance artists by matching the usually modest fees they receive for readings and workshops sponsored by a variety of organizations.
The grant will allow Poets and Writers to finance similar programs in Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Michigan, Minnesota, Ohio, North Dakota, South Dakota and Wisconsin, in addition to maintaining its activities in New York and California.
Among the writers helped by Poets and Writers in the early days of their careers are Erica Jong, Terry McMillan and Tama Janowitz.
Poets and Writers sponsors other programs to help fledgling fiction writers and poets.
They include the publications program, which publishes "A Directory of American Poets and Fiction Writers," "Literary Agents: A Writer's Guide" and a bimonthly magazine, Poets &amp; Writers; the information center, which answers queries by telephone and letter from authors about literary and financial subjects, and the writers' exchange, which brings four promising poets and fiction writers to New York each year to introduce them to publishers, editors, agents and new audiences.


Sports of The Times; Dennis Byrd, Mike Plant And Bowe
ON Sunday afternoon, precisely at the time Dennis Byrd of the Jets went down with a broken neck, there were four of us in a car heading toward an art exhibition on Long Island.
Talk about risk.
Foolish young people in expensive cars whipped in and out of the lanes as if they were driving at Indy or Daytona.
As they passed me, they took their hands off the wheel to make an obscene gesture, and they took their eyes off the road to mouth vulgar words at me.
No police car materialized to give them a ticket, to make them stop risking their lives, and ours.
There were so many, you could never catch them all.


BRIEFS
Debt  *
CIT Group Holdings Inc., 60 percent owned by Dai-Ichi Kangyo Bank Ltd. and 40 percent owned by Chemical Banking Corp., is offering $100 million of 5 7/8 percent notes due 1995 at 99.742 to yield 5.97 percent through Lehman Brothers.
The noncallable notes are rated A-1 by Moody's, A+ by S.&amp; P. and Duff &amp; Phelps.


Salvadoran Moves to Purge Military of Rights Abusers
El Salvador resumed the complex process leading to the formal end of its civil war today after the Government completed an important step intended to initiate a purge of the worst human-rights offenders in the army officer corps.
The United Nations Secretary General, Boutros Boutros-Ghali, announced in New York that President Alfredo Cristiani had, as required by the peace accords, sent him a letter on Monday detailing the "administrative decisions" he has made to implement the "purification" of the army.


Rev. Marvin Frey, 74, Writer of Faith Songs
The Rev.
Marvin V. Frey, an evangelical minister who wrote many well-known songs of faith, died on Saturday at Phelps Memorial Hospital Center in North Tarrytown, N.Y.
He was 74 years old and lived in Ossining, N.Y.
He died of heart failure, his wife, Helen, said.


Genesis Health Ventures reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Domi Itching for Rematch With Probert
How do you belt somebody in the mug without telegraphing the punch to your league president?
Therein lies the subtle problem for undiplomatic Tie Domi, the Ranger enforcer and a man who has been eyeing a shirt-tugging rematch for nine months.
Since his extended heavyweight bout with Bob Probert in February, Domi has been pointing to tonight's game with Detroit at Madison Square Garden as his own personal main event.


Maloney Decides to Step Down As U.S. Prosecutor in Brooklyn
Andrew J. Maloney, who successfully prosecuted John Gotti this year, is resigning tomorrow as the United States Attorney in Brooklyn.
Mr.
Maloney, who has served more than six years in what is usually a four-year position, retained his post longer than usual at the request of the Justice Department.
He said he wanted to complete "unfinished business" that included obtaining the conviction of Mr.
Gotti, the boss of the Gambino crime family.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
7.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
4.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.12
3.45
4/68
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.33
3.31
4.36
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.49
3.46
4.35
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.59
6.58
6.81
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.56
7.59
7.89
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.54
8.58
8.90
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.42
6.42
6.87
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


NEGATIVE MIND-SET ON M.I.A.'S CHARGED
A dispute arose at a Congressional hearing today when some military intelligence officials said that some analysts had a "mind-set to debunk" evidence of live American veterans who were reported missing in action or imprisoned during the Vietnam War.
Critics contend that such a mindset hindered the rescue of these Americans from Vietnamese captivity, and charges such as these have spurred reports that Americans might still be alive in Indochina.


Bridge
Foreign invaders make more impression in American Contract Bridge League Championships than they used to, partly because for many years they were barred from major team events, by xenophobic regulation.
When the Reisinger Board-a-Match Teams ended Sunday night, concluding the Fall Nationals in Orlando, Fla., there were two winners from Brazil, Gabriel Chagas and Marcelo Branco, and one runner-up from England, Tony Forrester.
One of Forrester's teammates, Eddie Kantar of Santa Monica, Calif., brought home a delicate part-score on the diagramed deal from the semifinals.
He held the South cards and landed in three spades after the opponents had come to rest in three clubs and his partner had made a balancing double.


Resistance to Plan on Homeless
About 200 angry residents from the Upper West Side crammed a meeting of Community Board 7 last night to voice opposition to a proposal by the administration of Mayor David N. Dinkins to move 100 homeless families into two hotels in their neighborhood.
The Board passed resolutions asking City Hall to address security at the hotels and to meet with community representatives to negotiate the implementation of any plan before it goes into effect.


Hadco Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Clinton Seeks to Expand Presidential Privacy
Bill Clinton, determined to have in the White House some measure of the freedom and privacy he enjoyed in Little Rock, has begun a systematic effort to push the edges of "the bubble," the constricting cocoon of bodyguards and journalists that is every President's shadow.
Since at least the days of Harry S. Truman, Presidents have complained of the great sacrifice in movement and privacy the office has come to entail, and many have tried to do something about it.
Mostly, they have failed, and the bubble has grown tighter.
George Bush lives almost completely within it.


Albany Delay Seen on Deal For Transit
Legislative leaders said today that they did not expect to strike a deal this month on a host of transportation financing issues, meaning that fares and renovations on New York City's subways, trains and buses might be held hostage next year to fierce haggling over the state budget.
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and the chairman of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, Peter E. Stangl, have urged the Legislature to convene a special session this month to deal with the state's complex transportation agenda when it can be considered apart from the budget process.
Mr.
Stangl, in particular, does not want the debate deferred until next spring, when financing for mass transit could become just another bargaining chip in Albany's annual budget wars.
Critical to Constituents
Although the state's budget for the 1992-93 fiscal year appears to be in balance, Cuomo administration and legislative budget analysts are projecting a gap of anywhere between $2 billion and $4 billion in the 1993-94 budget.
As the April 1 start of the state fiscal year approaches, budget negotiators may look to commandeer any available dollars to help close the gap, including those previously dedicated to transportation improvements.


Theater in Review
Lake Street Extension Kampo Cultural Center 31 Bond Street Lower East Side Through Dec. 20 By Lee Blessing; directed by Jeanne Blake; sets by E. David Cosier; costumes by Teresa Snider-Stein; assistant costume designer, Jonathan Green; lighting by Jeffrey S. Koger; production stage manager, Dean Gray.
Presented by the Signature Theater Company, James Houghton, artistic director; Thomas C. Proehl, managing director.
WITH: Keith A. Brush, Joe Sharkey and Rick Telles.


Theater in Review
CBS Live  Minetta Lane Theater 18 Minetta Lane Greenwich Village New material written by Bob Bejan, Ben Garant, Michael Schwartz and S. Sydney Weiss; scenic and mixed-media imagery by Cubic B's; costumes, hair and makeup by Thomas Augustine; lighting by Peggy Eisenhauer; video montages by Ira H. Gallen; production stage manager, Allison Sommers; production supervisor, Robert C. Socha.
A Controlled Entropy Entertainment Production, presented by Polygram Diversified Theatrical Entertainment.
WITH: Bob Ari, Jonathan Bustle, Kim Cea, Suzanne Dawson, Patricia Masters, Marcus Neville, Hardy Rawls, Sue Rihr and Dana Vance.


Millrose Games Acquired by IMG
The Millrose Games, an indoor track fixture in New York since 1907 when the meet was begun by employees of the city's branch of the Philadelphia-based Wanamaker department store chain, will make its 80th consecutive appearance in Madison Square Garden next Feb. 5 under new management.
That is because marketing rights to the games, named for one of the two Pennsylvania homes once maintained by Rodman Wanamaker, the son of the department store founder, John Wanamaker, have been sold to the International Management Group, the IMG chairman, Mark H. McCormack, announced yesterday.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day on Nov. 24 about the sale of Atex Inc. and two other business units by the Eastman Kodak Company misstated Kodak's obligations for a pending lawsuit by journalists who contend that the keyboards of Atex's computer terminals caused wrist injuries to them.
Danny Chapchal, who heads the consortium acquiring Atex, said his group was not assuming any of Kodak's liabilities related to the lawsuit.


A Salad Dressed For All Seasons
MAIN-DISH salads are not just for summer.
Once it was thought that hot food should be served boiling hot and cold foods icy cold.
Cold foods, including salads, were considered best for hot and steamy days.
But now we know better: room temperature or lukewarm is the preferred range for many foods.
Food that is very cold or very hot numbs the taste buds and prevents us from enjoying the full flavor inherent in it.


Justices Void Man's Death Sentence
The Supreme Court set aside an Arizona man's death sentence today, ruling 8 to 1 that the Arizona Supreme Court had failed to take the necessary precautions to make sure that the sentence was not based on an invalid provision of the state's death penalty law.
The Court ordered the Federal District Court in Arizona to grant a writ of habeas corpus for the convicted murderer, under which the state would have to release him from custody unless it acted "within a reasonable period of time" to correct the constitutional error in the death sentence or to impose a non-capital sentence.


3 New Trustees in Queens
Three members of Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez's staff will assume the responsibilities of the Queens school board members who have been suspended.
The newly appointed trustees are Burton Sacks, chief executive for monitoring and school improvement; Maria Santory Guasp, executive director of the division of instruction and professional development, and Flora Langer, deputy executive director of the division of funded programs.


Schott Is Subject of Investigation by Owners
While the major league executive council named a panel yesterday to investigate Marge Schott's alleged racial and ethnic remarks, a civil liberties expert said that if she was suspended or fined, she would have trouble challenging the action on free speech grounds.
Schott, the owner of the Cincinnati Reds, was the subject of a one-hour telephone conference call during which the executive council appointed a four-member panel to investigate the remarks attributed to her.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Saturday about sanitation problems in Alaska referred incorrectly to the residents of Kotlik, Alaska.
They are Yupik Eskimos, not Indians.


Democrat Is Declared Nassau County Clerk
Ending a contest marked by acrimony and intrigue, a state Supreme Court justice refused today to order another recount of ballots in Nassau County's special election for County Clerk, making Doreen Banks, a Democrat, the "official, official winner."
The special election filled a job vacated by a Republican incumbent of 25 years, Harold W. McConnell, amid lawsuits over backlogs in entering court judgments and recording mortgages.


Reporter's Notebook; Introduction to Life Inside Beltway
Some House freshmen ran against Congress, while others ran for new directions in policy.
But today, as they arrived for orientation, the new members expressed more practical concerns, like finding office furniture, housing and day care for their children.
"You feel like a person without a country," said Representative-elect Jennifer Dunn, Republican of Washington State, "but fortunately I'm a woman with a district."


Cary Scott Lowenstein, Singer and Dancer, 30
Cary Scott Lowenstein, a dancer, singer and actor, died on Sunday at Hospice-by-the-Sea in Boca Raton, Fla.
He was 30 years old and lived in Los Angeles.
He died of AIDS, said his parents, Daniel and Toby Lowenstein.


PHH Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Hindus Move on a Disputed Temple Site, Defying New Delhi
In a direct challenge to the Indian Government, Hindu fundamentalists said today that they would disregard a court injunction and start building a Hindu temple this weekend on a site occupied by a 16th-century mosque in the northern town of Ayodhya.
A similar though unsuccessful effort to build a temple on that site in 1990 led to a violent confrontation resulting in several deaths and the collapse of the country's central Government.


House of Fabrics reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Recovering Addict Leans on Aid From Neediest Cases
Carol J. has devoted the last two years of her life to stripping her mind of the lessons she learned in her first 31.
She has worked to rid herself of fears that sprung from a childhood of sexual abuse.
And she has tried to understand why she thought she could wipe away her pain by surrendering herself to drugs.
Confronted by many searing memories during therapy, she might easily have given up.
But she knew that when she felt overwhelmed, she could turn for support to her social worker, Charlie Levine of the Brooklyn Bureau of Community Service, one of seven charities aided by The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.


Countries in Europe Can't Agree on Plan For Police Network
A two-day conference on immigration and judicial policies among European Community nations ended in disagreement here today, with governments split over implementation of a plan to set up a European police network.
Despite intense discussions, ministers from the 12 countries could not agree on who should head the so-called Europol or where to locate its headquarters.
The force is regarded as a way to improve coordination of law-enforcement intelligence as Europe moves toward more relaxed border controls.


Making the Shadow of AIDS Visible
Paintings and sculptures in museums and galleries were draped in black yesterday, bells tolled in churches and art institutions, red AIDS-awareness ribbons were given out in hundreds of buildings and the lights went dark outside cultural landmarks in a symbolic blackout of city skylines from New York to San Francisco.
These events were part of the fourth annual Day Without Art, a worldwide commemoration organized by arts organizations and AIDS health and education groups in conjunction with the World Health Organization's AIDS Awareness Day.


Inaugural Aims to Please All Parties
Bill Clinton will celebrate his inauguration here on Jan. 20 with a series of events calculated to evoke the memories of Thomas Jefferson, Andrew Jackson, Abraham Lincoln and the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr.
Mr.
Clinton, said officials in his transition operation, will enter Washington on Jan. 17 with a calvacade of buses -- echoing those of his campaign -- that will start from Monticello, Va., the mansion Jefferson designed and built.


No Headline
"There are thousands and thousands of us who feel the same way, that what we've suffered since the hurricane is worse than what we went through during the storm." -- JOSE VELAZQUEZ, a victim of the August hurricane in Florida.  [ A1:1. ]


Riser Foods reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 17


Last Military Mission Of Shuttle Is Set Today
Preparations were completed today to launch the space shuttle Discovery with a five-man crew on Wednesday with unseasonably cold weather the only apparent major impediment.
The launching of the Discovery on the last planned secret military shuttle flight hung on whether stringent weather rules adopted after the 1986 Challenger disaster would force a delay.
The cold contributed to degrading seals in a rocket booster that led to the Challenger explosion and the loss of its seven-member crew.


Knicks Try Another Look and See Their Fortunes Soar
The evolution of the new-look Knicks continued last night with another lineup change and another victory over an elite team.
With Charles Smith replacing Tony Campbell as the starting small forward, New York rolled to an impressive 101-85 victory over the Portland Trail Blazers at Madison Square Garden before the Knicks' seventh consecutive home sellout crowd (19,763).


Thievery and Extortion Halt Flow of U.N. Food to Somalis
The port is closed, a ship with 10,000 tons of food for the starving has been diverted to Kenya and cocky teen-age guards with assault rifles loll around the docks demanding cash even though aid convoys have ceased to move.
"Everything we've done here promotes rule by the gun," said Russ Ulray, a frustrated logistics officer for the United Nations World Food Program, who is deskbound these days.


Reporter's Notebook; In Kremlin's Noble Halls, The Tumult of Democracy
Democracy is making an impact on the Great Kremlin Palace, once used by Russian czars as their Moscow residence and by the Communists for their wooden imitation of a parliament.
Now, when Russian politicians are just getting the hang of pressure groups, hallway lobbying and wheeling and dealing, the place resembles a high-school gym at election time.


Why Biomedical Researchers Forgo New York
To the Editor:
In a Nov. 17 news article, you report that a study conducted for the New York Academy of Medicine's Commission on Biomedical Research and Development notes that New York City's share of Federal money for medical research is shrinking.
Reasons include "the ivory-tower attitude at medical centers, as well as government policies" and "inadequate laboratory space."


Wine Talk
NOTHING about wine is so widely misunderstood as the mystique of old wine.
"We had dinner with friends," someone will say. "They served the 1961 Lafite."


Nathaniel E. Kossack; Retired U.S. Official, 80
Nathaniel E. Kossack, a retired Federal official with a nationwide reputation in law enforcement, died last Wednesday at his home in Wilmington, Del.
He was 80 years old.
Chandler Funeral Homes in Wilmington, which reported the death on Monday, said he died of heart failure.


RESULTS PLUS
HOCKEY  Stars Move to the Top  Ulf Dahlen had a goal and an assist last night as the visiting Minnesota North Stars defeated the Ottawa Senators, 3-1, and climbed into first place in the Norris Division.
The victory, the fifth straight on the road for the surging North Stars (14-9-3), moved them past Detroit into first place in the Norris and tied them with Quebec for fourth over all in the National Hockey League standing.
Dave Gagner and Todd Elik also scored for the Stars, who are unbeaten in four games and have a 6-1-1 record over their last eight.
Minnesota (8-5-0 on the road) has won five consecutive road games for only the third time in franchise history.
Tomas Jelinek scored for Ottawa, which lost its third straight game since ending a 21-game span without a victory last week.
The Senators are last in the league with a 2-23-1 record. (AP) Blues 8, Whalers 4: Craig Janney continued his torrid pace with four assists and Kevin Miller had a hat trick as St.
Louis beat Hartford in St.
Louis.
Janney has 12 assists in the last five games, during which the Blues are 3-1-1, and is among the league leaders with 29 assists.
Miller scored two of his goals in the final two minutes.
Brendan Shanahan also had two goals for the Blues.
The Blues are unbeaten (7-0-2) in their last nine home games.
But they also are 1-8-1 overall on the road.
Murray Craven had two goals and an assist for Hartford, which is in a 1-4 slump. (AP) Kings 6, Blackhawks 3: Corey Millen had two goals and an assist in the opening period and Kelly Hrudey stopped 44 shots as Los Angeles beat Chicago in Milwaukee.
The Kings scored twice in the first four minutes and defeated the Blackhawks for the second time in as many meetings to improve their record to 17-7-2, a mark that leads the Smythe Division.
The game was played before 16,292 at the Bradley Center.
The crowd was second highest of the six neutral-site games played so far, topped by the 17,026 who saw Toronto-Quebec on Nov. 17 in Hamilton, Ontario.
Milwaukee currently has a team in the International Hockey League. (AP)


In Searching for Scholarship Funds, the Advice Is: 'Do It Yourself'
Tough economic times and the rising cost of a college education, which can now top $20,000 annually, have produced a boom in computerized scholarship search operations.
For fees ranging from $50 to $250, these operations offer customized lists of corporate and foundation grants for which a student might qualify.
The services scan electronic data banks of thousands of scholarships and match ethnic background, religion, intended career choice, or other criteria to the individual applicant.


The Pop Life; Arista's Formula: Country and Film Music
About three years ago, Clive Davis was looking around for ways to break new ground with his label, Arista Records.
Mr.
Davis, who is the president of Arista, said he had noticed that some of the new stars of contemporary music were record producers.
So he struck a deal with the pop-soul writing and producing team of Antonio (L.A.) Reid and Kenneth (Babyface) Edmonds, and gave them money to start their own label, LaFace Records.
He said he also saw "great songs" being minimized by the explosion of hard rock, heavy metal and rap, which led him to open a country music branch in Nashville.
And it was his view that young film makers and Hollywood studio executives appeared to be hipper than ever about the possibilities of integrating music and film to please contemporary tastes.
So he decided that the time was right to produce soundtracks in a big way.


Buy Up the Somalis' Guns
When someone proposes any action to save starving women and children, it is hard to counsel caution without appearing cruel.
But the proposal to dispatch up to 30,000 American troops to Somalia must be considered as dispassionately as possible.
The Bush Administration should explore whether we might be able to buy peace and humanitarian relief before sending in military forces.
The use of combat troops is premised on humanitarian objectives, as against protecting our national security, the traditional justification for deploying forces.
That is noble and a much more preferable use of troops than, for example, the invasions of Grenada and Panama.
But if the humanitarian role is the one we will play in the post-cold-war world, we should contemplate where it leads us.


Avoiding the Clinton Taxman
This could be a banner year for executive pay thanks to Bill Clinton.
To avoid the higher taxes the President-elect has vowed to slap on their multimillion-dollar pay packages, corporate executives from Wall Street to Hollywood are figuring ways to reap pay and benefits this year instead of next, according to compensation consultants.


Casey's General Stores reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


COMPANY NEWS
COMPUTER SCIENCES CORP., El Segundo, Calif., has been awarded a one-year, $62.1 million contract by the Army to provide technical assistance and computer programming support to the Information Systems Software Development Center at Fort Lee, Va.
PACIFIC ENTERPRISES, said it had completed the sale of its Canadian oil and gas operations to Enerplus Group of Calgary, Alberta, for $39.2 million (United States).


CMAC Investment Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
A headline with the Chronicle column in some editions yesterday about the Courage in Journalism Awards misstated the site of the awards ceremony.
It was in New York.


Books of The Times; Intrigue in the Business World and in Suburbia
The Venerable Bead  By Richard Condon  294 pages.
A Thomas Dunne Book/St.
Martin's Press. $21.95.
Small Game  By John Blades  239 pages.
Henry Holt. $19.95.


Federal Agency Announces Start Of Human Tests of AIDS Vaccines
The National Institutes of Health announced today that it was ready to begin tests of AIDS vaccines in people at high risk to get the disease.
"This is a small step forward, giving a vaccine for the first time to people who are at high risk for the disease, the kind of people who will ultimately be getting a vaccine against H.I.V.," said Dr.
Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, the chief Federal agency working on the vaccines.


Theater in Review
Christchild  Henry Street Settlement 466 Grand Street Lower East Side Through Dec. 20 By J. E. Franklin; directed by Irving Vincent; set designer, Felix Cochren; sound by Bill Toles; costumes by Judy Dearing; makeup by Thelma L. Pollard; lighting by Jeff Guzlik; assistant director, Robert Siverls; production stage manager, Fred Seagraves.
Presented by New Federal Theater Inc., Woodie King Jr., producer.
WITH: Patti Bown, Vincent La Mar Campbell, Lee Roy Giles, Minelva Nanton, Michele Shay, Terri Towns and Charles Malik Whitfield.


1993: So-So Growth, Low Inflation
A consensus forecast of leading bond market economists released yesterday said the economy would grow moderately next year, inflation would remain low and the yield on the 30-year Treasury bond could decline to around 7.25 percent.
The forecast for interest rates, however, depends on a big if: whether the new Clinton Administration will produce a credible deficit-reduction program along with its proposals to stimulate the economy.


CHRONICLE
ROBERT KOTLOWITZ, former senior vice president and director of programming and broadcasting at WNET, Channel 13 in New York, has been named to a senior fellowship at the Freedom Forum Media Studies Center at Columbia University.
Mr.
Kotlowitz, who is now an editorial adviser at WNET, will use the fellowship to work on a book analyzing the impact of public broadcasting and will join the program, an independent affiliate of Columbia University, in January.
"For me it is a chance after many years at the station to step aside and look at what has happened in two decades," he said.
"There is a powerful feeling that it has a constituency that has grown over the years and that does not really share economic and cultural values but is spread throughout the population. The common denominator is curiosity. I want to see how true that is and what it means."


Guest Supply reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Tilting Train Cuts Travel Time By Rounding the Bends in Stride
In a tortoise-and-hare plot twist, a train using old-fashioned railroad tracks may prove superior to the world's fastest railway technologies when it comes to moving Amtrak passengers through the Northeast Corridor.
With the goal of cutting the time on its New York-Boston run, Amtrak has begun testing a type of high-speed electric train developed in Sweden that is able to hug the curves of routes laid out for the lumbering steam locomotives of a hundred years ago.


Sexual Harassment Inquiry Involving Senator Is Begun
The Senate Ethics Committee today ordered a preliminary investigation into accusations of sexual harassment lodged against Senator Bob Packwood.
Committee aides said they believed it was the first time the committee had looked into such accusations since it was created in 1964.
Aides on the ethics panel will investigate complaints that the Oregon Republican made unwanted sexual advances toward 10 women over several years.
A preliminary inquiry will look at the credibility and seriousness of the accusations, and its findings will be forwarded to the senators on the committee to decide whether to go further.


Mets to Get Rockies Started
The Mets, who began as an expansion club in 1962 with a game against the Cardinals in St.
Louis, will become the answer to a new trivia question next year when they open the season at Shea Stadium on April 5 as the very first opponent of the new Colorado Rockies.
The afternoon game will be the first of 84 East-West encounters for the Mets.
With the National League expansion to 14 teams, including the addition of the Florida Marlins in the Eastern Division, each team will play only 78 games against division opponents, 13 against each of the six.
Each team also will play 84 interdivision games, 12 against each of the seven rival division members.


Navy Will Forgo Courts-Martial In Missile Firing That Killed Turks
A Navy panel has recommended that the captain of the American ship that fired two missiles at a Turkish destroyer be disciplined for dereliction of duty, along with seven other officers and sailors.
The recommendation for disciplinary action against the men, including Capt.
James M. Drager, is short of a court-martial but serious enough to effectively doom their careers, senior admirals said today.
Captain Drager, 48 years old, was considered one of the Navy's rising stars, and was the first helicopter pilot to have been named commander of an aircraft carrier.


Amy Fisher Receives Maximum Sentence of 5 to 15 Years


Europe's Farmers Protest Trade Agreement
With France busily trying to win allies in its fight against a United States-European Community farm trade agreement, tens of thousands of farmers from across Western Europe filled the streets of the French border city of Strasbourg today to protest the pact.
French farm unions, which contend that the farm trade accord will badly damage French agriculture, chose Strasbourg for the daylong demonstration because the city not only is the headquarters of the European Parliament, but also is within easy reach of German farmers.


Jeffrey Fox; Photographer, 46
Jeffrey Fox, a commercial photographer and instructor, died on Friday at Tisch Hospital at New York University.
He was 46 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of cancer, his wife, Phoebe, said yesterday.


McDonnell Retirees Sue Over Health Plan's End
A decision by the McDonnell Douglas Corporation to curtail medical coverage for retirees has been challenged in court.
A Federal class action lawsuit filed here Monday on behalf of 8,000 former employees of McDonnell Douglas's western operations charges that the company's decision to end its current medical plan on Dec. 30 is unlawful.


Guerrilla Group Vows More Attacks on South Africa Whites
A small black guerrilla faction warned today that its attack on a golf club on Saturday night marked the beginning of a new campaign against white civilian targets, evidently aimed at disrupting a compromise on South Africa's political future.
But the Government and the leading black organization, Nelson Mandela's African National Congress, fiercely condemned the attack in King William's Town, which left two couples dead and 17 people wounded at a wine tasting where much of the town's white gentry had gathered.  'White Areas' Are Target
The Government and the congress planned to meet on Wednesday for a new round of talks to fix a target date for elections.
But some South Africans fear that a sustained campaign of terrorism against whites, if it materializes, could weaken the Government's ability to surrender power.


Yields on Money Market Accounts and C.D.'s Are Mixed
The average yields offered on bank money market accounts and certificates of deposit for the seven days beginning today are mixed locally and flat to slightly higher outside the New York area, according to The Bank Rate Monitor.
The likelihood that rates on deposits will rise significantly anytime soon is remote, said Robert K. Heady, publisher of The Monitor.
"There are those who believe that a rate rise will emanate from the incoming Administration's plans of increased spending, but already there are analyses from the Clinton camp that there will be no quick turnaround for the economy."


Flow International reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


CUC International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Market Place; European Star Amid Uncertainty
INVESTING in European stock markets is a high-risk enterprise these days.
Monetary instability, uncertainty over the future of European integration, the political shadow of Balkan violence and the rise of extreme right-wing movements feeding on economic anxiety have all contributed to a mood of pessimism.
The fact that most analysts expect the dollar to rise over the next six months also makes Europe less attractive to American investors.
In these circumstances, most people are looking for solid stocks with steady growth potential.
Judging by its record over the last five years, and by the aggressive determination of a management team widely perceived as among the most effective in France, the French telecommunications, energy and transport conglomerate Alcatel Alsthom S.A. looks a relatively safe bet.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Kentucky Headhunters  Lone Star Roadhouse 240 West 52d Street
The Kentucky Headhunters are pot-bellied and proud.
True, only a couple of these five Southern boogie masters actually show a paunch, but attitude-wise, they aren't afraid of a little flesh and like to throw that weight around.
The Headhunters' stomping country rock is practically a manifesto for down-home white male working-class pride, music that would make a perfect soundtrack to a wildman weekend.


Guild Members Assail Tactics Of Zuckerman
Members of a Daily News union that is battling Mortimer B. Zuckerman as he tries to take over the ailing tabloid voted last night to condemn his tactics against them.
But they also decided to encourage union members to apply "under protest" for their own jobs at a Zuckerman-owned Daily News.
The vote essentially postponed a showdown with Mr.
Zuckerman and eased an immediate crisis that threatened to disrupt his first days as owner of The News later this month.
After talks over a new contract with the union, the New York Newspaper Guild, failed Tuesday, Mr.
Zuckerman said he would begin sending current employees job applications because they would no longer be working under a union contract.


Bridge
Transfer responses to no-trump openings, aimed at making the strong hand declarer by bidding the suit below the one in which length is held, have become highly popular in tournament play.
A thoughtful extension of this idea, with a considerable following, calls for the responder with 4-5 or 5-4 distribution in the major suits to use Stayman and then bid his four-card suit.
This allows the opening bidder to become declarer if he has three-card support for his partner's five-card suit.
This idea was developed a decade or so ago by Michael Smolen of Marina del Rey, Calif., who died of leukemia two weeks ago at the age of 52.
In a long tournament career he had accumulated almost 18,000 master points, winning titles at many levels with a wide variety of partners.
A Slight Slip
On the diagramed deal from a California tournament he defended skillfully as East, taking full advantage of a slight slip by the declarer.
Routine bidding led to three no-trump and West naturally led the diamond king.


CHRONICLE
Maybe Mrs. el-Sayed can learn something from YOKO ONO.
Ms.
Ono is the chairwoman of a benefit performance of "The Night Larry Kramer Kissed Me" on Friday evening.
It is for the Treatment Action Group, which finances efforts to speed up access to promising AIDS therapy.
For the occasion, at the Perry Street Theater, Ms.
Ono designed a T-shirt using lyrics from a song she wrote in the 1970's: "A dream you dream alone is only a dream, but a dream you dream together is a reality." Now, if that could only be applied to AIDS, she said.


College Basketball; St. John's Wins Lapchick By Going in Slow Motion
The Running Redmen of St.
John's, as they are referred to under their new coach, Brian Mahoney, slowed things up a bit in the second half of a close game against Iona last night, and the change in pace helped them pull away from the scrappy Gaels, 90-74, to win the annual Joe Lapchick Memorial Tournament before 5,518 spectators at Alumni Hall.
Shawnelle Scott led St.
John's with 17 points, constantly posting up less-powerful Iona players under the basket in a deliberate halfcourt offense in the second half.
Lamont Middleton had 16 points and Charles Minlend added 15 for the Redmen.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-14  MANY DIVISIONS IN EUROPE  News analysis: A year after optimistically setting course for monetary union later in the decade, the 12-nation European Community is riven by economic, monetary and political divisions, raising doubts about whether it will ever become anything more than the single trading market that is due to take effect Jan. 1.
A1  GERMANY BACKS EUROPEAN UNITY  The German Parliament, warning that increased racial violence reflects the danger of resurgent nationalism, voted overwhelmingly to approve a treaty of European union, thus making Germany the ninth nation to ratify the treaty, which was agreed in the Dutch town of Maastricht a year ago.
A12  Germans ban the music of several neo-Nazi rock groups.
A12  U.S.
BACKS U.N.
SOMALIA ROLE  The United States has agreed to a significantly greater degree of United Nations involvement in the new military operation it wants the Security Council to authorize for Somalia later this week than it was prepared to accept two years ago in the Gulf war against Iraq.
A1  GAMBLE FOR TOURISTS IN AFRICA  A $300-million gamble, which opened as the Lost City in the South African homeland of Bophuthatswana, will offer tourists hotel and casino accommodations and a bit of fantasy about an Africa that is not quite so African.
A1  VENEZUELAN FEAR OF INSTABILITY  In the 1970's, highways and high-rises sprouted across Caracas, creating what Venezuelans proudly called a "Miami with mountains." But the damage to this city's spirit is captured in a new phrase, as residents debate the country's future.
A coup attempt last Friday failed, as did one in February.
But the latest violence, in which 230 died, has confirmed Venezuelans' fears that their country has become dangerously unstable.
A3  Salvadoran rebels begin the destruction of their weapons.
A6  HONG KONG POWER STRUGGLE  News analysis: Asian wars have always been a bit odd, ever since the British invasions in the 19th century to force the Chinese to accept opium.
Today's worsening conflict over Hong Kong is no exception.
On the surface, the war of words between Britain and China over Hong Kong is about British efforts to make the territory a bit more democratic.
But more fundamentally, the conflict is about power, mistrust and pride.
A7  Six U.N. peacekeepers are seized by Khmer Rouge guerrillas.
A11  As fighting raged in Sarajevo, efforts for food aid halted.
A5  Russian warns his country on runaway inflation.
A13  Israel seeks to lift ban on contacts with the P.L.O.
A9  National A16-22, B12-13  HEALTH INSURERS ASK OVERHAUL  The health insurance industry called for a Federal law that would bring coverage to all Americans, define a basic set of benefits and control costs by limiting tax breaks for insurance purchases.
A1  U.S.
SUES TWO SALOMON OFFICIALS  After more than a year of inquiry into bond-market manipulation, the S.E.C. filed a civil suit charging two former managing directors of Salomon Brothers with insider trading and other securities violations.
A1  'TV WILL NEVER BE THE SAME'  Tele-Communications Inc., the nation's biggest cable television company, announced plans to introduce technology that could radically change the way people use TV.
A1  DECISION ON FOOD LABELING  Ending a long dispute between two Cabinet officers, the Administration announced rules intended to tell consumers the nutritional content of virtually every packaged food.
A1  'AN AMERICAN REUNION'  Aides to President-elect Clinton announced plans for what promises to be the most folksy inaugural celebration since Andrew Jackson threw open the White House doors in 1829 and was almost crushed by enthusiastic supporters.
A20  Matters abroad are now confronting Clinton squarely.
A20  Education groups are seeking common ground under Clinton.
A21  Kennebunkport Journal: A town fading from the spotlight.
A16  AN ASTONISHING DISCOVERY  A researcher studying worms called nematodes has found that males live much shorter lives than females, and he has traced the difference to the act of making sperm.
Other scientists, although cautious, now say it is possible that at least a fraction of the difference in life span between men and women may be linked to sperm production.
A18  THE SHUTTLE ROARS ALOFT  Discovery, carrying an intelligence satellite, soared into orbit on the last secret shuttle mission planned for the Pentagon.
A16  COLORADO UNDER FIRE  Anger over Colorado voters' passage of an anti-gay-rights measure has already cost the state's precious tourism industry millions of dollars, and the retribution shows no signs of abating quickly.A16  The Supreme Court heard an unlawful-taxation case.
A19  An abducted Mexican doctor went on trial in the Camarena slaying.
A17  The cost of the most expensive drug could be cut, a study found.
B12  A clash developed over human trials of an AIDS vaccine.
B12  Alaska offered an alternative to its plan to kill wolves.
B13  Metro Digest B1  MORE CROWN HEIGHTS ANGER  One day after a Hasidic Jew was arrested in a gang beating of a homeless black man in Crown Heights, Mayor Dinkins traveled to the racially divided Brooklyn neighborhood and once again found himself the target of Hasidic anger.
A1  Neediest Cases B5  Business Digest D1  Home Section C1-13  A tree grows in architecture.
C1  Shrieks for Barney the dinosaur.
C1  At the Algonquin with Andrea Marcovicci.
C1  A 3-in-1 fitness machine.
C2  Currents C3  Home Improvement C4  New twists on traditional arts.
C4  A home so healthful it passes the sniff test.
C6  Parent &amp; Child C12  Arts/Entertainment C14-22  Programming Lincoln Center.
C15  The real Malcolm?
As the search widens, he's as elusive as ever.
C15  National Endowment for the Humanities head to step down.
C15  Theater: "Pill Hill." C18  Dance: Ballet Hispanico in "El Nuevo Mundo." C15  Word and Image: Children's holiday books.
C19  Home Video C20  Profiles offeaturing Roy Rogers and Orson Welles.
C20  Networks rush Amy Fisher films.
C21  Sports B14-22  Baseball: Yanks drop offer to Bonds; pursue Maddux.
B15  Basketball: Nets defeat Hawks.
B15  Has Knicks' Riley settled on a  starting lineup?
B18  St.
John's beats Iona to capture Lapchick tournament.
B22  Columns: Anderson on Dennis Byrd and a "mystery" drug.
B15  On College Football B17  Football: Jets' Byrd undergoes seven hours of surgery.
B15  Giants' Handley makes sweeping changes.
B17  Hockey: Rangers beat Red Wings.
B21 Skiing: Manufacturers bring skies to the mountain.
B20  Obituaries D20-21  A. Gardner Fox, a retired physicist and inventor.
D20  Frank D. O'Connor, a retired New  York appellate judge.
D21  Editorials/Op-Ed A24-25  Editorials  Managed competition can work.
Chancellor Fernandez stands tall.
Baseball's very big problem.
Letters  William Safire: Visions in collision.
Leslie H. Gelb: Get cracking on Bosnia.
Jean Kennedy Smith, Eunice Kennedy Shriver, Patricia Kennedy Lawford, Edward M. Kennedy: A grotesque portrait of our parents.
Herbert L. Abrams: If Clinton is disabled.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
THE focus on gifts during holiday celebrations can prove too much for some children.
Charles L. Thompson, a professor of psychology at the University of Tennessee in Knoxville, describes how his 1 1/2-year-old grandson was so excited by the number of Christmas presents he received last year, that he started playing with the boxes they came in.
"They were easier for him to cope with," he recalled, adding that older children show similar reactions.
"One of my students had a toddler who was so overwhelmed that, during his third Christmas celebration that day, he hid in the closet," Dr.
Thompson said.


Why Young Children Scream
HE has a fixed, goofy grin, a pudgy green belly and bright yellow toenails that clash with his purple "skin." And with a six-foot-tall body mounted on short, plump legs, he moves with a clunky waddle.
Not a likely candidate to succeed as a big-time celebrity.
But that's what Barney the dinosaur, the latest children's sensation on public television, has become.


Bombardier Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Dinkins Faces New Criticism In Crown Hts.
One day after a Hasidic Jew was arrested in a gang beating of a homeless black man in Crown Heights, Mayor David N. Dinkins traveled to the racially divided Brooklyn neighborhood and once again found himself the target of Hasidic anger.
Leaders of the ultra-Orthodox Lubavitcher Hasidim bristled at the Mayor's immediate denunciation of the attack, saying the black man had been a burglar, not a victim.
And Mr.
Dinkins, preaching racial tolerance to a group of children at a public library, was briefly confronted by an angry Hasidic woman who compared him to a controversial black nationalist.


Sports of The Times; Will Mystery Drug Help Byrd Heal?
IN time, it might be known in medical circles as the Dennis Byrd drug.
Or it might be forgotten, another mystery drug that didn't work.
Byrd's broken neck has been stabilized by surgery but the extent of recovery by the partly paralyzed Jets defensive end might be determined by small vials of colorless liquid, an experimental mystery drug known as Sygen.


For Clinton Inauguration: a Plain and Fancy Affair
President-elect Bill Clinton's aides today unveiled plans for his inauguration, which promises to be a festival of contrasts mirroring Mr.
Clinton's own persona: blue jeans and ball gowns, a soup kitchen and $125-dollar-a-plate dinners, all kicked off by -- what else? -- a bus trip to the White House.
Clinton inaugural planners are promising the most folksy inauguration since Andrew Jackson threw open the White House doors on March 4, 1829, and was almost crushed by enthusiastic supporters, who made off with his chinaware and left muddy footprints on the satin-covered chairs.


Baseball's Very Big Problem
Five years ago Al Campanis, an admired baseball executive, hurt himself, his career and the feelings of millions of Americans by saying on national television that blacks "lacked the necessities" to manage baseball teams.
But his example did not eliminate bigotry from baseball.
Marge Schott, owner of the Cincinnati Reds, refers to blacks as "niggers."
When Ms.
Schott's remarks became public knowledge, a decisive baseball commissioner would have acted promptly to calm public outrage.
But there is no commissioner; Fay Vincent resigned the job in September.
The task of reprimanding Ms.
Schott now falls to baseball's executive council, which meets on Monday in Louisville.


Frank D. O'Connor, 82, Is Dead; Retired New York Appellate Judge
Frank D. O'Connor, a retired judge of the Appellate Division of the New York State Supreme Court who served as the Queens District Attorney and later as President of the City Council, died yesterday at Booth Memorial Hospital in Flushing, Queens.
He was 82 years old.
Judge O'Connor died from head injuries he suffered 13 days ago when he fell down a flight of stairs at his home in Jamaica Estates.


Thor Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Review/Theater; Success and Failure In Black Struggle to Rise
"Pill Hill," by Samuel Kelley, is a penetrating study of the aspirations and defeats of a group of young working-class black men in Chicago.
In this play (at Hartford Stage), we meet people who never have a chance for advancement and others who progress but are besieged by questions of guilt and responsibility.
Those who succeed in "Pill Hill" pay a severe price, although some steadfastly refuse to acknowledge the consequences.
Mr.
Kelley (a recent graduate of the Yale School of Drama) also deals intelligently with the legal system, selling real-estate, and conflict between management and labor.
The play is acted with an earthy authenticity by a cast that is finely tuned to the changes in the characters.


At Boeing, a Big Debate On Future of Jumbo Jets
Boeing, the company that invented the jumbo jet, is now debating whether there is a future for the huge airplanes.
Philip M. Condit, the president of the Boeing Company of Seattle, said yesterday that there were differences of opinion within the company on whether a new generation of 600-passenger airplanes was feasible.


If the Shoe Fits, Eat It
IF Dennis Kyte had a shoe boutique, a woman could slip into a pineapple, a banana or maybe a potato with a peel for a strap.
Mr.
Kyte has dozens of designs for what he calls botanical footwear.
Forty-three of his watercolors of such fanciful shoes are on display at Stubbs Books and Prints, 153 East 70th Street, through Dec. 31.
The exhibit also includes topiary watercolors ($150 to $275) by Madison Cox, a landscape designer and author, and botanical-motif place mats and pictures ($50 each) by Monica Greig, a British artist.


Prices Swing but Little Changes
Prices of bond and notes moved a lot yesterday but ended little changed, as traders and investors turned their focus to the November employment report scheduled for tomorrow..
The hope is that the new data will give a clearer sign of the economy's direction and, if things are on the upswing, how strong the momentum is.
But investors might be disappointed.


Ted Shaine Moves To BBDO New York
Ted Shaine, a well-known creative director who has worked at agencies including Hill, Holliday, Connors, Cosmopulos and Ammirati &amp; Puris, was named yesterday to the new position of senior creative director at BBDO New York.
Mr.
Shaine, 45 years old, was most recently executive vice president and creative director at Hill, Holliday in Boston, before leaving in January for New York to work on a freelance basis.
Before Hill, Holliday, he worked at Ammirati in New York on accounts like BMW, Club Med and Schweppes.


World Events Force Clinton to Divert Attention to Foreign Affairs
President-elect Bill Clinton, who had the luxury of running a political campaign that focused on the domestic issues he knew best, is now grappling with a transition period that has forced him to address the shifting grounds of foreign policy.
Today he talked to Caribbean leaders and to President Bush, who briefed him on the status of a United Nations resolution regarding military intervention in Somalia.


Centel Critics Force Close Merger Vote
Centel Corporation investors opposed to the company's plan to merge itself into the Sprint Corporation rounded up enough votes to prevent Centel's management from claiming victory at a special shareholders meeting here this morning.
It is rare for a vote on a management-sponsored resolution to be so close that the independent proxy processer cannot determine the outcome by the end of the meeting.
The fact that Centel officers could not announce results indicated an especially close vote on the proposed merger, which needs a simple majority for approval.


Designing for Charity On Not-So-Grand Scale
THE dollhouse, and its offspring, the miniature room, were not always toys.
In 1558, Duke Albrecht V of Bavaria commissioned a dollhouse as a gift for his daughter, but liked it so much he kept it for himself.
By the early 20th century, Mrs.
James Ward Thorne, a Chicago socialite, had donated 68 miniature period rooms to the Art Institute of Chicago.
"Mrs. Thorne conceived of the rooms as didactic tools for teaching the history of interior design," said Ian Wardropper, curator of European decorative arts and sculpture at the Art Institute.


End of Israeli Ban on P.L.O. Contacts Is Urged
After a two-month delay sought by Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin, the Government asked Parliament today to lift a ban on contacts with the Palestine Liberation Organization, but it reiterated its rejection of negotiations with the group.
Justice Minister David Libai proposed a repeal of a 1986 law that prohibits meetings between Israelis and P.L.O. members.
The change, which would permit meetings that do not harm state security, passed a preliminary vote today, but final passage could take weeks.


International Thoroughbred Breeders Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Cuomo Calls for New York and New Jersey to End Rivalry
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo yesterday appealed for peace in the economic war between New York and New Jersey and called for the two sides to meet.
But he also said he was prepared to do battle if New Jersey continued to woo New York companies with financial incentives.
"They slug you. You slug them. That's primitive," Mr.
Cuomo said.
"Well, what should you do? You should sit down with New Jersey and say, 'Look, this is foolish. You're going to rip us and we're going to rip you. You're going to cost us money. We're going to cost you money. Let's get together. Let's make a region that's more attractive, which is what we've talked about for years.' "


Tension Mounts in Lebanon; Religious Balance in Jeopardy
Consultations began here today after Christian political and spiritual leaders warned that Lebanon's political order would collapse if Muslims force an ending to a power-sharing formula among the religions.
A delegation from the Iranian-backed Party of God visited Patriarch Nasrallah P. Sfeir, the head of the Maronite Catholic Church, and offered to enter into what a fundamentalist Muslim official called a "meaningful dialogue" to head off civil war.


Review/Television; Recalling the Eras Of Cowboys and 'Kane'
Here's one way, with just two names, to ponder the wide, wide world of movies: Roy Rogers and Orson Welles.
The Singing Cowboy parlayed third-feature horse operas into a multi-million-dollar business.
The Boy Wonder from the East made one of the greatest films ever, "Citizen Kane," and for the rest of his life wound up scrounging for financial backing to get his movies made.
American culture can be a thing of wonder.
Tonight, both stars are being given television profiles.
At 9 on American Movie Classics, the hourlong documentary "Roy Rogers: King of the Cowboys" kicks off a Rogers retrospective that will continue at scattered times through the weekend.
At 8, "Orson Welles: What Went Wrong?" is the latest installment in an occasional Cinemax series called "Mad About the Movies."


RUSSIAN ECONOMIST TAKES ON CRITICS
With his job on the line and his program under attack, Acting Prime Minister Yegor T. Gaidar told a hostile legislature today that the country must stop inflation and runaway spending, or face the fate of the underdeveloped third world.
Mr.
Gaidar, whose policies for economic change are the focus of the Congress of People's Deputies, gave little ground to critics, whom he accused of indulging in "the economics of populism" and of ignoring the dangers of an inflation rate that is now 25 percent a month.


A Ray of Hope From City Hall On Job Growth
New data on New York's employment and output of goods and services indicate that the worst of the recession -- which has caused the city to lose 10.7 percent of its jobs since April 1989 -- is over, government and private economists say.
But they caution that the city's economic recovery will lag behind the country's and that there will be no significant increase in jobs soon.
Indeed, several economists expect another employment decline in 1993.


London Journal; Chancellor's Life Is an Open Book, on Comic Side
In a political season that has already seen both the British pound and the British Government teetering near the brink of collapse, the tribulations of Norman Lamont, Britain's mild-mannered Chancellor of the Exchequer, seem like small stuff indeed.
But as political theater, the succession of published reports in recent days about Mr.
Lamont's misfortunes, both real and fictitious, have provided richly distracting moments for an otherwise gloomy public, gamely trying to make the best of Britain's longest economic recession since the 1930's.


How Green Was My Passaic, Now Long Hill
No one used to mind when the City of Passaic and the Township of Passaic, 22 miles away, were confused.
But that was before Passaic, the city (along with other parts of Passaic, the county) crumbled.
Passaic Township, as bucolic as New Jersey gets, began to wear its name like an itchy sweater.
Residents tired of explaining the difference between their remote green stretch of southern Morris County and urban blight.
Most stopped using the name altogether.


Skiing; International Racers Beat Average Skiers to Slopes
For most skiers, the start of the ski season has nothing to do with snow or even cold weather.
It begins with sales at ski shops, demonstrations at ski shows, meetings of ski clubs, showings of ski movies and, most glamorously, the arrival of racing on the international ski tours.
Major competition began last week, when the men gathered for World Cup giant slalom and slalom races in Sestriere, Italy, and the women met for the same events in Park City, Utah.


Economic Security Rates Higher Status
To the Editor:
In a Nov. 15 editorial you joined the chorus of concern over Bill Clinton's proposed Economic Security Council, warning that "the parallel with national security invites . . . a quick descent into the worst protectionism."


A Couple Builds a Home So Healthful It Passes the Sniff Test
ON the shore of Lake Washington here, six miles from Seattle, is a nearly $2 million condominium with hand-painted wallpaper in the dining room, a coromandel screen in the living room, and a pure silk comforter on the bed.
But what really makes this home different is that the three-bedroom apartment and all its contents were selected to create an environment that does not make one of the owners ill.
John Shimer is one of many Americans who have environmental illness or multiple chemical sensitivities.
When he smells fumes from some paints, automobile exhaust or ammonia, for example, his vision blurs, his speech slurs and his head aches.


Defense Seeks Dismissal Of All Glen Ridge Charges
Defense lawyers today asked for dismissal of all charges against the four defendants in the Glen Ridge sex assault trial on the ground that the prosecution withheld documents that could benefit their clients.
In a day of bitter and at times confusing legal argument, one of the four defense attorneys, Alan Zegas, accused the trial prosecutors of "outrageous conduct," saying they had not provided information that he said they were constitutionally required to surrender to the defense.


The Answer: Managed Competition; How to Make It Work
President-elect Clinton promised real reform of health care.
So far he has offered only some loose, not always consistent principles, and translating them into law sounds like a monumental task.
Well, perhaps not so monumental.
To establish a national system of managed competition, Congress has to do only part of the work.
Congress would be foolhardy to prescribe detailed reforms for places as different as the mean streets of New York and the salt flats of Utah.
The right role for Washington is to lay down a few ground rules and let the states fill in the blanks.


Big Plans for the Hudson River Piers
AN English country lane lined with thatched-roof cottages, a Venetian waterway, a large piazza, an archway from medieval France -- all may find a home on the Hudson River someday, lining "streets" on the Silver Screen Studios back lot.
If all goes according to plan, visitors will pass the scenes to reach parts of a million-square-foot entertainment and recreational complex proposed for piers 59 through 62 between 17th and 23d streets.


Three Networks Rush Amy Fisher Films
The race to turn the Amy Fisher story into a television movie escalated into a network scheduling showdown yesterday as two networks announced they would broadcast movies about Ms.
Fisher, the Long Island teen-ager who shot the wife of a man she says was her lover, on the same night in January, with a third movie two nights later.
ABC first announced a firm date of Jan. 24 for its version, called "Beyond Control: The Amy Fisher Story." But NBC followed by announcing it would broadcast its version, tentatively called "Treachery in the Suburbs: The Amy Fisher Story," on the same night.
CBS has scheduled its version, "Casualty of Love," for Jan. 26.


Girls' 'Young' Pen Pal Turns Out to Be in Prison for Murder
A prison inmate who represented himself as a 10-year-old girl exchanged pen-pal letters with at least three young girls for several months before his deception was uncovered.
Prison officials say they do not believe the inmate broke any laws and there is little they can do beyond checking his incoming mail.
Postal officials and the state police said they were investigating whether the prisoner violated postal regulations, but a state police spokesman, Sgt.
Scott O'Mara, said he doubted a crime had been committed.
The inmate, Michael Jarrett, 42 years old, is serving a 50-year sentence at the maximum-security Connecticut Correctional Institution here for the murder of his 16-year-old girlfriend in 1985.
Using a false address in Somers, he wrote to Hopscotch, a children's magazine, seeking pen pals.
Letters Signed 'Micky'
Officials at the Somers post office said they had forwarded his mail to the prison until last week, when they learned of a state police investigation into the matter.
Mr.
Jarrett corresponded with at least three girls, and in one instance made sexual references in his letters, said Thomas M. Edwards, the publisher of Hopscotch.
Though prison officials say Mr.
Jarrett, who signed his letters Micky Jarrett, broke no laws, he did violate a prison rule against writing to children under 18 without their parents' consent.
The warden, Lawrence Tilghman, said today that officials had not yet determined if Mr.
Jarrett would be disciplined.
Several weeks ago, Mr.
Wheeler said, prison officials received a report "through the prison grapevine" about Mr.
Jarrett's letters and started reviewing his mail.
Russell Dionne, who has been the Somers postmaster since March, said Mr.
Jarrett had used nonexistent street names and numbers for "a number of years" and received a large amount of mail and "dozens and dozens of periodicals," including Good Housekeeping and Seventeen.
Childlike Handwriting
Last week, prison officials informed the mother of a 9-year-old girl in Fostoria, Ohio, that her pen pal was really Mr.
Jarrett.
Mr.
Edwards, the publisher of the magazine, based in Bluffton, Ohio, said he became aware of a problem a few months ago when he received two complaints from parents whose daughters had received pen-pal letters of a suspicious nature.
In one case a New York man sent along a copy of a letter his daughter had received.
Mr.
Edwards said the letter contained some sexual references, but he concluded that it was a fluke and "hoped it would go away." He said there was no way he could have known then that the letter, written in a childlike hand, had come from a prisoner.


Western Publishing Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Father's Thoughts Turn To Memory and Hope
Funny how at a time of severe stress a little thing can steal into a father's thoughts, at least for a while, to keep his mind off what no one really wanted to think about last night.
For Dan Byrd, an insurance man from Baton Rouge, La., who waited in an eighth-floor lounge at Lenox Hill Hospital on Park Avenue at 77th Street after a seven-hour operation to stabilize his son's shattered spine, the distracting thought was a piece of trivia.


Canada Plans Mild Stimulus
The Government, gearing up for an election next year, sought today to give the sluggish Canadian economy a gentle nudge without further increasing the budget deficit and further weakening the Canadian dollar.
Finance Minister Don Mazankowski announced a series of measures of modest stimulus, including new road building and a bridge to Prince Edward Island, while freezing civil servants' and politicans' salaries for two years as part of $8 billion of spending cutbacks.


Upturn Is Seen In Media Spending
A prediction for media spending in 1993 foresees noticeable upturns after two disappointing years.
Myers Reports in Parsippany, N.J., an advertising, marketing and media consulting company, made what it described as a bullish forecast in predicting that media spending next year will grow 2 to 3 percent after inflation, or 7 to 8 percent factoring in inflation.


Direct-Mail Schemes Aimed at Kin Of P.O.W.'s Condemned as Deceit
Senator John F. Kerry today condemned as "grotesque" and "fraudulent" some lucrative fund-raising strategies that exploited the hopes of families of Americans missing or imprisoned during the Vietnam War.
Those direct-mail and telemarketing campaigns raised millions of dollars, ostensibly to pay for efforts to free Americans held in southeast Asia.
But Joseph Salta, one direct-mail specialist who testified, said that of the $1.9 million he had raised, only $200,000 actually went to efforts to track down Americans.
The remainder was spent on his fees (17.65 percent of all expenditures) and production costs, he said.


Frank Stinchfield, Orthopedic Surgeon, Dies at 82
Frank E. Stinchfield, a leading orthopedic surgeon in hip replacement, died Tuesday at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 82 years old and lived in the Bronx.
He died of heart failure, his family said.


Home Video
Morality in all its interpretations is a volatile issue in video stores.
This week, for example, The New York Daily News quoted the business publication Inside Media as saying that Blockbuster, the nation's largest video chain, had refused to stock Woody Allen's film "Shadows and Fog" and that the store "was offended by the whole Allen-Mia Farrow mess."
Blockbuster, which has more than 2,500 outlets, does not stock NC-17 films and promotes itself as a family video center.
But the Inside Media article reported that Carol Feinberg, a senior vice president of the chain, denied that the absence of "Shadows and Fog" from its stores had anything to do with Mr.
Allen.
The article also said that Ms.
Feinberg declined to explain why Blockbuster stores didn't stock the film.


2 Military Contractors Plan A Joint Venture on Vehicles
In the latest sign of retrenchment among military contractors, the FMC Corporation and the Harsco Corporation, two leading manufacturers of military vehicles, said they had reached a preliminary agreement to combine those operations in a joint venture to be controlled by FMC.
The two companies estimated that the venture would have sales of $1.2 billion next year.
It would be 60 percent owned by FMC, a mining, machinery and chemicals conglomerate that has its corporate headquarters here.
FMC's military systems group, based in Santa Clara, Calif., is by far the larger of the two operations, but its orders have been dropping.
Makes Bradley Fighting Vehicle
"Neither one of us wanted to commit significant new investment to the industry," said Robert N. Burt, chairman, chief executive and president of FMC, when asked about the decision to pool interests instead of arranging for one company to sell its business to the other.
Mr.
Burt said FMC expected Army spending on tracked and armed vehicles, the company's most important market segment, to decline from $4 billion a year ago to about $1 billion by 1995.


Max Evans; Fashion Editor, 61
Max Evans, a former fashion editor of Esquire magazine and a producer of couture and retail industry trade shows, died yesterday at Cabrini Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 61 years old and lived in Manhattan.
Mr. Evans died of liver cancer, said his brother, Clyde H. Earl.


INSIDE
'An American Reunion'
Aides to the President-elect announced plans for what promises to be the most folksy inaugural festival in more than a century.
Page A20.
Sperm and Longevity
Challenging prevailing beliefs, a scientist working with worms found that the act of making sperm sharply reduced the male's lifespan.
Page A18.
Delaying a Day of Reckoning
Directors of Comptronix waited at least 10 days before disclosing that its profits were inflated.
Page D1.
Threat to Cambodia Peace
The peace in Cambodia was threatened when six United Nations peacekeeping troops were seized by Khmer Rouge guerrillas.
Page A11.
U.S.
Attorney Resigning
Making way for a Clinton appointee, the United States Attorney in Manhattan is resigning.
Page B1.
Queens Schools Takeover
Trustees seized control of a suspended Queens school board, as parents reacted with frustration.
Page B1.


Empty 'Black Box' From Yeltsin Embarrasses South Korean Chief
The South Korean Government, in the midst of a hard-fought presidential campaign, has suffered a major embarrassment with Russia's acknowledgement that it knew that the tapes had been removed from a "black box" of a downed Korean airliner when President Boris N. Yeltsin turned over the flight's recorders two weeks ago.
During a visit here, Mr.
Yeltsin made a dramatic gesture of giving President Roh Tae Woo the black boxes, which would presumably contain critical information from the final minutes of Korean Air Lines Flight 007.
The Boeing 747 was shot down by a Soviet fighter jet on Sept. 1, 1983, after it strayed over Soviet airspace.
All 269 aboard were killed.


Analog Devices reports earnings for Year to Oct 31


TWO SUED BY S.E.C. IN BIDDING SCANDAL AT SALOMON BROS.
After more than a year of investigation, the Government yesterday brought its first legal action against former Salomon Brothers executives involved in the firm's illegal bidding in Treasury auctions, charging a series of securities law violations that included insider trading.
The civil suit, brought by the Securities and Exchange Commission, accused two former managing directors, Paul W. Mozer and Thomas F. Murphy, of systematically submitting billions of dollars in phony bids in Treasury auctions held to finance the public debt.


Handley Comes Up With Some Big Shifts
For the first time in his almost two years as the Giants' head coach, Ray Handley made sweeping personnel changes today.
He benched center Bart Oates for Brian Williams, split end Stephen Baker for Chris Calloway and strong safety Lamar McGriggs for Myron Guyton.
In addition, offensive guard William Roberts will be benched part time, with Williams replacing him whenever Oates is used at center.


Key U.N. Members Agree to U.S. Force In Somalia Mission
Four of the five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council agreed tonight on a draft resolution authorizing the United States to lead an international military force to Somalia to protect the delivery of food and medicine to those at risk of death by starvation or disease.
The proposed resolution is expected to be approved by the full 15-member Council on Thursday, and the first American troops could arrive in the eastern African country within days.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
CERAMIC tiles are durable but they stain rather easily, and surfaces to which tiles are attached can be damaged by moisture if tiles are loose or broken, or if the grout between them deteriorates.
To keep tiles and grout clean, wash them often --at least every two weeks.
An effective and inexpensive solution for general cleaning can be made by mixing one to two cups of clear vinegar with a gallon of warm water.
Apply the solution with a cloth, sponge or a nonabrasive cleaning pad.
Use a small bristle brush, like a used toothbrush, to scrub stubborn areas.
Rinse with clear water.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Bagpipe Festival  Knitting Factory SoHo
Who would have thought that bagpipes could be such a blast?
But the tartanization of the Knitting Factory was intended to be winning and whimsical.
The Bagpipe Festival, sponsored by Dewar's, featured traditionalists and iconoclasts in a rollicking variety show.


Zapata Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CHRONICLE
HODA EL-SAYED, the wife of AHMED MAHER EL-SAYED, the Egyptian Ambassador to the United States, has been in Washington for little more than three months, but already she has become wise in the ways of the American charity circuit.
On Tuesday she announced the formation of Friends of Egypt, whose goal is to raise $3 million in the United States to help rebuild the more than 7,500 schools destroyed or damaged in the earthquake that struck her country on Oct. 12.


Jorge Donn, 45, Dies; Bejart Troupe Dancer
Jorge Donn, a longtime lead dancer for Maurice Bejart's Ballet of the 20th Century, died on Monday in Lausanne, Switzerland.
He was 45 years old.
He died after a long illness, a statement to the press from the Bejart company said.
It did not identify the cause of death.


GENENTECH TO SEEK CLEARANCE FOR CYSTIC-FIBROSIS DRUG
Genentech Inc. said yesterday that it had completed the final phase of human clinical trials of Pulmozyme, a new drug to treat cystic fibrosis.
The company said that by March it would ask the Food and Drug Administration for clearance to market the drug.
The results of the 968-patient study demonstrated that Pulmozyme, which is used in an aerosol form, improved lung function and reduced the rate of respiratory infection in patients with cystic fibrosis.
No major adverse side effects were noted.
The clinical data must still proceed through scientific and regulatory review.


Yields Up on Money Funds But Level of Assets Is Down
Yields offered by tax-exempt and taxable money market funds were up slightly in the latest week, according to IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report's most recent survey.
After declining for three consecutive weeks, tax-exempt yields moved up, as assets slipped by $159 million, to a total of $98 billion.
Analysts said a heavy supply of new short-term municipal paper that reached market in the last few days was more than likely to affect yields this week.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Toninho Horta  Guitarist Village Vanguard 88 Seventh Avenue South (at Perry Street) Greenwich Village Through Sunday
Toninho Horta's first set on Tuesday night worked at being lighter than air.
Mr.
Horta is steeped in the whispery dynamics of bossa nova; he is from Belo Horizonte in the Brazilian state of Minas Gerais, and has worked with Minas Gerais's best-known songwriter, Milton Nascimento.
Playing gleaming, transparent chords or weightless lines on a classical guitar or a hollow-bodied electric guitar, Mr.
Horta assumed, rightly, that subtle harmonic transformations and lightly curling melodies would delight listeners.


Dinkins Names a Manager For Agency for Homeless
Having chosen a management expert to handle New York City's problem of homelessness, Mayor David N. Dinkins has turned to someone whose strength is advising poorly run companies and solving governmental troubles.
The new official, Charles V. Raymond, whose name surfaced for the job last week and who was officially appointed yesterday, is a tall, graying man who managed ballet companies in the 1980's after working for the city in the 1970's.
Mr.
Raymond has been asked to carry out Mr.
Dinkins's ambitious effort to overhaul the unwieldy bureaucracy now running the homeless shelter system.


AT THE ALGONQUIN WITH: Andrea Marcovicci; Love Gone Wrong In Songs, Not Heart
IF Andrea Marcovicci is at all embarrassed about being "a hopeless romantic who has found a forever love," the only clue is her glowing face.
When she adds she is a "soon-to-be-blushing-bride" the give-away is a Pepsodent smile of delight.
Considering the fact that Ms.
Marcovicci can turn a love song inside out, discovering an unexpected sadness in a simple lyric like "Some Enchanted Evening" or startling an audience with a nostalgia-gone-awry interpretation of "These Foolish Things," a visitor finds it logical to inquire if true love has perhaps lightened the singer's outlook on torch songs.


Florida Rock Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


The Genetic Blending of Afro-Amerasians
To the Editor:
"For Afro-Amerasians, Tangled Emotions" (news article, Nov. 16) contains an important error when it describes these biracial people as "culturally Vietnamese, politically American and genetically black."
It is scientifically wrong to call these children of Asian mothers and black fathers "genetically black," thus totally discounting their mothers' contribution to their genetic makeup.
They are neither genetically black nor genetically Asian.
These people are biracial -- their genomes are blended -- and this fact must be appreciated for them to be respected and accepted for who they are.


Florio Nominee to Head Education Department Is Praised
Mary Lee Fitzgerald, an educator with a local and national reputation as an innovative administrator, was introduced to some of her own pupils today in a new role, as New Jersey's next Commissioner of Education.
Dr.
Fitzgerald, who has served as Superintendent of Schools in Montclair for 10 years, would become the first woman to head the state's system of nearly 600 public school districts and its 1.3 million students.
Gov.
Jim Florio sends her name to the State Senate on Thursday, and two senators who will play important roles in the confirmation process predicted quick action.


Essay; Visions in Collision
Looking down into the abyss of hyperinflation a condition that bred totalitarianism in Germany -- Russian leaders, old and new, are now deciding which economic model to follow.
One model is Western-style capitalism that couples political democracy with free markets.
The Poles and Czechs, having accepted the hardship of such "shock therapy," are making this dual freedom work.


Hockey; Undercard to Probert, Main Event to Rangers
There was a fight last night at Madison Square Garden and there was a hockey game.
The Detroit Red Wings won one of the battles.
The Rangers won the one that counts.
Bob Probert of the Wings may have outswung Tie Domi of the Rangers during their fisticuffs 37 seconds into the contest, but Sergei Nemchinov of New York outraced Niklas Lidstrom of Detroit to a loose puck midway through the third period and that made all the difference.
Nemchinov's sweet breakaway goal gave the Rangers a 4-3 lead they eventually turned into a 5-3 triumph over Detroit.


MIDWEEK REPORT
Week 14
San Francisco, one of two teams at 10-2, is the only team with a sure playoff berth, but the list should grow longer this weekend.
Only three teams, New England (2-10), Seattle (2-10) and Phoenix (3-9) have been eliminated from playoff contention, leaving 24 still in the hunt.
Dallas (10-2), New Orleans (9-3) and Minnesota (9-3) can all clinch berths with victories, and both Buffalo (9-3) and Pittsburgh (9-3) can make the grade with victories coupled with strategic losses by other teams.


Upstate County Fights Meningitis Outbreak


Nets Appear To Have Winning Knack
It is nights like tonight that you look at the Nets and begin to wonder: Is this team for real?
Six Nets players scored in double figures against the Atlanta Hawks and for a brief moment they didn't look like Team Turmoil.
They just looked good.
Now that the Nets have your attention after spanking Atlanta, 122-115, before 9,069 at the Byrne Meadowlands Arena, let's review a few facts.
The 8-7 Nets have won four straight games.
The last time they were above .500 at this point in the season was November 1986.
They are walking the walk, and after the game, they were talking togetherness, not trash.


Skiing; Making Certain Equipment Passes the Test
Choosing ski equipment by word of mouth and magazine has never been completely satisfying to those plunking down $200 to $500 for a quality pair of skis.
In a significant contrast to ski selection methods of past generations, more and more skiers have been taking the choice into their own hands by putting skis on their feet for prepurchase test runs.
Because of growing efforts by ski equipment companies to bring the manufacturer to the mountain, skiers have more of an opportunity than ever before to test and compare models and brands.
Manufacturers' representatives set up vans at ski areas, then tune, mount and provide skis and snowboards for free on-site trials.
Security Precautions


With Jobs Scarce, the Neediest Helps the Unemployed
Kathleen Nairne needs a job.
A conversation with her always returned to that point.
She recently separated from her husband and is trying to raise her two boys by herself after being laid off in June.
She just learned that she is pregnant.
The family's breakup has shaken her 13-year-old son, who is failing school.


German Parliament Ratifies European Union Pact
Members of the German Parliament, warning that increased racial violence here reflects the danger of resurgent nationalism, voted overwhelmingly today to approve a treaty of European union.
Germany became the ninth nation to ratify the treaty, which was signed in Maastricht, the Netherlands a year ago.
Portugal is expected to ratify it next week, leaving Britain and Denmark the only nations who have not approved the treaty.


In Worm, at Least, Making Sperm Is Found to Shorten a Male's Life
The simple act of making sperm substantially shortens a male worm's life span, a researcher has discovered in results that overturn accepted biological dogma about the relative cheapness of a male's ejaculation compared with the preciousness of a female's egg.
The scientist studying simple but revealing worms called nematodes found that males live much shorter lives than their mates, and he has traced that discrepancy to sperm production.


U.S. Attorney Leaving Post In Manhattan
Otto G. Obermaier, the United States Attorney for the Southern District of New York, announced yesterday that he would resign his post effective Feb. 1, permitting President-elect Bill Clinton to fill one of the most powerful and visible law-enforcement jobs in the country.
His departure, coupled with the resignation of Andrew J. Maloney, the United States Attorney for the Eastern District of New York, marks an important power shift in law enforcement in the region and one of the most immediate and dramatic consequences for New York State of the changing of the guard in Washington.


Sanderson Farms reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Old Animosity In Hong Kong; Britain and China Ask, Still, Who's in Charge
Wars in this part of the world have always been a bit odd, ever since the 19th century invasions by the British to force the Chinese to accept opium.
Today's worsening conflict over Hong Kong is no exception.
On the surface, the war of words between Britain and China over Hong Kong is about British efforts to make this territory a bit more democratic.
But more fundamentally, the conflict is about power, mistrust and pride, and over who will rule Hong Kong in the years before its return to China in 1997.


Calendar: Trains, Antiques And Tours
Garden Trains
New York Botanical Garden, 200th Street and Southern Boulevard, Bedford Park, the Bronx; (212) 220-8777.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Health insurers called for a Federal law requiring coverage for all Americans, asking the Government to define a basic set of benefits and limit tax breaks for the purchase of insurance.
The move was a signal that the industry would accept sweeping changes like those proposed by President-elect Clinton.  [ Page A1. ]
Standardized labels for all packaged food were announced by the Bush Administration, taking effect in 1994.  [ A1. ]


Gay Men's Chorus Concert
The soprano Roberta Peters is to join the New York City Gay Men's Chorus for two performances of its holiday concert, "Joyful and Triumphant," on Dec. 17 and 18 at Carnegie Hall.
On the program are Mozart's "Alleluia," Gounod's "Ave Maria," "Vilia" from Lehar's "Merry Widow," and other works arranged for soprano and men's chorus.
The chorus will also perform the New York premiere of Conrad Susa's "Winter Serenade" as well as traditional carols and spirituals.
Gary Miller, the group's director, will conduct.
Tickets are $10 to $50.
Information: (212) 247-7800.


Venezuela Still Edgy: Will There Be Coup No. 3?
During the 1970's oil boom, highways and high-rises sprouted across this city, creating what Venezuelans proudly called a "Miami with mountains." But the damage to this capital's spirit is captured in a new phrase, as residents debate the country's future after "the bombing of Caracas."
A coup attempt last Friday failed, as did one in February.
But the latest violence, in which 230 died and the presidential palace was strafed by rebellious air force pilots, has confirmed Venezuelans' fears that South America's wealthiest democracy has become dangerously unstable.


Fernandez Accuses Board Members of Meddling in Administration
In an unusually contentious encounter, Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez yesterday publicly accused his adversaries on the New York City Board of Education of meddling in hiring decisions, deluging his office with "nitpicking" requests for information and even intimidating his aides.
Michael J. Petrides, a board member from Staten Island and one of the four-member majority that has battled with Mr.
Fernandez on a variety of issues, set up the angry, finger-stabbing showdown at the board's bi-weekly meeting by placing on the agenda the item "Micro-Management: Reality or Perception?"


Albany Legislators Chastised by Cuomo Over Transit Issues
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo chastised state legislators today for appearing reluctant to return to Albany this month to address a host of transportation issues, saying that tough choices will only get harder if deferred until next year.
He said he had summoned Assembly Speaker Saul Weprin, a Democrat, and the Senate Republican majority leader, Ralph J. Marino, to a meeting on Monday.
He said they would discuss his proposals for financing a Metropolitan Transportation Authority capital spending plan and for dividing the proceeds of the state petroleum business tax, which are supposed to be used for transportation needs starting next year.


Perot Won't Heckle Clinton, Cuomo Says
After meeting with Ross Perot in Dallas for an hour on Tuesday, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo said he was convinced that the former Presidential candidate has no interest in heckling President-elect Bill Clinton from the political sidelines.
"I think he's sincere," Mr.
Cuomo said here after returning from Dallas, where he gave a speech Tuesday night.
"He is not a trouble maker. He is not a person who is a negativist. He is not looking to irritate, aggravate, be the loyal opposition. That's not his choice. His choice is to be helpful."


Value Merchants Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 7


From Memories, Form
CHERYL RILEY is like a sponge.
"I absorb everything so that I can use it in my work later," she said.
Her furniture designs are influenced by her readings of history, art and science-fiction books; childhood memories of her grandmother's Texas farm, and scenes of nature throughout Northern California.
She encrusted a pair of copper tables (one is shown at left) with coins from Nigeria.
A more elaborate version of the table will be added to the Cooper-Hewitt's permanent collection and featured in a one-woman show next spring at the museum.


Lincoln Center Programming: Rough Terrain
Before taking charge of programming at Lincoln Center last month, Jane S. Moss went hiking near Sante Fe, N.M..
"I was looking at the mountains and mesas," she explained.
"It was so beautiful. I was thinking of it as the flip side of art; my father, a geologist, would have looked at the landscape as if it were a score." The sight reminded her, she said, that art is, among other things, "spiritually nourishing."
Within a few days, Ms.
Moss was contemplating another sort of landscape: the peaks and valleys of this country's most important performing-arts institution.
In a series of interviews, she spoke of the issues facing Lincoln Center in the current unsettled climate, at a time when spiritual nourishment will be hard won.
The dimensions of the problems can seem imposing: decreased arts support, almost non-existent arts education, aging audiences and basically static repertory.


Lucchese Emissary Becomes Mob-War Casualty
A reputed Lucchese crime family member who officials say was used as an emissary to arrange secret meetings with a fugitive Mafia boss was gunned down yesterday in the garage of his Brooklyn used-car lot.
The victim, Patrick Testa, is believed to be the latest casualty in an internal war initiated by a fugitive Lucchese boss, Anthony Casso.
That war has claimed at least 11 other lives in the last four years.


Foreign Affairs; Get Cracking on Bosnia
The people of Bosnia and the tinderboxes nearby might meditate on two realities: First, President Bush will not order U.S. forces to the rescue.
Forget it.
Second, President-elect Clinton won't either -- at least not for months.
He shows little disposition to walk economics and chew foreign policy gum at the same time.
He has barely begun to select his national security team.
Mr.
Bush's decision to dispatch troops to Somalia has in no way altered his opposition to American intervention in Bosnia.
His senior aides are absolutely clear about that.
He just sees too many land mines in Bosnia and no way to get out.


Award to Zahringer
GEORGE ZAHRINGER 3d of the Stanwich Club in Greenwich, Conn., was honored last night for a record eighth time as the player of the year of the Metropolitan Golf Association.
IRA L. MENDELL, a former president of the M.G.A., was also honored with the Distinguished Service Award at the M.G.A.'s annual dinner, held at the Westchester Country Club in Harrison, N.Y.


A Mix of Earlier Skirmishes Converges in the Rainbow Curriculum Battle
The fight between Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez and a rebellious Queens school board concerns much more than what first graders should be taught about gay people.
The confrontation brings together several long-running battles over how the city schools should be run, who should run them and what they should teach, particularly about the sensitive issues of sexuality and tolerance.


It's Time to Rethink Deregulation
To the Editor:
The incoming Administration should make a high priority of re-evaluating Government policies that have brought financial ruin to major portions of the United States airline industry.
Deregulation policies adopted 14 years ago have led to dozens of bankruptcies and billions of dollars in losses.
Since the start of deregulation, such losses have just about wiped out all the profits earned over the many decades of pre-deregulation history.


S.E.C. Keeps Putting The Football in Play
Antonio Langham has it right.
As the University of Alabama began its preparations for the first Southeastern Conference championship game, the Crimson Tide defensive back was asked if it was fair for his team, with its perfect record, to have to play a Florida team with two conference losses.
Langham laughed.
"No," he said.
"My feeling is that they should have waited to next year before they came up with a S.E.C. championship game. But they came up with it, and we're going to play it, and we're going to play as hard as we can."


Don't Expect the Russians to Imitate Us
To the Editor:
Robert S. Strauss, retiring Ambassador to Russia, wisely advises that in the post-cold-war era "we will need more change in our thinking about ourselves, the Russians and the world" ("More U.S. Support for Russia," Op-Ed, Nov. 15).
However, Mr.
Strauss also rehearses one of America's oldest and fondest notions when he suggests that "we matter to the Russians as the prosperous democratic society Boris Yeltsin and the vast majority of Russians would like to more closely resemble."


El Salvador Guerrillas Begin Destroying Weapons
On a dusty mountaintop, a onetime rebel wearing protective goggles took a blowtorch to an American-made M-60 machine gun today and cut it in half, formally beginning the former insurgents' destruction of the arms they used in El Salvador's 12-year civil war.
A comrade held up the two pieces to a crowd made up of fellow members of the Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front, United Nations peacekeepers, journalists and villagers, many of them children jammed into the trees overhead.


A. Gardner Fox, 80, Expert in Microwaves, Dies
A.
Gardner Fox, a retired physicist and inventor who made discoveries in radar, microwave communications and lasers, died Nov. 24 at the Evergreen nursing in Harmony, Pa.
He was 80 years old.
His family reported his death yesterday and said the cause was Alzheimer's disease.


Byrd's Spine Is Stabilized in 7 Hours of Surgery
A team of six surgeons worked for seven hours at Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan today to successfully stabilize the fractured fifth cervical vertebra in the neck of Jets defensive end Dennis Byrd.
But it could be as long as two years before Byrd will know if he will regain the use of his paralyzed legs, according to Dr.
Elliott Hershman, the team's orthopedist.
"The goal of the surgery -- to stabilize the spine -- was achieved," said Hershman, who was not part of the team that operated on Byrd.
"The long-term prognosis has not changed. The overall amount of improvement that may occur will take some time to determine." Can't Flex Fingers
Byrd, who fractured the vertebra in a collison with teammate Scott Mersereau in the Kansas City game last Sunday, still has no use of his legs, although he can sense when he is touched.
He has partial use of his arms, but can't flex his fingers.


Mexican Doctor Goes on Trial in Agent's Slaying
More than two years after he was kidnapped and flown to the United States, a Mexican doctor went on trial here today accused of participating in the torture and killing of a Federal narcotics agent in 1985.
In his opening remarks to the Federal jury of nine men and three women, the lawyer for Dr.
Humberto Alvarez Machain accused the Government of paying millions of dollars to drug dealers and murderers to concoct evidence against his client.


G.M. Is Set to Announce New Wave of Plant Closings
Officials of the General Motors Corporation acknowledged today that the auto maker would announce the closing of several North American factories on Thursday.
The officials, who spoke on condition of anonymity, would not identify which of G.M.'s 100 or so plants would be closed.


Three-in-One Fitness Machine
IF you could draw up a exercise wish list for your home, you might dream about a magic room where you could walk in flabby and march out fit, but you would probably choose a treadmill, a cross-country ski machine or a stair-climber.
These three pieces of equipment ranked among the top four in 1991 sales figures recorded by the Sporting Goods Manufacturers Association, and all three had increases in sales from 1990.
Sales of the other top machine, the exercise cycle, declined.


Neutrogena Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Gotham's Tree Topped Appropriately


TAX REFUND CASE BEFORE HIGH COURT
The Supreme Court heard arguments today on whether states that once imposed unlawful taxes on the pension income of retired Federal workers now have a constitutional obligation to refund the money.
While the 16 affected states estimate their potential liability at nearly $2 billion, the significance of the case goes beyond that sizable figure.
The underlying question is how the Court should decide which rulings are retroactive.


Events: Gift-Shopping To Help Some Causes
Radio Station Benefit
Ferris Booth Hall, Columbia University, Broadway at 115th Street; (212) 695-4465.
The WBAI Crafts Fair, featuring more than 350 artists, will be held on three weekends starting tomorrow through Sunday; also, Dec. 11 to 13 and Dec. 18 to 20.
Open Fridays, 5 to 9 P.M.; Saturdays and Sundays, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Admission is $6; ticket good for all nine days, $15.
Cultural Sales
Urban Center Galleries of the Municipal Art Society, 457 Madison Avenue, at 51st Street; (212) 935-3960.
Items from New York cultural organizations, including the Brooklyn Botanic Garden, Cooper-Hewitt Museum, Harlem Textile Museum, Small Press Center and the Newark Museum, will be on sale at a holiday bazaar.
Open Tuesday through Thursday, 11 A.M. to 7 P.M.
Admission is $3.
Six Days of Crafts
Martin Luther King Jr.
High School, 122 Amsterdam Avenue, at 65th Street; (212) 866-2239.
The American Arts and Crafts Alliance is sponsoring a crafts fair featuring ceramics, clothing, jewelry, toys and furniture, on Saturday and Sunday; also, Dec. 12, 13, 19 and 20.
Open 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Admission, good for all six days, is $5; people 60 years old and older, $4; children 15 and younger, no charge.
Benefit for Children
Madison Avenue, 62d to 72d Streets; (212) 988-4001.
On Sunday, from noon to 5 P.M., 112 stores on the avenue will donate 20 percent of their profits to five New York City charities in an event sponsored by the Madison Avenue Christmas for Children Fund.
Asian Crafts
Eastside International Community Center, 330 East 45th Street; (212) 989-1829.
Tibetan, Indian, Indonesian and Thai items are among those crafts for sale on Saturday and Sunday, from 10:30 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Admission is $2; children 13 and younger, $1.


John Caban, 43, Ally Of Treatment Groups
John Caban, executive vice president of Odyssey House, the drug and alcohol treatment organization in New York, died on Tuesday at St.
Vincent's Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 43 years old.
He died of lung cancer and pneumonia, said his brother, Stanley Drop.


Review/Music; Pomerium Musices Sings Early Renaissance Works
Five hundred years of exploration stand between 20th-century ears and Antoine Busnoys.
What we have learned ought to expedite our path to the past but often seems to block it.
Indeed, listening to Pomerium Musices sing works by Busnoys and Johannes Ockeghem at Corpus Christi Church in Morningside Heights on Sunday afternoon was as disorienting as it was pleasing.
Both 15th-century music and our own make use of the tonal center -- the home from which sounds go out in search of adventure and to which they return to rest -- but the dynamics of this operation have changed.
The older music floats in an orbit all its own.
For no matter how often we encounter the early Renaissance today, it behaves strangely to ears enriched (or perhaps infected) by the abrupt homeward pull of the dominant seventh chord.
The harmonic resolutions of Busnoys and Ockeghem are rounder; they touch ground more lightly.
Listening to them is, for a contemporary earthling, like negotiating the gravity of the moon.


New Questions on Comptronix
The directors of the Comptronix Corporation, whose stock collapsed last week after its top officers confessed to routinely inflating its profits, learned of the wrongdoing at least 10 days before they disclosed that news to public investors, the company's interim chairman said today.
E.
Townes Duncan, an outside director who took the reins at the electronics manufacturing company last week after its three senior executives were suspended, said the Comptronix board held its first special meeting to deal with the accounting crisis on Nov. 15.
At the unusual Sunday meeting, the company hired a team of independent auditors and sharply curtailed the powers of its top executives.
But it did not inform investors of that meeting.
Another Special Meeting
A week later, at another special meeting of the board on Sunday, Nov. 22, the three executives -- William J. Hebding, the founder and chief executive; Allen L. Shifflett, president, and J. Paul Medlin, treasurer -- were suspended.
But the first official announcement from the company was not forthcoming until early Wednesday, Nov. 25.


The Fancier to Spy With
ROSLYN BEILLY and David Schlansky find new lives for frail antique parasols and canes and dull letter openers.
They discard the worn parts and turn interesting handles and cane heads into stems for magnifying glasses.
The couple's collection includes lenses with bone, bamboo, ivory, silver, walnut, cherry-wood, Bakelite or jewel-encrusted handles.
One glass has a blue Limoges ball handle; another has a telescoping handle borrowed from an antique lorgnette.
A vulture and a fox stand guard on two others.


A Look Back at the Selling Of Automobiles in America
WHEN the song of the open road is a jingle; when Packards, Studebakers and Hudsons roam the highways again; when Ed Sullivan returns to sell Mercurys, it can only mean one thing: an automotive advertising retrospective.
One of the more ambitious efforts to peer into the rear-view mirror begins tomorrow at the Museum of Television and Radio in New York.
The exhibition, "Madison Avenue Meets Gasoline Alley," which is scheduled to run through May 30, hopes to trace how the automotive and the advertising industries developed in tandem and explore their sometimes tempestuous, sometimes incestuous, always absorbing, relationship.


Katrina Haslip Dies; AIDS Worker Was 33
Katrina Haslip, a former New York State prison inmate who became an advocate for increased governmental and private support for women with AIDS, died yesterday at Roosevelt Hospital in Manhattan.
She was 33 years old and lived in Manhattan.
Ms.
Haslip died of complications from AIDS, said Theresa McGovern, director of the H.I.V.
Law Project of the AIDS Service Center of Lower Manhattan.


Off the Shoulder
SHAWL weaving was at its height in Kashmir from the 17th to 19th centuries.
More than 100 examples from this period, as well as shawls woven in Europe during the Napoleonic era, are on view at the Mark Shilen Gallery in SoHo through Jan. 3.
Collectors are buying them for the shoulders, the sofa or a special spot on the wall.
"They were always woven to be worn," Mr.
Shilen said.
"The decorative aspect came quite a bit later." Prices of the Kashmir and European shawls range from $400 to more than $10,000.
The exhibit includes a six-foot-square Kashmir shawl, circa 1860, in kaleidoscopic hues against a cranberry background ($6,000).


Economic Scene; A Clinton Option: Sit Out the Fever
IN "Catch-22," Joseph Heller's surrealist novel about World War II, G.I.'s who went to the infirmary with fevers above 102 degrees were hospitalized.
Those with temperatures below 100 were sent back to the barracks.
And those in between were parked on a bench until their fevers went up or down.
Waiting to see which way the economy's temperature turns is no laughing matter for millions wondering whether they will have jobs next year.
But one can still glimpse irony in Bill Clinton's fiscal choices.
The candidate swept into office by voters demanding that something -- anything -- be done to cure the recession is discovering that a lot of economists think it would be prudent to sit on the bench.
Indeed, the President-elect may end up with the task of deflecting enthusiasm for an instant fix into budget reforms with an enduring but very slow payoff.


Educators Seeking Common Ground Under Clinton
Usually fractious education groups here have found education principles they can all support, hoping to capitalize on President-elect Bill Clinton's longtime interest in education.
Representatives of 21 major national education organizations have been working together since September to devise a list of education goals they could support.
Today, 18 of the groups sent the document to Congress.


Corrections
An article yesterday about sightings of a mysterious creature in a lake in British Columbia misidentified the river that drains the lake.
It is the Okanagan, not the Columbia.


INSURERS, IN SHIFT, ASK U.S. TO REQUIRE COVERAGE FOR ALL
In a sharp break from past practice, the health insurance industry called today for a new Federal law that would require coverage for all Americans, define a basic set of benefits and try to contain health-care costs by limiting tax breaks for the purchase of insurance.
The board of directors of the Health Insurance Association of America, representing 270 commercial insurers, adopted a policy statement today declaring that "the insurance industry itself needs reform."


New Twists on Traditional Arts
SOME of John McQueen's baskets seem to have arms and legs.
Others are so thin and airy they resemble membranes.
Nancy Crow's quilts are optical illusions made of brilliantly colored geometric shapes.
The patterns seem to recede and then re-emerge.
What the two artists have in common is a need to redefine their crafts.
Their works are on exhibit through March 28 at the American Craft Museum in Manhattan.


Torretta Is Honored
Miami quarterback GINO TORRETTA yesterday was named winner of the Johnny Unitas Golden Arm Award, presented each year to the nation's top college senior quarterback.
Torretta has completed 228 of 402 passes for 3,060 yards and 19 touchdowns this season, while throwing 7 interceptions.
He has led the Hurricanes to an 11-0 mark this year.
Torretta was also named yesterday to the College Football Association Scholar Athlete Team.
Torretta, a graduate student in business management, has a 3.4 grade point average out of a possible 4.0. (AP)


15 Are Arrested In Carjacking Ring
Fifteen men have been arrested in connection with a carjacking ring and accused of stealing more than 50 luxury vehicles since mid-1991, officials said yesterday.
A complaint filed against the men by the United States Attorney, Otto G. Obermaier, details 14 armed carjackings, or robberies of vehicles from their drivers.
But prosecutors said that as the case progresses, they would show that several other car thefts committed by the group were also carjackings.


Europe's Doldrums; Disputes Are Stalling the Search for Union -- Will Talks Next Week Get It Restarted?
A year after optimistically setting course for monetary union later in the decade, the 12-nation European Community is riven by economic, monetary and political divisions, raising doubts whether it will ever become anything more than the single trading market due to take effect Jan. 1.
Instead of crowning that achievement by starting to carry out the ambitious treaty on currency union and closer foreign policy cooperation they agreed to a year ago in the Dutch city of Maastricht, the Europeans find themselves being driven apart.


City May Lose Another Meet
Indoor track and field meets have been disappearing from the local scene for decades and now it appears another is in jeopardy.
At a meeting of The Athletics Congress Board of Directors in Louisville, Ky., officials agreed to form a subcommittee to look into the possibility of pulling the USA/Mobil Track and Field Championships from Madison Square Garden by 1998, and awarding the meet to other sites on a rotating basis.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
7.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
4.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.12
3.17
4.60
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.30
3.33
4.36
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.44
3.49
4.35
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.56
6.59
6.81
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.56
7.56
7.89
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.54
8.54
8.90
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.41
6.42
6.87
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Senator Says Schott Will Be Discussed
Sen.
HOWARD METZENBAUM, Democrat of Ohio, said yesterday that he would bring up the alleged racial remarks by the Cincinnati Reds' owner, MARGE SCHOTT, at a Senate hearing next Thursday in Washington.
Metzenbaum will be the chairman of a Senate Judiciary antitrust subcommittee meeting on baseball and said he would discuss Schott.
The executive council chairman, BUD SELIG, and a former commissioner, FAY VINCENT, are among the scheduled witnesses.
Metzenbaum, who once owned part of the Cleveland Indians, said he was appalled at Schott's comment that Hitler was good in the beginning but went too far later.
"Statements of this kind, whether from the owner of a baseball team or any other owner person, are totally inappropriate," said Metzenbaum.


Giuliani Fund-Raiser Aiding Rematch For a Mayoral Bid,
Keeping financial pace with the man he wants to replace, Rudolph W. Giuliani raised almost $1 million last night for his mayoral rematch against David N. Dinkins next year -- no small achievement for a Republican in New York City, where Democrats hold a 5 to 1 advantage in registered voters.
Altogether this year, Mr.
Giuliani has raised nearly $2.5 million, roughly equal to Mr.
Dinkins's total.
At the same time, he has been busy soothing the rank-and-file party leaders who were irked by his standoffish approach in 1989.
That means that he will almost certainly avoid the kind of costly primary challenge that set him back then, and that Mr.
Dinkins faces from his fellow Democrat, City Council President Andrew J. Stein.


Soccer; Give Reyna the Ball. There Goes Maradona.
There are 22 players on the field during a soccer game, but Claudio Reyna stands out above the others the moment he makes contact with the ball.
Reyna's feet gently caress the ball at high speed before he distributes it 40 yards away to a teammate on the run.
All it takes is one touch with the ball to know you are watching a player blessed with the game's most generous gifts.


Chiropractors Deserve Insurance Equality
To the Editor:
Once again you attack the chiropractic profession (editorial, Nov. 21) by urging New York's Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo to veto the insurance equality bill.
While admitting to a limited value of chiropractic, you contend its mandatory inclusion would increase already high insurance costs.


COMPANY NEWS
LITTON INDUSTRIES, Beverly Hills, Calif., said a unit had received a $34.5 million contract to continue engineering and support services for the Navy's Spruance and Kidd class destroyers.
MORRISON KNUDSEN CORP., and five joint-venture partners received a $1.2 billion contract from the Provisional Airport Authority of Hong Kong to prepare an offshore site for a new airport in Hong Kong.


Resort (Not Too African) for Rich Tourists
You are in Africa, but in no particular place.
The drizzling rain forest says the latitude is tropical.
But that grove of pendulous baobab trees, still adjusting to their new home just across the lagoon-sized swimming pool, implies savannah.
The architecture is neither Luxor nor Marrakesh nor Kalahari game lodge, but something of each, only more so.
You are a bit lost.


CHRONICLE
Suddenly ARTHUR ASHE seems to be everywhere at once.
There he is on "Good Morning America." There he is addressing the United Nations.
There he is at one benefit after another.
On Monday, he was at Harvard University.
On Saturday, he will be in Phoenix.
This evening, he is being honored in New York by Athletes for the Benefit of Children and by the American Association of Sportscasters.


Petrolite Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


KHMER ROUGE HOLD U.N. PEACEKEEPERS
The Cambodian peace settlement was threatened again today as the United Nations announced that six of its peacekeepers had been seized by Khmer Rouge guerrillas on spying charges and that several others had been wounded in three attacks.
The captive soldiers -- three from Britain, two from the Philippines and one from New Zealand -- were detained by the Khmer Rouge on Tuesday, only hours after the United Nations Security Council voted to impose trade sanctions against the Maoist-inspired rebels.
The Khmer Rouge have refused to disarm under the peace accord reached last year to end Cambodia's 13-year civil war.


Books of The Times; Witches, War and Other Delights for the Young
Children "still believe in God, the family, angels, devils, witches, goblins, logic, clarity, punctuation and other such obsolete stuff," said Isaac Bashevis Singer in 1978 on receiving the Nobel Prize in Literature.
"When a book is boring, they yawn openly. They don't expect their writer to redeem humanity, but leave to adults such childish illusions." Here are 11 books on witches, talking crows and other obsolete stuff that seemed the best of the children's picture books this year.
SHORTCUT,
by Donald Crews
(Greenwillow Books/William Morrow &amp; Company,
$14).
It's late, so seven children decide to take the shortcut home along the railroad tracks, which run along a mound with ditches on either side, "surely full of snakes." They know when the passenger trains pass, but the freight trains don't run on schedule.
"Whoo. . . . Klakety-klak-klakety-klak." In muted watercolor and gouache, Mr.
Crews captures the intense excitement of a long freight train going thunderingly past you.


Kennebunkport Journal; Bushes' Retreat Is in Transition, Too
The election returns had barely been tabulated before some shopkeepers on Dock Square began marking down the George Bush coffee mugs and T-shirts.
Raymond Crepeau, a local car dealer, has been doing a brisk trade in used Secret Service minivans -- low mileage, discounted, and a story to pass on to the grandchildren.
After 12 years in the national spotlight, residents of this coastal community in southern Maine are preparing for life after Jan. 20, when its most famous summer resident becomes plain Citizen Bush.
Some of the changes were already evident when Mr.
Bush returned to Maine to spend the Thanksgiving holiday at his vacation home on Walker's Point.


RESULTS PLUS
BOXING McKinney Wins Title Kennedy McKinney, an Olympic gold medalist in 1988, captured the International Boxing Federation superbantamweight title by knocking out the defending champion, Welcome Ncita of South Africa, in the 11th round last night at Tortoli, Sardinia.
It was Ncita's first loss in 32 professional fights.
McKinney, 26 years old, from Las Vegas, Nev., hit Ncita with a right hook to the jaw, sending the South African boxer to the canvas for the count of 10.
The American boxer appeared on the brink of defeat earlier in the 11th when he was knocked down by Ncita. (AP)


Magna International reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Helene Toolan, 80, Cancer Researcher And Institute Head
Dr.
Helene Wallace Toolan, a cancer researcher, died on Sunday at Southwestern Vermont Hospital Center in Bennington.
She was 80 years old and lived in Old Bennington, Vt.
She died of congestive heart failure after a long illness, her family said.


WHERE TO FIND IT
UNLIKE most shopkeepers, Joanna Doniger
expects
her customers to return their purchases.
And during the holidays, her busiest season, they bring back beaded bustiers, taffeta skirts and sequined evening gowns after wearing them just once.
One Night Stand, Ms.
Doniger's five-year-old Manhattan dress shop, specializes in women's evening wear to rent, everything from billowy ball gowns to slinky cocktail dresses.
And though she refuses to stock evening trousers ("too hard to fit," she said) and white debutante-style gowns ("too hard to keep snappy"), she has almost 800 dresses, sizes 2 to 14.


Colorado Faces Boycott Over Its Gay-Bias Vote
Furious that Colorado voters appeared to sanction bigotry against homosexuals, some tourists are canceling plans to come to the Rockies and a television production company picked another state to shoot a movie.
"This is too blatant an act to ignore," said Joyce Miller, president of the Coalition of Labor Union Women, referring to voters' approval of a binding referendum that repealed ordinances in Denver, Boulder and Aspen that barred discrimination against homosexuals and forbade any city in the state to pass similar ordinances.
"This is a basic violation of civil rights."


Shuttle Is Lofted In a Final Flight For the Military
The space shuttle Discovery, packing a big spy satellite and an all-military crew of five, roared into orbit today on the last secret shuttle mission planned for the Defense Department.
Shortly after the launching, the astronauts completed their main task, deploying the satellite.
Military officials released little information on it other than to say that the payload and its support equipment weighed 23,215 pounds.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
DETROIT TIGERS -- Agreed to terms with Alan Trammell, shortstop, on a one-year contract.
National League  CHICAGO CUBS -- Agreed to terms with Steve Lake, catcher, on a one-year contract.


Nassau Moves for Extension On Plans for Sludge Disposal
In an effort to avoid building two sludge-processing plants at a cost of $200 million, Nassau County today asked a Federal judge for more time to consider ways to dispose of its sludge elsewhere.
But Federal officials called the extension an unnecessary delay and argued that the county should proceed with its original plan: the construction of two plants that would convert sludge into fertilizer pellets that could then be sold.


U.C.L.A. Coach Retires
GLENN BASSETT, the college tennis coach with the most victories, announced yesterday that he would retire immediately to take advantage of a one-time U.C.L.A. early retirement program that earns the retiree additional service credit.
Bassett will serve as head coach during the 1993 season under a special coaching agreement.
He is in his 27th year as U.C.L.A.'s head coach, and his overall dual-match record is 568-89-2. (AP)


Trustees Seize Queens District That Rejected Gay Lessons
Three trustees seized control yesterday of the day-to-day responsibilities of a school board in Queens that New York City's Schools Chancellor, Joseph A. Fernandez, suspended for its defiant refusal to adopt a curriculum that includes lessons about gay people.
And yet even as they met with leaders of parents' associations, pledging to involve them in the adoption of a multicultural curriculum, many parents in the district reacted with resignation, anger and disillusionment, saying they felt powerless, caught between the Chancellor and the board they elected and to some extent betrayed by both.


Wiley (John) &amp; Sons reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Review/Dance; Ballet Hispanico Presents Columbus With a Twist
Ballet Hispanico, ever vibrant, returned to the Joyce Theater on Tuesday night, with a premiere by Graciela Daniele that is certainly one of the kinkiest references to the Columbus Quincentenary.
In "El Nuevo Mundo," the Nina, the Pinta and the Santa Maria are represented by three showgirls in feline costumes, and a surrogate for Queen Isabella wears a camisole.
The controversial hero is in jeans and a leather jacket, and Miss Daniele's overall idiom here is strictly Las Vegas flamenco.


Jersey City Schools Improving, But Too Slowly, Overseer Says
Jersey City schools, taken over by the state three years ago because of a pattern of inefficiency and corruption, have made steady progress but are not likely to free themselves from state control in the prescribed five-year minimum term.
That message was delivered to the State Board of Education today by Dr.
Elena J. Scambio, who was appointed by the state in October 1989 and given broad powers to revitalize Jersey City's system.


A Grotesque Portrait of Our Parents
As children of Joseph P. Kennedy and Rose Fitzgerald Kennedy, we categorically reject the misjudgments, mischaracterizations, insinuations and outright falsehoods about our family relationships portrayed in the book "J.F.K., Reckless Youth" and repeated by many reviewers.
We recognize that honest historians, biographers and journalists have differed and will continue to differ about the achievements and activities of members of our family.
Since the days when our grandparents Patrick J. Kennedy and John F. Fitzgerald first became involved in public life a century ago, our family has received extended scrutiny, much of it favorable, some of it harsh, most of it fair, but some of it keyed to sensationalism and exploitation for profit, regardless of truth.


Honoring Firefighters
To the Editor:
New York should honor its firefighters by ordering the "bunker" pants they are asking for (news article, Nov. 26).
These will protect them better than current uniforms do, especially from the waist down.
Their demand is not for mere protection, however; it is for foresight.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  DINKINS TARGET OF HASIDIC ANGER
One day after a Hasidic Jew was arrested in a gang beating of a homeless black man in Crown Heights, Mayor Dinkins traveled to the racially divided Brooklyn neighborhood and was greeted with anger.
A1.
GIULIANI WAR CHEST FILLING FOR REMATCH


Chancellor Fernandez Stands Tall
By suspending an entire community school board, New York City Schools Chancellor Joseph Fernandez has stood up, admirably, to a direct challenge to his authority.
He was right to act decisively; the confrontation with District 24 in Queens threatened to undermine not only Mr.
Fernandez but the principle of decentralization that has guided the schools since 1969.
The controversy stems from policies adopted by the central Board of Education to promote multicultural education and better intergroup relations.
To carry out that mandate, Mr.
Fernandez's staff helped devise a 443-page curriculum guide called "Children of the Rainbow," that could be used by the 32 community districts.


College Basketball; Fla. State Is Pushed To Limit
Florida State 67, Massachusetts 64
TALLAHASSEE, Fla., Dec. 2 (AP) -- Doug Edwards scored 19 points, including two foul shots with eight seconds left, and No. 11-ranked Florida State beat No. 19 Massachusetts, 67-64, tonight.
The Seminoles (3-2) took the lead for good with 2 minutes 11 seconds left when Edwards's tip-in gave Florida State a 64-62 lead.
Edwards had 12 points in the second half.
Louis Roe had 19 points and 14 rebounds to lead UMass. Arkansas 81, Memphis St. 76
FAYETTEVILLE, Ark. (AP) -- Robert Shepherd, the smallest player on the court, went inside for some big rebound baskets as Arkansas rallied from a 20-point deficit to defeat No. 8 Memphis State.
The 6-foot-1-inch Shepherd contributed all over the court, popping outside for a couple of important jumpers and coming up with five steals.
He finished with 14 points in the season opener for both teams.
Kentucky 81, Wright State 65
LEXINGTON, Ky. (AP) -- Jamal Mashburn, Jeff Brassow and Travis Ford hit consecutive 3-pointers in a 13-1 run late in the game to lead No. 5-ranked Kentucky.
Pittsburgh 89, St.
Francis (Pa.) 75
PITTSBURGH (AP) -- Pittsburgh finally got its running game going in the second half, riding Jerry McCullough's 17 points and a succession of easy fast-break baskets to victory in the opener for both teams.
Pitt held St.
Francis scoreless for more than seven minutes of the first half during a 13-0 run and took an 18-7 lead.
Georgetown 88, St.
Leo 49
LANDOVER, Md. (AP) -- Othella Harrington, projected as Georgetown's next great center, scored 20 points in his first college game as the No. 14-ranked Hoyas routed St.
Leo in their season opener.
Duane Spencer, another 6-10 freshman, grabbed 10 rebounds to lead the Hoyas.
Georgetown is 14-0 against Division II St.
Leo.
The Hoyas have won the last 12 meetings by an average of 39 points.


Nixon Won't Be 'Enriched' by Victory in Compensation Case
To the Editor:
Your Nov. 19 editorial and the news article concerning the unanimous opinion of the United States Court of Appeals in Richard M. Nixon's compensation suit presents a slanted, distorted version of the Court decision that Mr.
Nixon has a right to compensation for the Government's seizure of his Presidential materials.
When you conclude that a judicial decision is so offensive that it deserves to be pilloried with pejoratives such as "unjust," "insult" and "ludicrous," one would think that professional responsibility would also lead you to publish the opinion itself.


Corrections
The Patents column in Business Day on Nov. 23 omitted the name of an inventor who patented a method for liquid ceramic compounds that can be applied on bridges and other structures as protective coatings.
He is Terrance Fay of Vernon, N.J., who invented the process with Paul N. Bosco, president of Ceram Tech International Ltd., in Pomona, N.Y.


A Cable Vision (Or Nightmare): 500 Channels
Bruce Springsteen, who lamented in song about having "57 Channels (and Nothin' On)," didn't know the half of it.
The nation's biggest cable television company said yesterday that as early as 1994 it would install technology that would ultimately let its customers receive as many as 500 channels.
In the long run, this new digital technology is likely to greatly accelerate the marriage between computers and television, allowing customers to roam through video libraries hundreds of miles away.


A Tree Grows In Architecture: 'Green' Design
IMAGINE photovoltaic panels sprouting on the roof of every house, a fish farm in every kitchen and krypton gas "superwindows" instead of storm windows.
Innovations like these, intended to minimize damage to the environment, may sound unlikely, but then, 20 years ago, so did recycling.
There are signs that the architecture movement -- variously called "environmentally responsible," "environmentally sensitive," "sustainable" or "green" and meant to save energy, improve air quality, avoid chemicals, reduce waste and recycle materials -- is gaining momentum.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Nov. 27
Nov. 20
Nov. 29
1992
1992
1991
Gasoline production, daily
7.4
7.4
7.0
Distillate production, daily
3.4
3.3
3.2
Gasoline stocks
212.3
210.2
206.5
Distillate stocks
138.4
136.5
140.0
Crude imports, daily
6.3
6.7
4.4
Product imports, daily
2.1
1.9
2.5
Crude stocks
325.2
324.1
341.4
Crude production, daily
7.0
7.0
7.3
Refinery utilization (%)
89.2
88.8
83.9
Source: American Petroleum Institute


SPORTS PEOPLE: Baseball; Barfield to Play in Japan
JESSE BARFIELD, who was with the Yankees from 1989 through last season, agreed yesterday to a one-year contract with the Yomiuri Giants worth about $1.7 million, the Kyodo News Service reported.
Barfield led the American League in homers in 1986 when he hit 40 with Toronto.
He hasn't hit more than 28 since.
Barfield, who is 33, was traded to the New York Yankees in 1989.
He was limited to 30 games last season because of an injury.


Driver-Harris Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


For Jets, Drills Amid Anguish
Since the injury to Dennis Byrd, paralyzed below the waist when he suffered a broken neck in last Sunday's game against the Chiefs, there had not been a lot of thought or talk about football by the Jets.
As Byrd underwent surgery to stabilize a fractured vertebra in his neck at Lenox Hill Hospital today, Jets players and coaches studied their game plans and took to the practice field after two days off to prepare for a road game against the Buffalo Bills on Sunday.


Kasparaitis Warned
DARIUS KASPARAITIS, the Islanders' rookie defenseman, was fined $500 and issued a warning yesterday by the National Hockey League after a kicking incident Saturday night.
Kasparaitis won't be suspended for the kick, which came after a fight with KEVIN DINEEN of Philadelphia in the first period of a 9-3 Islanders victory at Nassau Coliseum.


Abrams Aide Resigns Post After Inquiry
A senior aide to the New York State Attorney General, Robert Abrams, resigned yesterday after a five-month investigation found the aide undervalued a house he sold in 1989 by $23,000, thus lowering his tax bill.
The action by James McSparron, first assistant deputy attorney general, came after Roderick C. Lankler, a lawyer who was a state special prosecutor for the New York City criminal justice system from 1979 to 1981, reviewed the allegations and found that Mr.
McSparron and his former wife, Hedy L. McSparron, had apparently violated state tax laws.


Study Lists Political Action Groups' Spending
Political-action committees contribute almost half of all money raised by legislative candidates in New York State, a figure that reinforces the notion that there is a "stranglehold of special interests" on state government, according to a study on campaign financing.
The study of contributions in the 1990 elections to the Legislature found that nine political-action committees contributed more than $100,000 apiece and that at least 50 contributed $20,000 or more.
It was conducted by Citizen Action of New York, a public-interest group affiliated with the national organization Citizen Action.


Smith Shapes Up For Role As Starter
Asked if he thought Pat Riley had finally settled on a starting lineup, Knicks guard Rolando Blackman smiled.
"I'm not going to touch that question," Blackman said after Charles Smith had replaced Tony Campbell as the Knicks' starting small forward Tuesday night.
"Whoever it's going to take to get it done, that's who he's going to use -- period."


U.S., Ending Dispute, Decides What Food Labels Must Tell
Ending a long-running dispute between two Cabinet officers, the Bush Administration today announced new food-labeling rules intended to tell consumers the nutritional content of virtually every packaged food.
For the first time, all labels on these foods, including descriptive phrases like "low-fat" and "light," will be standardized.
The new labels will provide people with an opportunity to compare the nutritional value of a food with their daily dietary needs.
The Administration said the labels would end consumer confusion.


Garden Q.&amp; A.
Windowsill Amaryllis
Q.
I love amaryllis flowers.
What's the best way to get them to bloom on my windowsill? -- Dale R. Collins, Hartford
A.
The common name amaryllis applies to two related plants.
The one whose genus name is Amaryllis is from South Africa and has a solid flower stem.
The one commonly called amaryllis is of the genus Hippeastrum.
It originated in the tropics and has hollow flower stems.
Hippeastrum is probably your favorite.


No Headline
The Tower of Babel in food labels has come down, and American consumers are the winners. -- DR.
LOUIS W. SULLIVAN, the Secretary of Health and Human Services.  [ A1:2. ]


Critic's Notebook; The Real Malcolm X? The Search Widens, But Riddles Remain
Near the end of Spike Lee's "Malcolm X," the audience receives the movie's greatest jolt: news film of the real Malcolm X. After more than three hours of seeing Denzel Washington portray him, the genuine Malcolm suddenly seems odd, unfamiliar, almost fake.
With Malcolm's image everywhere today, most viewers carry a mental picture into the theater.
But Mr.
Washington so thoroughly embodies every well-known rebirth of the man -- from street hustler to spokesman for the Nation of Islam to martyr -- that shortly into the movie any memory of the actual Malcolm vanishes.
Who have we been watching if not Malcolm X?


Many Reuters Operations To Move From New York
The North American division of Reuters, the international news and financial information company, is decentralizing many United States operations away from New York.
The reorganization plan will mean that about 300 reporters, editors and marketing and other business professionals will be given the option of moving to new sites, said Robert A. Crooke, director of media relations for Reuters America Inc.


Judge Rejects Partial Verdict in Ex-C.I.A. Spy Chief's Trial
After six days of deliberation, jurors in the Iran-contra retrial of Clair E. George, former chief of covert operations for the Central Intelligence Agency, reported today that they had reached a verdict on some of the seven charges.
But Judge Royce C. Lamberth of Federal District Court told the jury to work to reach a decision on all counts.


Yankees Withdraw Rich Offer To Bonds
Barry Bonds did not think $36 million was enough for him to play baseball in the Bronx for the next five years.
The superstar free agent wanted $43 million over six years.
The Yankees refused to budge on the extra year and the extra millions, so last night they withdrew their offer and said their interest in this year's top free-agent prospect had vanished.
After making a contract offer on Monday that would have made Bonds the highest-paid player in baseball, General Manager Gene Michael gave Bonds and his agent, Dennis Gilbert, two days to accept it.
But Gilbert told Michael last night that his client wanted a guaranteed sixth year.
Michael ended negotations.


A Director Is President At Calgene
Calgene Inc., a leading agricultural biotechnology company, today named Roderick N. Stacey president and chief operating officer.
Mr.
Stacey, who has been a director of Calgene since 1990, will be responsible for the company's newly formed oils and cotton divisions, as well as for corporate finance and administration.
Mr.
Stacey's appointment is the second time that Roger Salquist, Calgene's chairman and chief executive, has named a director to a management position.
Last year, Thomas Churchwell was named chief executive of Calgene Fresh, a subsidiary formed to produce and market Calgene's genetically engineered tomatoes.


Seagram Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Dr. Ira Goldstein, 50, Mt. Sinai Professor And Rheumatologist
Dr.
Ira M. Goldstein, one of the country's foremost rheumatologists, died yesterday at Mount Sinai Medical Center.
He was 50 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of metastatic lung cancer, the center said.


Head of Endowment For the Humanities Plans to Step Down
Lynne V. Cheney, the chairwoman of the National Endowment for the Humanities, plans to resign on Jan. 20, when the Clinton Administration takes office.
Ms.
Cheney announced her departure in a letter to her staff on Tuesday, in which she said that "this period of transition is a fitting time for me to move on to other things." She has served as the chairwoman for six and a half years, and will be leaving 16 months before the end of her second four-year term.


Intel Rival Is Set Back By Ruling
A Federal judge today handed Advanced Micro Devices Inc. a significant setback, ruling that the Silicon Valley chip maker does not have the right to copy software embedded in the Intel Corporation's 486 microprocessor.
Advanced Micro was scheduled to begin shipping this month its own version of the 486 chip -- now the processor of choice in most desktop machines.
The company has recently been demonstrating computers based on its chip.
Gaining Market Share
The decision by Federal District Judge William A. Ingram also strengthens Intel's position in attempting to stop Advanced Micro from selling a compatible version of its 386 chip.
Advanced Micro has been the most successful of a number of chip makers who have designed clones of the Intel microprocessors, taking market share away from Intel in the 386 business.
In 1991 Advanced Micro shipped about 2 million 386 chips compared with 15.4 million for Intel, but Advanced Micro's sales are expected to triple this year, said Dan Hutcheson, president of VLSI Research Inc., a San Jose, Calif. market research firm.


A Wall Street Ban


Police Detail Investigation Into Beating of Man Near Hasidic School
At Mayor David N. Dinkins's news conference yesterday, Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly gave a detailed account of the events surrounding the beating of a black man in Crown Heights early Tuesday morning.
At 12:28 A.M.
Tuesday, a sergeant from the 71st Precinct, responding to a report of a fight, went to 1449 Union Street in Crown Heights, where he found Ralph Nimmons, 25 years old, lying on the ground bleeding from the head.
There had been two calls to 911, one requesting an ambulance; the other call, from someone who offered no identification and whose request was not clear, did not mention a burglary or someone being held for the police.
The sergeant also found two coats, a yarmulke and a black hat, as well as a bloody 2-by-4 wedge-shaped stick and a bloody battery pack from a two-way radio.


Money Fund Assets Decline
The total assets of the nation's 615 retail money market mutual funds decreased $1.10 billion, to $387.65 billion, for the week that ended on Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
The assets of the 384 taxable retail money market funds were down $1.76 billion, to $308.12 billion, while the assets of the 231 retail tax-exempt funds increased $664.1 million, to $79.53 billion.


Fed Action On Rates Is Unlikely
Sounding more upbeat about the economy than they have all year, Federal Reserve officials said in interviews this week that they were not likely to change interest rates in the near future.
Speaking with unusual candor, the officials said that they were so pleased about the robust economic growth of the third quarter that they had no plans to cut interest rates soon and that they were so happy with the low inflation rate that they saw no need to raise rates either.


Sports of The Times; The Public Is Invading The Players
PICTURE this: The Giants are practicing on their private grass field in New Jersey when 20 punks suddenly slip through a hole in the fence and commence wielding bats, chains, umbrellas, shovels and steel bars against the players.
The attack is over in 30 seconds.
The thugs disappear through the opening and the players are glad to discover nobody was seriously injured.
Sound impossible?
This exact thing happened last month in Naples, in the most expensive soccer league in the world.


Scuffle Cuts Short a Meeting of the Russian Congress
An attempt by foes of President Boris N. Yeltsin's Government to hold a secret ballot on one of the most disputed issues before the Russian Congress fueled a scuffle at the podium today, forcing the Speaker to cut short the third day of the session.
The clash disrupted a day that was relatively quiet in the Congress of Peoples' Deputies, at a session only about two-thirds of the legislators attended.
Much of the day was spent debating the Government's economic program, and though speeches were often savage in tone, the deputies seemed to be moving toward a resolution that would criticize the economic program without undermining the Cabinet.


Diocese Reaches Settlement With 68 Who Accuse Priest of Sexual Abuse
In the largest case of its kind, 68 men and women who say they were sexually abused by a Roman Catholic priest as school children in the 1960's announced today that they had reached an out-of-court settlement with the diocese of Fall River.
A lawyer for the group said the agreement included a financial settlement for each of the 68 people and an understanding that the diocese would soon issue tough new guidelines for handling cases of sexual abuse by priests.
The amount of the settlement was not disclosed.


List for Secretary of Interior Is Narrowed to 3
President-elect Bill Clinton has narrowed his list of choices for Interior Secretary to three Westerners, officials close to the transition said today.
They are former Gov.
Bruce Babbitt of Arizona, Senator Tim Wirth of Colorado and Representative Bill Richardson of New Mexico.


Rate-Cut Hopes Lift European Bonds
European bonds got a lift yesterday when hopes that Germany would cut interest rates were revived.
The Bonn Government reported that the economy had declined sharply in the third quarter, and the country's largest trade union agreed to a wage settlement that is below the rate of inflation.
In Germany, the price of the 10-year bond rose about 1/2 point on the day.
In France, bond futures grew about 1/3 point.


Dinkins Aide Seeks to Loosen Rules on Homeless
The Deputy Mayor in charge of New York City's homeless policies asked state officials yesterday to loosen state rules -- which he himself helped write -- that for nearly a decade have required the city to provide shelter immediately to all who say they are homeless.
Cesar A. Perales, the Deputy Mayor for Health and Human Services, said in an interview that the city's continuing inability to find temporary shelter quickly for all the families who come to municipal offices and say they are homeless had forced him to reconsider many of the fundamental premises that have guided the city's homeless policies for years.


CHRONICLE
All it took to get the conference "Raising Women's Voices: Perspectives on Women in the Media" off the ground at Princeton University this week was an agreement with CINDY CRAWFORD, the fashion and cosmetics model who is also the host of MTV's "House of Style."
There are lots of other well-known participants, as well as numerous academics, at the conference: CHARLES GIBSON, the host of "Good Morning America" on ABC; CAMILLE PAGLIA, author of "Sexual Personae"; LINDA WELLS, editor of Allure magazine, and LANDON JONES JR., managing editor of People magazine.
But JENSA BELL, a Princeton junior, who organized the conference, said she would not proceed with planning until an agreement was made with the model.
"The negotiations with Cindy Crawford took four months, and once she was confirmed, everything else took off," she said.


RESULTS PLUS
HOCKEY  Devils and Senators Play to Tie  Claude Lemieux scored a pair of power-play goals, helping the New Jersey Devils tie the Ottawa Senators, 3-3, last night.
Lemieux got the tying goal on a rebound at 11 minutes 41 seconds of the third period.
The Devils avoided their second loss in eight days to the league's worst team.
Ottawa goalie Peter Sidorkiewicz, playing his 13th consecutive game, stopped 40 shots.
The Maple Leafs seemed to score the tying goal when the puck went into the net during a scramble, but the referee, Kerry Fraser, ruled that it had been illegally kicked in. (AP) COLLEGE BASKETBALL  Narrow Victory for Oklahoma  Bryatt Vann made four free throws in the final 42 seconds and No. 15 Oklahoma made seven of eight from the line in that span to hold off Oregon State, 78-75, last night in Norman, Okla. (AP)
Fordham 85, Adelphi 69: Dave Buckner scored 20 points and host Fordham took a 25-point lead in the first half in beating Adelphi. (AP)
Yale 53, Lafayette 42: Damon Franklin scored 14 points and Yale held Lafayette to 19 in the second half in New Haven, Conn. (AP) HIGH SCHOOL FOOTBALL  Lynbrook Wins 21st in a Row  Lynbrook, representing Nassau County, earned the first Long Island Class III championship yesterday, rallying from a 7-0 deficit to defeat Islip of Suffolk County, 19-7, before 2,023 fans at Hofstra Stadium.
Lynbrook (11-0), which won its 21st consecutive game, got touchdowns from Anthony Picone, Chris Agnew and Damien Taylor, whose 12-yard scoring reception on a pass from Sean Goodwin in the third quarter broke a 7-7 tie.
Islip (9-2) opened the game with a 9-play 65-yard drive capped by a 5-yard run by Brian Barlitz.
GOLF  Faldo Takes First-Round Lead  Nick Faldo overcame windy conditions with three straight birdies and shot three-under-par 69 yesterday for the first-round lead in the Million Dollar Challenge in Sun City, South Africa.
Faldo was one shot ahead of two South Africans, Ernie Els and David Frost, in the quest for golf's richest top prize, $1 million. (AP) BOXING  Australian Wins Decision  Jeff Harding of Australia rallied in the final rounds yesterday to win a unanimous 12-round decision over David Vedder of San Jose, Calif., in a World Boxing Council fight for Harding's light-heavyweight title.
The fight took place in St.
Jean de Luz, France. (AP)


U.N. BACKS A SOMALIA FORCE AS BUSH VOWS A SWIFT EXIT; PENTAGON SEES LONGER STAY
The United Nations Security Council approved tonight a United States-led military intervention to protect the delivery of aid to Somalia, and the Bush Administration assured Americans that the international force would complete its mission quickly and return home.
But the assurances were undercut by disagreements between the White House and Pentagon officials over how long it would take the force, which is to include at least 28,000 United States troops, to complete its mission.


TVWeekend; Recording A Hit Musical
When it comes to program-length commercials, tolerance depends on the product being pushed.
Toys being foisted on children rate high on the revulsion meter.
On the other hand, spiels for Broadway musicals can be fun, even as they diligently drum up business for the sale of tickets and orginal-cast albums.
Public television's "Great Performances" seems to have a stranglehold on this particular market.
A month ago, "Jammin': Jelly Roll Morton on Broadway" combined recording-studio sessions and interviews with the writer and director George C. Wolfe to bring valuable insights to the current hit "Jelly's Last Jam." Tomorrow at 9 P.M. on Channel 13, "Guys and Dolls Off the Record" just stays in the recording studio and lets the performers do the selling.
They succeed splendidly.


New Law Doesn't Address Problem of Juvenile Carjackers; No Second Chance
To the Editor:
The recent carjacking that led to the murder of Gail F. Shollar in Piscataway, N.J., has left me with feelings of total despair.
Another family is destroyed unnecessarily.
This tragedy could have been avoided.


Sales Surge for Vehicles Built in the U.S.
A surge of demand in late November pushed auto sales to the healthiest level in recent months, as sales of domestically built cars rose 14.5 percent and domestically built light trucks rose 37.4 percent.
The seasonally adjusted annual rate of car sales was 7.3 million from Nov. 21 to Nov. 30, up sharply from 5.8 million in mid-November and 5.6 million in the first third of the month.


Messier's Back Commands Attention
Once again, Mark Messier's skates sat in his locker throughout practice, his aching back getting a workout in the trainer's room instead of on the ice.
He did not practice Tuesday or today, and very nearly did not play in Wednesday night's game against Detroit.
He will play Friday night against Washington at the Capital Centre despite the slow ice and Capitals' physical style, both of which seem to promise punishment for a man who would like to avoid the corners and the crunches as much as possible.
But it is uncertain how much longer he can continue to play in this kind of pain.


Democrats Must Lead On Line-Item Veto
To the Editor:
"Line-Item Veto: No Hope, or Help," your Nov. 18 editorial opposing the line-item veto, misses the point: Congress will not reform its own spending ways, since too many voters judge their legislators' success by whether they "bring home the pork" for the district or state.


Tanker Spills Millions of Gallons of Oil Along Spanish Coast


Giants May Activate Guyton and Ingram for the Redskins
Twelve weeks ago, Myron Guyton, the Giants' strong safety, underwent surgery on a herniated disk.
Four weeks ago, Mark Ingram, the Giants' flanker, underwent arthroscopic surgery on his right knee.
Both are likely to be activated for Sunday's game here against the Washington Redskins.
Both say the wait has been difficult because injured players think they are spare wheels and not really part of the team.
Although neither volunteered it, they said the fragility of a pro football player's health is emphasized by the injury that has left Dennis Byrd of the Jets partly paralyzed.


Intervention in Somalia; Congress Can't Just Let George Do It
It's not enough for the United Nations to authorize peace enforcement in Somalia, as it did yesterday, or for President Bush to provide U.S. troops for that worthy purpose.
The Constitution, the law and prudent politics require that Congress also take responsibility for dispatching American troops abroad.
That means reconvening to debate and authorize the troop commitment at the earliest possible date.
Even after the troops have landed, there are important issues for Congress to address.


Violence on the Job Is a Growing Threat; Societal Barometer
To the Editor:
"Social Workers: Targets in a Violent Society" (front page, Nov. 18), while extremely disturbing, is long overdue.


A Delicate Issue: Was Byrd Aiming With Head?
While the Jets' Dennis Byrd remained partly paralyzed yesterday, the result of a headfirst collision with a teammate, an unsettling debate was under way.
Was the injury truly unavoidable, or did Byrd use his helmet improperly and endanger himself in the process?
Was Byrd on a fateful course with Scott Mersereau as the pair came at Chiefs quarterback Dave Krieg from opposite sides?
Had Byrd simply missed tackling Krieg?
Or had Byrd, in fact, disregarded National Football League rules, as well as coaching advice, by barreling in headfirst?


Khmer Rouge Rebel Group Frees 6 U.N. Peacekeepers in Cambodia
A band of Khmer Rouge guerrillas today released six United Nations military observers who were taken hostage Tuesday and accused of spying for the Cambodian Government, the United Nations said.
The peacekeepers -- three from Britain, two from the Philippines and one from New Zealand -- were freed after a group of Indonesian negotiators provided the captors with a letter from a local Khmer Rouge commander demanding the release.


Reconsider Ban on Plea Bargains, Bronx Lawyers Ask
The Bronx County Bar Association yesterday urged the Bronx District Attorney, Robert T. Johnson, to reconsider his recent ban on plea bargains, arguing that the policy will clog an already overburdened criminal justice system.
In a one-hour meeting with two officials of the bar association, Mr.
Johnson said he would not back down.
A spokesman for Mr.
Johnson said, however, that prosecutors were reviewing all cases and might allow some defendants to plead guilty only to the most serious charge in an indictment, dropping lesser charges.


Price of a Prostitute: The Client's Car
The police in Hartford have begun seizing the cars of men cruising the city's neighborhoods for prostitutes, under a state law that allows authorities to take property used in committing a crime.
Three cars were seized Wednesday in the first sweep by vice detectives under the new policy, which was announced today.
The policy had been requested by residents of Frog Hollow, a neighborhood that is bordered by the State Capitol, Hartford Hospital and Trinity College but plagued by gangs, drug dealers and prostitution.


Co-Captain Suspended
TORAINO WALKER, a co-captain of the Connecticut basketball team, was suspended indefinitely yesterday because he missed four consecutive practices without an excuse.
Coach JIM CALHOUN made the announcement but did not comment further except to say that Walker would not be with the team for its game at North Carolina State on Saturday.


Extra Care on Nets' Williams
Chuck Daly, the Nets' coach, said today that the injured left ankle of Jayson Williams would take longer than expected to heal, and that the backup forward would miss four to eight weeks.
The 6-foot-10-inch Williams sprained the ankle last Saturday in a game against the Sacramento Kings and was put on the injured list this week, meaning he would miss at least five games.


TVWeekend; A Talk With John Lennon's Killer
20/20  ABC, tonight at 10 (Channel 7 in New York).
Produced by Rob Wallace for ABC News; Victor Neufeld, executive producer; Barbara Walters, correspondent.


Torretta Wins Camp Award
Miami Hurricanes quarterback GINO TORRETTA was voted the Walter Camp Player of the Year trophy yesterday.
The recipient of the annual award to the nation's best college player is chosen by Division I-A coaches and sports information directors. (AP)


A Monetary Ruling in Reynolds's Favor
He has spent two years trying to prove his innocence, and Butch Reynolds now has a $27.3 million court judgment for all the races he was not allowed to run.
Joseph Kinneary, a United States District judge in Columbus, Ohio, yesterday awarded Reynolds $6.8 million in compensatory damages and $20.5 million in punitive damages from the International Amateur Athletic Federation, track and field's world governing body.


Times Raises Price For Home Delivery
The price of The New York Times delivered to homes in the Northeast directly by The Times will increase to $5.50 a week on Jan. 1, Charles E. Shelton, the vice president for circulation, announced yesterday.
Most customers now pay $5 for seven-day delivery in the New York metropolitan region and in other parts of the Northeast, including Boston, Philadelphia and Washington.
The suggested newsstand prices in those areas will not change.


Seattle Threatened From Land and Sea
Researchers have concluded that, in a long-term sense, the 2.5 million people who live in Washington's Seattle-Tacoma area face a geological triple threat: earthquakes, tsunamis and volcanic eruption.
The research confirms earlier findings that the area is prone to powerful earthquakes and other phenomena related to the motion of the plates that form the earth's surface.
They occur as a section of Pacific floor, the Juan de Fuca Plate, descends under the northwest part of North America.


Western Grip for Davis Cup Final
This being the old-fashioned face of Texas, where being hokey is a hallowed tradition and longhorned steers commingle with commuters, the Davis Cup draw ceremony unfolded this afternoon with all the panache of a spaghetti western.
Fort Worth even threw a brief but hearty parade for the teams from the United States and Switzerland that are set to tangle in this weekend's Davis Cup finale.
An Apache, using smoke signals and other magic, sanctified the grounds of the Tarrant County Convention Center, a sprawling 24-year-old site that plays host to everything from rodeos to rock stars to religious revivals.
This week, it contains two rock-hard Plexi-courts.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
G.M. identified seven parts plants and two others it will close in the next three and a half years -- a sign that its strategy for becoming leaner involves relying heavily on parts from outside suppliers.
The nine plants are in Flint, Kalamazoo and Livonia, Mich.; Syracuse; Ewing, N.J.; Wilmington, Del.; Euclid, Ohio; Sioux City, Iowa, and St.
Catharines, Ontario.  [ Page A1. ]  At the Inland Fisher Guide plant in Ewing, N.J., 2,200 employees were told they would lose their jobs.
"G.M. says Merry Christmas," one worker yelled.  [ D4. ]
Sales of domestically built cars and trucks rose to the healthiest level in months.
Car sales were up 14.5 percent in mid-November, light trucks 37.4 percent.  [ D4. ]


Market Place; Steady Business In Temporary Jobs
THE temporary-help industry stands at the front line of an economic recovery, and the news from the front is encouraging these days.
When business begins to pick up, companies tend to be cautious at first, renting temporary workers instead of rehiring permanent ones -- a labor-market phenomenon that seems well under way.
The number of workers employed by temporary-help companies has been running about 14 percent ahead of last year since May, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics.


Panel Permits Use of Genes In Treating Cystic Fibrosis
Two teams won approval from a Federal panel yesterday to treat cystic fibrosis by inserting sturdy new genes into the patients' frail and beleagured airway tissue, a scheme that if successful could amount to a cure for cystic fibrosis, the most common lethal hereditary disease.
The two teams take a very similar approach to rallying the power of human gene therapy against the illness, and human trials could begin by early next year.


Chrysler Names Chairman and Beefs Up President's Post
Shortly after the Chrysler Corporation said today that Robert J. Eaton would become chairman and chief executive on Jan. 1, which had been expected, Mr.
Eaton offered a strong vote of confidence in Chrysler's president, Robert A. Lutz, giving him the additional post of chief operating officer and including him in a restructured four-member office of the chairman.
Mr.
Lutz's promotion is noteworthy for several reasons.
Before the arrival of Mr.
Eaton, who is 52, Mr.
Lutz was considered a top contender for the Chrysler chairmanship, a post he made clear that he wanted.


Art in Review
William Blake
Salander-O'Reilly Gallery  20 East 79th Street  Manhattan  Through Dec. 31
Made up almost entirely of loans, among them nine top-of-the-line watercolors from the Tate Gallery in London, this remarkable exhibition is intended, its catalogue says, to examine the paintings and drawings of William Blake (1757-1827) "outside of the context of his literary genius." But since that's the way Blake's art is usually presented, one seeks another pretext for the show.


Art in Review
Matthew Weinstein
Sonnabend Gallery  420 West Broadway (near Spring Street)  SoHo  Through Dec. 19
Almost overnight, it seems, Matthew Weinstein's paintings have gone from not trying hard enough to overdoing it.
His new show is full of crisp, blaringly bright abstractions that harbor silhouettes of male bodies, rib cages and spinal columns within their bulbous intertwining forms and are dotted with small decal-like images of skeletons, skulls, human organs and much else.


At the Bar
Maryanne Trump Barry likes to joke that in New York she may be seen merely as Donald Trump's sister but that in New Jersey, where she has been a Federal judge since 1983, Donald Trump is seen primarily as her brother.
That was arguably true last month, when her heterodox views on sexual harassment made page 1 of many of the state's newspapers.
Since President Ronald Reagan named her to the Federal District Court in Newark, Judge Barry, Mr.
Trump's older sister, has won praise for her industry, intelligence and outspokenness.
It was her outspokenness that was most evident on Nov. 20 when she told 900 Federal law-enforcement agents and officials in Washington, most of them female, that women should lighten up a bit on the subject of sexual harassment.


Baltimore School Clinics to Offer Birth Control by Surgical Implant
Frustrated by their apparent inability to put a dent in the city's high teen-age pregnancy rate, Baltimore public health officials are planning to offer Norplant, the surgically implanted contraceptive, at clinics in city schools.
The program is apparently the first in the nation that would provide students with the implant, which lasts five years.
Baltimore has one of the highest teen-age pregnancy rates in the nation.
One in 10 Baltimore girls from 15 to 17 years of age gave birth in 1990, the last year for which statistics are available.


Review/Art; Founding Inspiration Of Latin Modernism
Joaquin Torres-Garcia may not have been a great artist, but he was an extremely interesting participant in a great moment in art history.
Born in Uruguay in 1874, he moved to Spain when he was 17 years old and studied painting.
His career coincided with the advent of European modernism, and for the next 40 years, in Madrid, Paris and New York, he was a member of a brilliant international group of artists.
As a painter he was like a sponge, soaking up the influences of Cubism, Constructivism and finally Neo-Plasticism, whose austere geometries he rendered as tight grids filled with forms that resemble pictographs or children's drawings.
His real gifts, though, lay in his role as theoretician and teacher.
Erudite, passionate, enthralled with the art of all cultures, especially those of the pre-Columbian Americas, he was dedicated to the concept of an avant-garde in which social, spiritual and formalist ideals meshed.


At Last, Honest Food Labels
The long and bitter dispute within the Bush Administration over honest food labeling has finally ended.
Dr.
Louis Sullivan, the Secretary of Health and Human Services, won the bureaucratic war.
But the real winners, he points out, are American consumers.
The dispute pitted Dr.
Sullivan and the Food and Drug administrator, David Kessler, against Agriculture Secretary Edward Madigan.
Last month, in an unseemly bureaucratic maneuver, Mr.
Madigan blocked the major overhaul of food labeling rules that had been mandated by Congress and crafted by the F.D.A. to provide consumers with more honest nutritional information.


Critic's Choice/Film;   A Thriller That Runs Deep
No one who's seen "The Crying Game" would dispute that it is, quite literally, amazing.
Neil Jordan's romantic thriller is a brilliant original, one that expands an initially simple suspense story into a dizzying exploration of sex, loyalty, betrayal and unexpected love.
Beautifully acted by an unusual cast, it features Stephen Rea as an uncommonly gentle I.R.A. operative, Miranda Richardson as his partner, Forest Whitaker as a fearful hostage and Jaye Davidson as the hostage's coolly alluring girlfriend.
Whatever else you may say about "The Crying Game" -- and it's a dazzling conversation piece -- this much is guaranteed: you will be talking about Jaye Davidson's extraordinary performance on the way home.


Look to the Grassroots in Aiding Russia
To the Editor:
I have just returned from a year in Moscow as consultant for a banking start up, and read with great interest the views of former Ambassador Robert S. Strauss ("More U.S. Support for Russia," Op-Ed, Nov. 15).


Bucks Run Into Reality
Bullets 113, Bucks 95
LANDOVER, Md., Dec. 3 (AP) -- The Washington Bullets handed Milwaukee its first lopsided loss of the season last night, getting 24 points from Harvey Grant in a 113-95 victory that snapped the Bucks' four-game winning streak.
The Bucks, whose 10-3 record going into the game matched Portland's as the best in the National Basketball Association, had lost three games by a total of 15 points.
But they surpassed that in their fourth defeat by committing 28 turnovers, shooting 40 percent and scoring only 37 points in the second half.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-20  U.N.
BACKS U.S.
MISSION  The U.N. approved a U.S.-led military effort to deliver relief supplies to Somalia.
The White House said the force of 28,000 U.S. troops would return home quickly, but Pentagon officials were skeptical.
A1  SOMALIS OFFER THEIR VIEWS  News analysis: Many Somalis say the U.S. intervention in their country fails to address clan violence, economic reconstruction and political reconciliation.
A1


Sounds Around Town
The Meters
The Meters, Tramps, 51 West 21st Street, Chelsea, (212) 727-7788.
Alleviate the winter nip with some New Orleans spice, simmered into a fine sauce by these founding fathers.
As the top rhythm section of New Orleans, this group, which includes Art Neville, George Porter Jr., Leo Nocentelli and Russell Batiste, mixed the street beats of funeral marches with funk and soul, concocting the basic flavor of New Orleans rhythm-and-blues.
The Meters were also the foundation for the Neville Brothers, who incorporated the group's syncopated groove into an eclectic fusion of soul, pop and world music.
Discover the mainline of New Orleans music at the Meters' only New York City appearances this time around.
Sets are to be at 8:30 and 11:30 tonight and tomorrow night.
Tickets are $25.
John Cale's Innovations
John Cale, Loeb Student Center, Eisner and Lubin Auditorium, New York University, 566 La Guardia Place at Washington Square, Greenwich Village, (212) 998-4999.
John Cale's musical innovations as a co-founder of the Velvet Underground, and during his subsequent solo career, have made a deep mark in rock's development.
Restlessly moving between lyrical pop, pathos-heavy punk and classical experimentation, Mr.
Cale has produced an extremely varied body of work, from chamber music to sound poetry to achingly sweet ballads.
His new recording, "Fragments of a Rainy Season" (Hannibal), collects 20 of his melancholy songs in a solo vocal and piano performance.
Mr.
Cale's show this weekend should be similar to that album, as he draws on his mellowed wisdom to inspire the devoted and, one hopes, a few newcomers to the fold.
The composer Michael Brook opens the show.
The doors will open at 7 P.M. on Saturday, and the music begins at 8.
Tickets: $15; $5 for students.
No one under 18 admitted.


Topics of The Times; Sensitivity Training in Albany
As allegations of sexual harassment swirl about two senior U.S.
Senators, Bob Packwood of Oregon and Daniel Inouye of Hawaii, the New York State Assembly offers a timely experiment aimed at minimizing sexual harassment.
A former Assembly staff aide, Charmian Neary, told a special state task force last fall that she had been subjected to repeated sexual comments by an Assembly member.
That sort of demeaning experience is hardly unique, as she and other Albany veterans can attest.


Population Growth Outstrips Earlier U.S. Census Estimates
With a surge of new immigrants and new babies, the population of the United States is growing much faster than projected just four years ago, the Census Bureau said today.
In 1988, the Government projected a population of 268 million for the year 2000 and 300 million for 2050.
The bureau now estimates that the population, now 255 million, will reach 275 million in the year 2000 and 383 million in 2050.
That amounts to an increase of 50 percent in six decades.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
7.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
4.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.00
2.99
4.62
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.28
3.30
4.34
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.43
3.44
4.35
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.56
6.56
6.77
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.55
7.56
7.89
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.54
8.54
8.90
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.41
6.40
6.87
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Operation Losing Proposition: 2 Years and 90 Cars Later
For nearly two years, the New York City police have seized cars of men arrested for soliciting prostitutes in an effort to clean up neighborhoods where local precinct commanders worry that prostitution is growing out of control.
The seizures began in January 1991, said a police spokesman, Sgt.
Edward Burns.
Since then 90 cars have been confiscated and 200 arrests made through what the department calls Operation Losing Proposition, which uses male and female officers posing as prostitutes.


Bush, Salinas and Mulroney To Sign Trade Pact Dec. 17
President Bush will sign the North American Free Trade Agreement on Dec. 17, while President Carlos Salinas de Gortari of Mexico and Prime Minister Brian Mulroney of Canada will sign the pact the same day in their countries, the White House announced today.
The agreement, which would eliminate trade barriers among Canada, Mexico and the United States, will not take effect until legislatures in all three countries have approved it or legislation putting its provisions into law.


In a Shootout, Three Officers Fire 48 Shots At a Suspect
Two New York City transit officers and a city police officer fired 48 times at a fleeing robbery suspect who fired nine shots at them in a wild shootout early yesterday morning in Washington Heights, the police said yesterday.
The suspect, Darrell Spearman, 23 years old, was hit in the barrage.
He was wounded in the hand and leg and was listed yesterday in stable condition at Presbyterian Hospital.
A taxi driver was also wounded by shots from the suspect, the police said, when he commandeered his cab.


U.S. Company Wins Stake in Argentine Pipeline
The Enron Corporation, the largest United States natural gas pipeline company, today became the first American industrial concern to win a big stake in the privatization of Argentina's state-owned industries.
The Government announced that a consortium including Enron, Citicorp and Perez Companc of Argentina had won the bidding for country's 3,800-mile southern natural gas pipeline network.
The value of the deal to the Government is $561 million.


New Delhi Journal; India Looses Law on Beggars, Proposing Jail Term
Only a worn and frayed splatch of burlap cushioned Gularia Devi's thin, aged body from the concrete sidewalk on which she sat.
She stretched out her right arm, palm up, her eyes silently imploring strollers who moved toward her, her eyes pursuing those who ignored her.
For more than an hour, her hand would rise from her lap, and for more than an hour, it sank back, empty.
"I have been here for 11 years," guessed Mrs.
Devi, who said she thought she was about 80 years old.
She delicately rearranged her soiled gray sari so that it draped modestly over her head, glancing at worshipers emerging from the archway of the Hanuman Temple, a temple to the Hindu monkey god.
"I sell some photographs of the gods," she said.
"But I beg for money as well."


For Children
'First Stop, Opera!'
Clark Studio Theater  Lincoln Center  (212) 769-7008  Recommended ages: 5 and up  Through Dec. 13
What's opera music without foibles like jealousy, flirting and seduction?
The start of the Growing Up With Opera series, sponsored by the Metropolitan Opera Guild, begins tomorrow with these themes and others.
The program consists of arias, sung by professional opera performers, from "The Marriage of Figaro," "Rigoletto," "The Magic Flute," "Hansel and Gretel," "Amahl and the Night Visitors" and "Gianni Schicchi."


Corrections
A music review yesterday about Toninho Horta, a guitarist at the Village Vanguard on Tuesday night, misstated the address of the club.
It is 178 Seventh Avenue South, at Perry Street.


Insurers' Turnaround on Health Benefits Only Opens New Set of Questions
Bill Clinton's election has been interpreted by the health-care industry as a referendum for sweeping change.
Factions recently at war now seem to be falling into line.
But the growing consensus is on general philosophical principles, not the details, which still present big obstacles to final agreement on how to provide health care to everyone at reasonable cost.
On Nov. 9, six days after the Presidential election, business executives, hospital trustees and leaders of the Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association offered to cooperate with Mr.
Clinton in writing legislation to revamp the health-care system.


Jersey Agency's Bond Offering
A $60.46 million financing by the South Jersey Transportation Authority, consisting of tax-exempt and taxable bonds, is being offered through underwriters led by Bear, Stearns &amp; Company.
The taxable portion of the financing includes $16.3 million of bonds due in 1997 and 2001, both priced to yield 6.73 percent and 7.39 percent, respectively.
For the tax-exempt bonds, the maximum yield is about 6.186 percent for an issue due in 2012, with the shorter-maturity serial bonds priced to yield from 5.5 percent in 2001 to 5.95 percent in 2005 and 6.1 percent in 2007.


Art in Review
Pierre Roy
Richard L. Feigen &amp; Company  49 East 68th Street  Manhattan  Through Jan. 22
Although the French artist Pierre Roy (1880-1950) was a contemporary of Andre Breton, de Chirico, Dali and the much younger Magritte, he neither sought nor found a place in their company.
Breton declared his paintings insufficiently radical to qualify for the Surrealist canon, and after Roy's death his work sank from view.


K.J. Oberman, 62, Manager of Funds For Oppenheimer
Kenneth J. Oberman, who managed the top-performing mutual fund in the United States last year, died on Tuesday at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in Manhattan.
He was 62 years old and lived in Brooklyn.
He died of Hodgkin's disease, his family said.


College Students Accused of Electronic Tax Fraud
About 40 students at a private college in Virginia and 50 of their friends are being investigated on suspicion of committing a new kind of fraud that was created when the Government introduced its electronic income-tax filing system seven years ago.
Officials say the students were taught how to defraud professional tax-preparation services and banks by filing phony returns, complete with forged wage statements and other supporting documents, and then pocketing bank loans arranged by the services in anticipation of tax refunds.


Art in Review
Eric Fischl  Mary Boone Gallery 417 West Broadway (near Spring Street) SoHo Through Dec. 19
Eric Fischl is not quite up to his old tricks again.
After his last show of scenes of India, which included some of the most beautiful, if vacant, paintings he had ever made, Fischl has returned to the scenes of his past triumphs.
His new canvases once more show ugly, unusually corpulent Americans, in Paris, on the beach or in their own dingy backyards.


Gay Rights Groups Hail Defeat of Judge in Texas
Gay rights advocates in Texas are celebrating the defeat of a judge who was censured in 1989 after he gave a convicted murderer a light sentence and later said in several interviews that he had done so because the victims were homosexuals.
The judge, Jack Hampton of the Criminal District Court here, narrowly lost in his effort to become an appeals court judge last month.
The winner of the election was Judge Barbara Rosenberg, a 42-year-old Democrat who was appointed to the Texas Court of Appeals to fill a vacancy.
Judge Rosenberg, a former Municipal Court judge and Family Court master, won by 15,994 votes, or 51 percent, over Judge Hampton, a Republican who is 60.


ALL P.O.W.'s FREED, EX-ADMIRAL SAYS
James B. Stockdale, who ran as Ross Perot's Vice-Presidential candidate, said today that he is convinced that no American prisoners of war were left behind in North Vietnam when the United States pulled out its ground forces in 1973.
Mr.
Stockdale, a former Naval aviator who was the highest-ranking American held by the Vietnamese at the Hoa Lo prison in Hanoi, told a Senate committee that American prisoners had set up an elaborate system to account for inmates in all prisons throughout North Vietnam.


Bush Rebounds to Center of the World Stage
For someone who implied barely three weeks ago that he had taken his final bow and left the script to the new star of the show, George Bush is spending a lot of time lately on center stage.
Working the telephone with the abandon of his Desert Storm heyday, President Bush has spent the week dragooning world leaders from Britain to Japan to Africa into a multinational coalition to clear the way for the safe delivery of aid to the starving in Somalia.
Administration officials say he may return to national television soon -- perhaps by Friday -- for a brief Oval Office speech to explain his decision to send American troops to Africa.


REPORT CRITICIZES GUARD OVER RIOTS
The California National Guard's response to the Los Angeles riots last spring was poorly planned and executed, a new report says.
It recommends that the Guard overhaul its procedures and rethink its role in civil disturbances.
The 36-page report, by Lieut.
Gen.
William H. Harrison of the Army at the request of Gov.
Pete Wilson, examined the Guard's response to the riots that began after a jury acquitted four white police officers in the beating of a black motorist, Rodney G. King.


Benefit for 3 Groups
Music with a winter theme will be performed by the pianist George Winston at a benefit on Sunday at 7:30 P.M. at Avery Fisher Hall, Lincoln Center.
Tickets are $20, $22.50 and $25.
The performance is sold out, but any returned tickets would be available a half-hour before the show.
Information: (212) 875-5030.


In the Windows, Witty Tableaux For the Season
THE holiday trees are scrawny and overpriced, and traffic seems set in cement.
Snow, when there is any, turns to a soggy mess as soon as it hits the ground, and shopping becomes an excruciating exercise.
For many people in New York City, Christmas is definitely not the season to be jolly.
Ah, but it has its joys.
Many New Yorkers have come to regard a tour of store windows dolled up for the holidays as one of the season's happier rituals, ranking somewhere above lighting a yule log and just below calling the family in Florida.


Virginia Favored in Soccer
Despite a 2-1 loss to Duke at home nearly six weeks ago that ended a 32-game unbeaten streak, Virginia shapes up as the favorite in the rematch Friday afternoon, which opens the Final Four weekend of the National Collegiate Athletic Association's soccer tournament.
Besides being the defending champions, the Cavaliers have an overabundance of talented players and the experience of having been in the finals in three of the last four years.
They also appear to be peaking at precisely the right time.


Prime-Time Victory For A.C.C. Syndicator
Hoops-infected TV spuds are already being fed regularly by ESPN and local broadcast and cable outlets with early repasts of college basketball.
The biggest early-season game from the Krzyzewski-Knight-Pitino Solar System, however, will not be seen on ESPN or CBS, but on local stations via a syndicate formed by Raycom.
The company, based in Charlotte, N.C., will telecast tomorrow's reunion of Duke and Michigan, who last met in the 1992 National Collegiate Athletic Association championship game.
It will be among the 450 games Raycom will syndicate this season, and it will appear locally on WWOR, Channel 9.


No Headline
"The Americans are in for a surprise. The expectations are very high. The Somalis think they will do a lot of things for them. And if they don't do these things -- deliver the humanitarian food, then disarm the people and then bring people together for political reconciliation -- it will revert to chaos." -- AHMED JAMA, a former national police chief in Somalia.  [ A1:5. ]


A Helping Hand for a Troubled Family


Samuelsson Injury Is a Minus
Pittsburgh Penguins defenseman ULF SAMUELSSON will miss two to four weeks because of a broken cheekbone he suffered in a Nov. 27 game against the Washington Capitals. (AP)


Restaurants
Among the rising tide of hotel dining rooms, a many-flavored luxury spot.
In the early 1980's, hotels in New York City and beyond caused quite a stir by revving up their sleepy dining rooms to compete with top restaurants.
But when the recession hit, these hotel dining rooms sank faster than the Dow Jones industrial average, and with that the hoopla over a hotel-food renaissance ended.


Look to the Grassroots in Aiding Russia; English? Nyet
To the Editor:
Edward L. Keenan may be correct when he says that English is "widely known and well taught locally" in the former Soviet Union, but my experience was otherwise during two weeks spent in Moscow, Kiev and Yerevan last summer ("Help Russia but Hold the Pizza," Op-Ed, Nov. 23).


Yankees Still Don't Close Door On Bonds
In the face of his agent's initial demand of $50 million for seven years, Barry Bonds does not have a long line of teams waiting to sign him.
Noting Bonds's rejection of the Yankees' offer of slightly more than $36 million for five years, a club official familiar with the pursuit of the two-time most valuable player said yesterday that two teams remained in serious contention.
The Yankees, however, apparently have not totally discarded their interest in the outfielder.
General Manager Gene Michael said Wednesday night that the Yankees had withdrawn their offer.
But Joseph Molloy, George Steinbrenner's stand-in, was described as being perturbed about Michael's comments and issued a statement yesterday that contradicted Michael and left the door open for resumption of talks.


First U.N. Goal Is Security; Political Outlook Is Murky
The deployment of a United States-led force to Somalia, approved today by the Security Council, is intended to create "a secure environment for humanitarian relief operations" and brake Somalia's descent into anarchy and chaos so an effort can be made at reconciling the warring factions.
The United Nations has thus accepted a major new military and humanitarian engagement for the fourth time since the end of the cold war, following the reversal of Iraq's occupation of Kuwait and the deployment of peacekeepers in Cambodia and the Balkans.
The Security Council also set up safe havens for the Iraqi Kurds in 1991.


Detective and Lawyer Clash on Reference to 'Rape Victim' in Glen Ridge Case
A detective and a defense lawyer clashed today at the Glen Ridge sex assault trial after the detective used the words "rape victim" to describe the mildly retarded woman who prosecutors say was assaulted.
The lawyer, Michael Querques, who has consistently led the defense team in depicting the young woman as a sexual aggressor, seemed disturbed that the witness, Detective Sheila Byron, had used those words.


Texas Lawmakers Again Reject Plan to Equalize School Financing
The Texas Legislature, which has been unable for more than 20 years to resolve legal challenges to the state's system of public school financing, failed again yesterday to approve a plan aimed at removing the disparities in spending between rich and poor school districts.
In a special session, the House of Representatives voted 91 to 56 -- nine votes short of the 100 votes needed -- to put a constitutional amendment on the ballot that would have asked voters to decide whether they wanted the state to take a percentage of property tax revenue from the state's wealthiest districts and give it to poor districts.
Two weeks ago the Senate voted 29 to 2 to approve the amendment, which was proposed by Gov.
Ann W. Richards.


Company Briefs
CITICORP, New York, said it was selling a 7.9 percent interest in Fomento Economico Mexicano S.A., a Mexican beverage company, to the Philip Morris Companies.


Judge Favors News Union In Purchase
Creating a new hurdle to Mortimer B. Zuckerman's plan to acquire The Daily News, a Federal judge ruled yesterday that Mr.
Zuckerman cannot strip the typographers union of its lifetime job guarantees if he wants to buy the ailing newspaper.
The ruling by a Federal District judge in Manhattan overturned a bankruptcy court decision by Judge Tina L. Brozman that had favored Mr.
Zuckerman's argument that he is not bound by the job guarantees because The Daily News is in bankruptcy.
The ruling sets back his plan to buy the paper, but nonetheless leaves him in control in his bid to become a New York City newspaper publisher.
Harsh Negotiating Strategy
The judge in the case, Lawrence M. McKenna, declared that Mr.
Zuckerman's harsh negotiating strategy with the union, the New York Typographical Union No. 6, was "not compatible with the good faith bargaining" required under Federal law."


10 Canadian TV Shows At a Weekend Seminar
Ten television shows, selected from the Banff Television Festival held last spring in Alberta, Canada, will be shown during a free weekend seminar at the Canadian Consulate General, 1251 Avenue of the Americas at 49th Street.
The annual television festival is named for the popular ski area where it is held.
The programs are from Britain, Sweden, Japan, Denmark, Spain and the United States; if they are not in English, the shows have subtitles.
The seminar, sponsored by the Center for Communications in Manhattan, includes discussions with television writers.
Richard Zoglin of Time magazine will speak today at 4 P.M.; John Leonard of New York Magazine and Ken Tucker of Entertainment Weekly will speak tomorrow at 3:30 P.M.


Japanese Economy Shrinks
In another sign of the deepening of Japan's economic slump, the Government reported today that the economy actually shrank in the third quarter of 1992.
Japan's gross national product -- the total value of the nation's output of goods and services -- declined four-tenths of 1 percent in the July-September quarter from the previous quarter, or at an annual rate of 1.6 percent.


Intervention in Somalia; White House and U.N. Muddy the Mission
American troops are properly being sent to strife-torn Somalia to insure that food reaches millions of starving people.
But instead of doing it right, President Bush seems bent on doing it quickly.
Even before the United Nations approved the dispatch of U.S. forces under U.N. auspices, the White House was telling the world -- and thugs in Somalia -- that the whole military operation would be wrapped up by Jan. 20, Inauguration Day.
Thus over the holidays, viewers will see U.S. troops protecting relief workers as food and medicines are distributed to a stricken people.
That's something, to be sure, but there's a danger that it could be only a poultice.


Excerpts From a Resolution On Delivering Somalia Aid
Following are excerpts from the Security Council resolution authorizing a new United Nations relief effort in Somalia: THE SECURITY COUNCIL,
RECOGNIZING the unique character of the present situation in Somalia and mindful of its deteriorating, complex and extraordinary nature, requiring an immediate and exceptional response,
DETERMINING that the magnitude of the human tragedy caused by the conflict in Somalia, further exacerbated by the obstacles being created to the distribution of humanitarian assistance, constitutes a threat to international peace and security,


Gearing for Conference, Clinton Meets With Federal Reserve Chief
As he faces decisions about dealing with an economy that shows signs of improvement, President-elect Bill Clinton met today with the chairman of the Federal Reserve Board and approved the initial guest list for a conference on the economy that has doubled to 215 participants.
Because the Federal Reserve controls interest rates, its chairman, Alan Greenspan, has as much influence over the economy as anyone in the Government.
Mr.
Clinton summoned him to the Governor's Mansion here for their first meeting since the election one month ago today.


The Spoken Word
CERVANTES LECTURES, Fordham University, East Fordham Road, at 190th Street, Rose Hill, the Bronx.
A two-day conference that celebrates Spanish culture and Spanish contributions to literature in the Americas; with scholars from across the country.
Today, 1 to 5:30 P.M., and tomorrow, 10 A.M. to 5:30 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 579-2687.
POETRY READINGS, Nuyorican Poets Cafe, 236 East Third Street, East Village.
Readings by Gerry Porlberg, Tracie Morris, Dennis Green and Cheryl Boyce Taylor.
Tonight at 10.
Admission: $5.
Information: (212) 505-8183.


Dinkins Faces Name-Calling In Queens
Mayor David N. Dinkins went to a Queens Democratic club last night and came face to face with rising Jewish anger over his handling of racial strife in Crown Heights.
The Mayor was heckled and called a "Jew hater" as he sought to speak out against bigotry and defend his condemnation of the beating of a black man by Hasidic Jews on Tuesday in Crown Heights.


U.S. Tried to Support Dollar, Federal Reserve Confirms
The Federal Reserve confirmed yesterday that it had tried to support the dollar against the German mark in the early stages of Europe's currency crisis, but its efforts were largely in vain.
In a quarterly report on its foreign-exchange operations through October, the Fed said that it had acted amid fears in the currency markets that the dollar's decline would accelerate after it hit new lows in response to high German interest rates.


Knicks Fall On the Road Yet Again
The Knicks, the National Basketball Association's only team still unbeaten at home, continued their road woes tonight as they failed to execute offensively during the fourth quarter.
The Cleveland Cavaliers played the final quarter without All-Star point guard Mark Price (hip pointer) but remained cool and confident to score an impressive 100-90 victory before 16,372 noisy fans at the Richfield Coliseum.
The Knicks (9-6) dropped to 2-6 on the road, and while their play was solid at times, it was still not consistent enough to defeat a quality opponent on the road.


Subscribers Assail Request of Insurance Rate Raise
More than 200 people representing small businesses, the sick and the elderly crowded into an auditorium in Manhattan yesterday to assail rate increases requested by Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield, New York State's largest health insurer, saying that if the increases were granted tens of thousands of people might be forced to drop coverage altogether.
The ailing company has asked the state to approve rate increases as of Jan. 1, ranging from 20 percent to 53 percent for its 1.5 million individual and small-group subscribers -- those customers who are self-insured or who work in companies that have from 3 to 50 employees.
Empire says it is losing money so rapidly that its cash reserve will dwindle to just $30 million by the end of the month.


Velazquez Injures Shoulder
Jockey JOHN VELAZQUEZ said yesterday that he would not be able to ride for the next three or four weeks because of a separated left shoulder he sustained in a spill at Aqueduct last Saturday.
He rode four races on Sunday, winning one, and was third aboard He's Proud in a race on Wednesday.
He was then unable to continue riding. (AP)


Art in Review
Elena Sisto
Germans van Eck Gallery  420 West Broadway (near Spring Street)  SoHo  Through Dec. 23
Elena Sisto's lush paintings look like chunks of old walls on which graffiti figures have been repeatedly drawn and erased until only cryptic, half-seen fragments remain.
Ms.
Sisto continues to rely on cartoon heroines to play out her allusive dramas, but of a distinctly different sort than before.
Where once Nancy, the no-nonsense protagonist of Ernie Bushmiller's classic comic strip, took the leading role in these narratives, Ms.
Sisto now enlists a variety of female (and a few male) characters, notably the bulbous cartoon women popular in men's magazines of the 1950's.


As Immigrants Face Crises, Neediest Cases Fund Helps
Irma Contreras need only wander the aisles of a supermarket near her apartment in the Bronx to remind herself of why she left her small village in Honduras.
The seemingly endless displays of milk and meat and produce piled high put into perspective the sacrifices she made to escape the poverty of her homeland and bring her six children to the United States.
Sometimes she appreciates the reminder.
Like many of the more than one million immigrants who have settled in the five boroughs since 1980, she has faced crises as she has tried to start a new life in a land where work is often less plentiful than food in the local supermarket.


The Art Market
Work in Progress
There's still work to be done on the SoHo branch of the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, which opened in June.
A gaping hole remains on the first floor where a basement cafe is supposed to be, and the stairwells still don't have permanent lighting fixtures.
Also missing are several architectural elements crucial to Arata Isozaki's design.
Indeed, the Japanese architect's plans called for an arched bridge of raw steel to cross over the cafe, an open staircase of raw steel with steel cable railings leading down to the basement, curved frosted-glass-and-steel display cases for the bookstore and gift shop, and walls of frosted glass at both ends of the second-floor galleries.
The architect had also made a rough plan for the cafe itself.


Beneath the Clothes Lies History


Violence on the Job Is a Growing Threat
To the Editor:
"Social Workers: Targets in a Violent Society" (front page, Nov. 18) and "Wires, Meters, Phones and Fears" (news article, Nov. 22) shine some light on a serious and growing problem in New York City and nationwide: violence on the job.


Pop/Jazz; From Cuba, Rumbas And Drums
Authenticity in music often doesn't mean anything at all, but in the case of the Cuban group Los Munequitos de Matanzas it means quite a bit.
The band -- 10 musicians and 4 dancers who are known as the best rumbaists in Cuba -- is traveling the United States for the first time and has arrived for a week's engagement at spaces across New York City, starting tonight.
All week people will be able to hear one of the finest examples of African music in the Americas.
The group, which uses only percussion instruments and sings, has just released a record, "Rumba Caliente 88/77" (Qbadisc).
It is at home with the rhythms and drumming of the Santeria religion, originally from the Yoruba tribe of Nigeria, whose adherents are found everywhere from New York to the Caribbean to Brazil.
It's at home with the Abacua rhythms and songs, the music of a men's secret society, carried over from Africa, whose music traditionally blesses festivals.


Eugene J. Kelly, 43, Prosecutor in Queens
Eugene J. Kelly, an assistant district attorney in Queens who prosecuted four drug dealers convicted of murdering a New York City rookie police officer, was found dead on Wednesday at his Bronx home.
He was 43 years old.
Mr.
Kelly died of what apparently was a heart attack, said a spokeswoman for the Medical Examiner's office.


On Stage, and Off
Seeking a Stage for 'Angels'
Imagine that you are a 36-year-old playwright, used to struggling with words on a page in the relative obscurity common to the profession.
You are at work on a mammoth project, political in theme, historical in scope, fantastical in its theatrics, savage in its humor and, not incidentally, homosexual in its outlook.
You are experimenting with the work out of town, and at more or less the moment you realize that there is much work to be done -- vast rewriting on the second half of the play and a restaging of the whole thing -- it becomes uncomfortably evident that your work is to be the main event of the New York drama season.
Broadway theater owners squire you around their theaters.
Producers woo you.
The New Yorker magazine profiles you.
Reporters seek you out.
All this for a play that was to come to the Joseph Papp Public Theater in early February.
This, essentially, was Tony Kushner's Thanksgiving as he mulled the future of his two-part, seven-hour opus, "Angels in America: A Gay Fantasia on National Themes," while shuttling among New York City; Dusseldorf, Germany (where the Royal National Theater's production of "Millennium Approaches," Part 1 of "Angels," played four performances), and Los Angeles, where "Angels" has been extended through Sunday at the Mark Taper Forum.
Decisions about who will produce, who will direct, what theater the play will land in and whether both halves of the play will arrive at the same time are expected by Monday.


An Earful Near the Starting Gate
Hear the one about the railbird who went to the track on a day a state commission was holding public hearings on how to improve racing?
First they took 17 percent out of every bet the fellow made on a series of races with shrunken fields of second-rate horses who were running for peanuts.
Then they dragged him in front of the commissioners and made him tell them if he had any suggestions.


On My Mind; In a Serbian Prison
In the cattle sheds the men lie on the floor, one blanket beneath them, one blanket to cover them.
They lie there 15 hours every day, locked in from the dark afternoon through the utterly black night.
There is hardly an inch between them.
Soon it will be terribly cold in these mountains.
But maybe, if the winter is not too bad, only a few hundred of the 3,000 locked in the windowless sheds built for animals will shiver to death.


Review/Film; Passions And Biases Of Peasants
Opening a special one-week engagement today at the Joseph Papp Public Theater is "El Bosque Animado" ("The Enchanted Forest"), Jose Luis Cuerda's bittersweet fantasy set in Galicia in northwest Spain in the 1920's.
Though the presentation is part of the Public Theater's current retrospective, "Spanish Eyes: Visions of Post-Franco Spain, 1975-1990," the 1987 film doesn't reveal any startling changes.
It celebrates not political liberation but the enduring character of the Spanish peasant: his passions, biases, superstitions, strengths and weaknesses.
"El Bosque Animado" is not exactly an inflammatory political statement.
It's a series of interlocking tales about mercilessly picturesque characters who live in or near the forest of the film's title.
There's gentle Gerardo, a poor well-digger whose wooden leg is so much shorter than his real one that he limps grotesquely and has trouble attracting women.
Malvis is a would-be bandit who scares nobody.
There are also a lonely ghost; a beautiful, overworked kitchen maid; a witch, and some rich landowners.


Topics of The Times; The Courage of the Bahais
Only in New York would a gathering of 30,000 people from 180 countries get lost during Thanksgiving festivities.
Even so, last week's second world congress of the Bahai faith sent a ringing message of courage to persecuted minorities everywhere.
Iran's clerical despots regard the Bahais as blasphemous criminals and deny them legal protection given Christian and Jewish minorities.
Even as the Bahais convened at the Javits Center to press their case for equality and social justice, the United Nations Human Rights Commission reported that Iran continues to jail Bahais because of their beliefs.


U.S. May Seek the Use of Force To Stop Serbs' Flights Over Bosnia
The United States has concluded that Serbia is routinely violating the United Nations ban on flights over Bosnia and Herzegovina and is consulting its allies on a possible resolution authorizing force to stop the flights, senior Administration officials said today.
The officials said that the United States might be prepared to introduce a resolution at the United Nations as early as next week that would for the first time provide an enforcement mechanism for the ban.
That could eventually lead to allied combat planes threatening to shoot down Serbian aircraft defying the ban.


Penney Marketing Overhaul Lifts Sales and Earns Praise
THE decision by J. C. Penney to overhaul its advertising and marketing efforts, from changing agencies to repeatedly reminding shoppers that snow tires have been supplanted by stylish apparel, is, to borrow one of the retailer's earlier slogans, looking smarter than ever.
Buoyed by months of climbing sales, Penney is entering the Christmas-shopping season in a strong position.
For the four weeks ended Saturday, the company said yesterday, sales at stores open more than a year rose 5.1 percent, exceeding gains at rivals like May Department Stores and Dayton Hudson, while total sales rose 6.4 percent, to $1.3 billion.


Bill Kearns, 69, Actor Seen in French Films
William R. Kearns, an American who became a well-known actor in France, died last Friday at his home in Chateau d'Oex, Switzerland.
He was 69 years old.
Patrick M. McGrady Jr., a family friend, reported Mr.
Kearns's death yesterday and said the cause was lung cancer.


INSIDE
Trade Pact to Be Signed
President Bush, President Salinas of Mexico and Prime Minister Mulroney of Canada will sign a free trade agreement on Dec. 17.
Page D1.
What, Us Worry?
Federal Reserve officials sound more upbeat about the economy than they have in months and are not likely to change interest rates soon.
Page D1.
A Hometown Betrayed
People in Guntersville, Ala., took pride in the growth of a local electronics company.
Now those who invested in it have lost a bundle.
Page D1.
Therapy for Cystic Fibrosis
Two research teams won a Federal panel's approval to treat cystic fibrosis by inserting new genes into patients' tissues.
Page A28.
Dinkins Heckled at Meeting
Trying to defend his handling of Crown Heights unrest, Mayor Dinkins was heckled during a speech and called a 'Jew hater.' Page B1.
Football's Dangerous Play
The collision that left the Jets' Dennis Byrd paralyzed has stirred a debate over using helmets as weapons in the National Football League.
Page B7.


Executive Changes
THE ARBITRON CO., New York, a syndicated audience measurement service and a unit of the Control Data Corp., appointed Stephen B. Morris president.
CENTERLINE SOFTWARE INC., Cambridge, Mass., appointed James Meehan president and chief executive, succeeding Sesha Pratap, who will continue as chairman.


Hire City Poor In the Suburbs, A Report Urges
Going against the grain of the most familiar anti-poverty strategies, which focus on urban economies or low-income housing in the suburbs, proponents of a plan to transport inner-city workers to suburban jobs are now bidding for the attention of the incoming Clinton Administration.
The Urban Institute, a Washington research group, is holding a conference here to discuss creating or realigning transportation systems to get the poor out to the suburbs where the jobs are.


Corrections
The Sports of The Times column yesterday, about an experimental drug administered to Dennis Byrd, the football player who suffered a broken neck and is partly paralyzed, misidentified the doctor who suggested the treatment.
He is Kristjan Ragnarsson.


Corrections
A report in the Addenda listing of the Media Business page on Tuesday about advertising personnel changes at D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles misidentified the account handled by Howard Cohen, one of two associate creative directors who were dismissed.
It was Burger King.


Italy Aide Accused of Mafia Ties Found Dead
One of Italy's most prominent public prosecutors, who had played a central role in jailing Sicilian mobsters, was found dead at his home today, four days after newspapers accused him of having links to the Mafia.
The police said he had apparently committed suicide.


Foe of Corruption Named To No. 2 Police Dept. Job
John S. Pritchard 3d, the inspector general of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority and a law-enforcement official known as an aggressive corruption fighter, was appointed yesterday to the second-highest civilian position in the New York City Police Department.
In announcing the appointment of Mr.
Pritchard as first deputy commissioner, Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly, a former first deputy, ended a month-and-a-half-long search to fill the job.
Mr.
Pritchard, a former New York City detective and a former F.B.I. agent, will oversee budget and personnel operations and, most important, monitor the Internal Affairs Bureau as it polices the Police Department.
Experts Praise Appointment
Mr.
Pritchard's appointment was praised by criminal-justice experts, who saw it as a move to restore confidence in a department that last summer was rocked by allegations of corruption, when six police officers were arrested on charges of drug trafficking.
The arrests were made not by the Internal Affairs Bureau, but by Suffolk County authorities.
The bureau is now facing scrutiny by an outside agency, the Mollen Commission, which was appointed by Mayor David N. Dinkins to investigate how well the police monitor themselves.


At Plant, Gray Skies and Pink Slips
Workers on the day shift streamed out of General Motors Inland Fisher Guide plant here today just as gray clouds and a cold wind were moving in from the west.
Hours earlier, in a meeting in the plant cafeteria, they had been told that the plant's 2,200 employees would lose their jobs next year.
"G.M. says 'Merry Christmas,' " one worker yelled to waiting reporters.
"We'll survive!" called another.
Yet another carried a homemade sign that read, "Will work for food."


Books of The Times; The Diary as an End Rather Than the Means
Incest
From 'A Journal of Love'  The Unexpurgated Diary of Anais Nin, 1932-1934
Illustrated. 418 pages. Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. $24.95.
"Last night my heart gave me trouble, and I felt great anxiety," Anais Nin writes in one of the entries found in this latest volume of her journals.
"I thought I would die in this hotel room alone, and I was anxious about the journal, wondering if I should not get up and burn it. Whether I would have time before my death to burn all the volumes. . . . I was surprised to find myself alive this morning."


Review/Film; Mr. Murphy Goes to Washington
WHEN first seen in "The Distinguished Gentleman," Thomas Jefferson Johnson (Eddie Murphy) is making his way through a crowd of well-heeled Floridians at a political fund-raiser.
His is the only black face in an otherwise pink and white sea of earnest contributors.
In quick succession he is taken for, or passes himself off as, a waiter, a guest, an F.B.I. agent.
In fact he is a small-time con artist whose most successful scam to date has been a phone-sex service: Girls of Many Nations (1-800-555-NATO), the point of which is to obtain the names and addresses of johns to be shaken down at a later date.
Thomas's initial brush with politics is instructive.
It opens his eyes to the rewards of big-time scamming in what's sometimes called the political arena.
Before you have time to note the mechanics of the film, which moves with the speed and the purpose of a game of three-card monte, Thomas has got himself elected to the House of Representatives.
Among his freshman colleagues: a television weather forecaster and a former football player of some regional fame.


Theodore D. Woolsey, Health Statistician, 79
Theodore D. Woolsey, a former director of the National Center of Health Statistics, died Nov. 27 while attending a family reunion in Dorset, Vt.
He was 79 years old and lived in Bethesda, Md.
Sandy Smith, a spokeswoman for the Center, reported his death yesterday and said the cause was a heart attack.


Indiana's Graham Has Surgery
Indiana guard PAT GRAHAM has undergone foot surgery and will be out indefinitely.
Graham broke his left foot during the Hoosiers' semifinal victory over Florida State at the Preseason National Invitation Tournament last week.
Graham missed all of last season with a similar fracture in the same foot. (AP)





Worthy PAC's
To the Editor:
You and others have spoken out against political action committees, but I favor them.
Movers and shakers -- powerful corporations and wealthy individuals -- influence legislation to serve their interests by cash and other gifts.
Decry it, but you can't stop it.
Thus PAC's have allowed people who are
not
wealthy to fight legislation they consider harmful or promote what they feel is needed.
If PAC's were eliminated, once again only the rich and powerful could influence legislation.
THEODORE R. DEMSKY Scottsdale, Ariz., Nov. 15, 1992


You're in the N.B.A. Now
Inside the visitors' locker room at the Spectrum early Wednesday night, David Robinson took off his red, white and blue Team U.S.A.
Olympic jacket and gently hung it on a hook.
When Lloyd Daniels walked into the room a moment later, Robinson made an "over here" motion with his head.
Daniels dropped his bag, removed his coat and draped it over the hook next to Robinson's.
Robinson whispered in Daniels's ear. Daniels listened, then nodded.


New York Pursues Truce In Job War With Trenton
New York State suggested yesterday that the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey coordinate negotiations between the two states in an attempt to end their fight over New Jersey's increasing use of financial incentives to try to lure companies from New York.
Jon Shure, a spokesman for Gov.
Jim Florio of New Jersey, said, "the idea of talking certainly interests us."


METRO DIGEST
METRO DIGEST  GENERAL MOTORS NAMES 9 PLANTS TO SHUT
The General Motors Corporation identified nine plants that it will close in the next three and a half years.
They are in Ewing, N.J.; Flint, Kalamazoo and Livonia, Mich.; Syracuse; Wilmington, Del.; Euclid, Ohio; Sioux City, Iowa, and St.
Catharines, Ontario.
With their closing, 18,000 jobs will be lost.
A1.
Workers at G.M.'s Ewing plant were sometimes relieved, sometimes bitter.
D4.
NEW YORK CITY  EASING OF RULES SOUGHT ON HOMELESS
Cesar A. Perales, the Deputy Mayor in charge of New York City's homeless policies, said that he had begun searching for ways to loosen state rules -- rules that he helped write -- that for nearly a decade have required the city to provide shelter immediately to those who say they are homeless.
A1.
DIVISION OVER BRONX PLEA-BARGAIN BAN
The Bronx County Bar Association urged the Bronx District Attorney, Robert T. Johnson, to reconsider his recent ban on plea bargains, arguing that the policy will clog an already overburdened criminal justice system.
But Mr.
Johnson said he would not back down.
B3.
DEPUTY POLICE COMMISSIONER NAMED
John S. Pritchard 3d, the inspector general of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, was appointed to the second-highest civilian position in the New York Police Department.
The new first deputy police commissioner, a former New York City detective and a former F.B.I. agent, will oversee budget and personnel operations and monitor the Internal Affairs Bureau as it polices the Police Department.
B3.
SUSPECT INJURED IN SHOOTOUT WITH POLICE
Two New York City transit officers and a city police officer fired 48 times at a fleeing robbery suspect who fired nine shots at them in Washington Heights, the police said.
The transit police said 30 of the 48 shots were fired by one officer using a 9-millimeter semiautomatic pistol.
B3.
Federal prosecutor is mugged at Municipal Building.
B3.
REGION  PORT AUTHORITY IN PEACE EFFORT
New York State suggested that the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey coordinate negotiations between the two states in an attempt to end their fight over New Jersey's increasing use of financial incentives to lure companies from New York.
B4.
PETROLEUM TAX MAY HELP CLOSE DEFICIT
With an eye trained on state fiscal problems, Governor Cuomo proposed using $516 million in petroleum tax proceeds intended for transportation projects to balance next year's budget.
B2.
SPARRING OVER WOMAN'S SEXUAL HISTORY
At the Glen Ridge, N.J., sex assault trial, a detective and a defense lawyer sparred over past sexual activities of the mildly retarded woman who prosecutors say was assaulted.
B4.
Rate increases requested by Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield are assailed at hearing.
B4.
Our Towns by Andrew H. Malcolm B4 Neediest Cases B5  Chronicle B5


The Plaza Off Screen: A Real-Life Adventure
IN the Plaza Hotel's gift shop there is a videocassette display recalling films that have celebrated the Plaza: "Plaza Suite," "North by Northwest," "Network," "The Way We Were." Not yet ready is the cassette version of the hotel's latest screen appearance and most stunning bit of free advertising, namely "Home Alone 2: Lost in New York." As seen in this holiday hit, the Plaza is New York City at its most hospitable.
The hotel appears as a glittering pleasure palace, a place where any 10-year-old boy with unlimited credit can make his dreams come true.
The movie's inviting vision of the Plaza -- lively staff, loads of flowers, endless amenities and not much mention of the bill -- will be duly noted by potential tourists all over the globe.
But does it fully correspond to the real thing?
In the words of Macaulay Culkin's much-imitated Kevin McAllister, I-don't-think-so.
There is, to cite one example, the scene in which Kevin visits a grand-looking hotel pool, which is conspicuously outfitted with Plaza towels.
Looks great, but the Plaza doesn't have a pool.
Guests who want to swim are advised to borrow a pass from the concierge and trek over to a health club three blocks away.


The Dreams From Fields Of the Past Are Saved
FOR decades, Coles Roberts and his family have been the stewards of about 300 acres of the other New Jersey, the one you don't see from the Turnpike.
Mr.
Roberts grew apples.
At one point he farmed a forest of apple trees, 14,000 strong and sturdy trees whose well-fed roots and well-pruned limbs produced the blossoms that attracted the bees that pollinated the flowers that became those little green knobs that grew into those bulging Red Delicious and Rome Beauties that left his land by the ton to feed the fruit needs of countless consumers all over (not to mention his homemade hot cider).





Corrections
A chart yesterday explaining changes in nutrition labeling for packaged foods referred incorrectly in some editions to the amount of dietary fiber in an example given, for macaroni and cheese.
It is 0 grams, not 25 grams.


German Leaders Vow to Battle Violence; Munich Rally Called
As Germans prepared new protests against the anti-foreigner violence sweeping the country, leading politicians pledged today to crack down on right-wing terrorism.
For the first time, Chancellor Helmut Kohl acknowledged criticism that he had reacted too slowly to the wave of violence.


CHRONICLE
Francis Bacon, the English painter known for his abstract images of psychological and physical brutality, left an estate with a net worth of $16.9 million to his companion, JOHN EDWARDS, when he died in April at the age of 82, the Associated Press reported.
As the terms of the will were announced in London yesterday, a Bacon painting of a female nude lying on a table was sold to an unidentified buyer for $1.3 million at Sotheby's.


Georgia Senate Runoff Over, Disputes and Lawsuits Begin
A week after it finally staggered to an apparent end, the bitter Georgia Senate race in which Paul D. Coverdell, the Republican, narrowly defeated Senator Wyche Fowler Jr. in a post-election runoff is still generating disputes that threaten to cloud Mr.
Coverdell's victory.
A public interest group today filed a lawsuit seeking to void the election and certify Mr.
Fowler as the winner, saying the Nov. 24 runoff, which was held after Mr.
Fowler led but failed to get 50 percent of the vote on Nov. 3, violated the United States Constitution.


Art in Review
'10 Steps'  Muranushi Lederman Productions 426 Broome Street SoHo Horodner Romley Gallery 107 Sullivan Street SoHo Through Dec. 12


Federal Prosecutor Was Mugged
The retiring chief Federal prosecutor in Manhattan, Otto G. Obermaier, was the victim of a mugging last week as he walked down the stairs to a subway underpass beneath the Municipal Building in lower Manhattan, transit police officials said yesterday
Mr.
Obermaier, 56 years old, who is the United States Attorney for the Southern District of New York, was on the stairs leading to the subway underpass at Centre Street at 1:30 P.M. on Friday when he was approached by a man with a gun who demanded his money, said Albert O'Leary, a transit police spokesman.


Marie McCarthy, Designer, 86
Marie McCarthy, who for many years designed the Larry Aldrich fashion collection, died on Tuesday at the Windermere Nursing Home in Virginia Beach, Va., at the age of 86.
She entered the home in 1989 because of severe osteoporosis, and her condition had deteriorated, said her daughter, Polly Gillespie.


Sounds Around Town
Jazz Meets Nativity
"Bending Toward the Light . . . a Jazz Nativity," St.
Bartholomew's Church, Park Avenue at 51st Street, (212) 751-1616, extension 219.
A cast of celebrated jazz musicians and singers, headed by Dave Brubeck, Lionel Hampton, Paquito D'Rivera, Al Grey, Jackie Cain and Roy Kral, is to take part in the seventh annual presentation of Anne Phillips's jazz treatment of the Nativity on Sunday, Monday and Tuesday.
Among other jazz musicians in the cast are the saxophonist Bob Kindred, who co-produced the work with Miss Phillips; the percussionists Candido and Tito Puente; the trombonist Benny Powell; the trumpeter Lew Soloff, and the guitarist Gene Bertoncini.
Joining them are the singers Gail Wynters, Milt Grayson and Qasim Holden, and the tap-dancer Jimmy Slyde.
Performances are to be at 5 P.M. on Sunday and at 8 P.M. on Monday and Tuesday.
Tickets are $15; $10 for children.
Fats Waller's Songwriter
"Toasting Andy Razaf," Arcade at Park Avenue Plaza, 55 East 52d Street, Manhattan, (212) 308-0643.
A series of four Saturday afternoon tea dances featuring songs with lyrics by Andy Razaf will begin tomorrow afternoon, celebrating the publication of "Black and Blue" (Schirmer Books), Barry Singer's biography of Mr.
Razaf, who wrote the words to many of Fats Waller's most familiar songs.
From 2 to 5 P.M., Vince Giordano's Nighthawks will play such Waller and Razaf collaborations as "Ain't Misbehavin'," Honeysuckle Rose," "Keepin' Out of Mischief," "Black and Blue" and "Blue Turning Gray Over You." Tomorrow's program will also include Razaf's lyrics for some of Eubie Blake's tunes, as well as several rarely heard songs Razaf wrote with other composers. They will be sung by Mr. Giordano and his band singer, Allan Marks. Admission is free. Of Jelly Roll Morton
"Vernel Bagneris Presents Jelly Roll Morton: A Me-Morial," Michael's Pub, 211 East 55th Street, Manhattan, (212) 758-2272.
This presentation of the music and life style of the great New Orleans composer and pianist Jelly Roll Morton is based on a series of tapes Morton made for the Library of Congress in 1938.
Mr.
Bagneris, a native of New Orleans as was Morton, plays the role of Morton, and Morton's music is played with unusual authenticity by Butch Thompson, a Morton specialist who joined the show two weeks ago to give New Yorkers an opportunity to hear the true Jelly Roll style and flavor.
Mr.
Thompson was originally booked through this weekend, but he will held over until Dec. 16 and the show itself has extended its run for the third time, to Jan. 2.
Performances tonight and tomorrow are at 9:15 and 11:15 P.M.
There is a cover charge of $20 and a two-drink minimum.


J. P. Lyford, Journalism Teacher Who Studied City Life, Dies at 74
Joseph P. Lyford, a California journalism teacher who drew national attention with close-up portraits of a sleepy rural community and a densely urban one, died Wednesday at a nursing home in Orinda, Calif.
He was 74 years old.
He suffered from Alzheimer's disease, his family said.


Insurers Stand to Profit Big From a Health Care Overhaul
Facing fundamental changes in the nation's health care system, many insurance companies see opportunities for growth and profits under proposals that would require coverage for all Americans and would try to limit costs with new taxes on health benefits.
The range of reforms being discussed by Congress and among Clinton aides could favor large insurance companies at the expense of smaller ones, industry executives and analysts say.
And consumer advocates question whether many of the proposals endorsed by a leading industry trade group on Wednesday would eliminate harmful practices by insurers like efforts to avoid insuring the sick and the elderly.


Low-Price Settlement in Big Salomon Scandal
John H. Gutfreund, whose aggressive leadership of Salomon Brothers seemed to embody Wall Street in the heady 1980's, agreed yesterday to never again run a securities firm and to pay a $100,000 fine as part of a settlement of civil charges stemming from the firm's illegal bidding in Treasury auctions.
He and two other former senior executives of Salomon settled with the Securities and Exchange Commission one day after the agency charged two other former Salomon employees with a raft of securities law violations involving phony bids in a series of Treasury auctions.
Involved Civil Charges
Mr.
Gutfreund and the two other executives who settled yesterday, Thomas W. Strauss, the investment house's former president, and John W. Meriwether, a former vice chairman, were not charged with any illegal actions.
Rather, the men settled civil charges that they had failed to properly supervise their employees.


Second Thoughts for Taylor
Lawrence Taylor, the Giants' celebrated outside linebacker, said today that last Sunday's injury to Dennis Byrd of the Jets had led him to rethink his plans about possibly returning next year.
On Nov. 8 against the Green Bay Packers, the 33-year-old Taylor suffered a ruptured right Achilles' tendon, ending his season.
Taylor has said he would rehabilitate the ankle, then decide if he would play next year or retire.
He now indicates that the career-ending injury to Byrd may encourage him to retire.


Corrections
A front-page headline in some copies yesterday about the Government's suit against two former executives at Salomon Brothers referred erroneously to the history of the case.
The suit filed Wednesday by the Securities and Exchange Commission was the first against individuals involved in the improper bidding for Treasury securities.
The Government has already settled its complaints against the firm itself.


Premier's Effort to Oust Serbian Leader Is Blocked
Election officials here today thwarted an attempt by Yugoslavia's Serbian-American Prime Minister, Milan Panic, to oust Serbia's nationalist President, Slobodan Milosevic, in elections set for Dec. 20 by invalidating Mr.
Panic's candidacy for the Serbian presidency.
Mr.
Panic announced Tuesday that he would face off against Mr.
Milosevic, but then the Serbian election commission's chairman, Caslav Ignjatovic, said Mr.
Panic's candidacy was rejected because he failed to meet a one-year residency requirement enacted just a month ago by the republic's parliament, which Mr.
Milosevic's supporters control.


Big Retailers Register Modest Sales Gains for November
Most of the nation's large retailers posted only modest sales gains last month, according to figures released yesterday by big chain stores.
But most Wall Street analysts said the numbers were somewhat deceptive, and did not sound a somber note for the all-important Christmas season.
An index of comparable-store sales at 14 leading retailers compiled by Salomon Brothers rose by 3.8 percent in November, well below the 7.5 percent gain recorded during October.


Corrections
An article on Friday about the YMYWCA in Newark misstated the circumstances under which the former chief executive and the chief financial officer departed.
Milton Harrison, the current president and chief executive, says they resigned and were not dismissed.


MISCARRIAGE RISK FOR CHIP WORKERS
Women exposed to certain chemicals while working in the nation's semiconductor factories face a significantly higher risk of miscarriage, a broad industry-financed study has found.
The study is the third in four years to find that a class of chemicals called glycol ethers -- widely used in the process of etching microelectronic circuits on semiconductors -- have toxic side effects.


Cuomo Plan Seeks Shift For Oil Tax
With an eye on looming state fiscal problems, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo today proposed using $516 million in petroleum tax proceeds intended for transportation projects to balance next year's budget instead.
This would leave only $185 million of the $701 million raised by the tax for transportation programs.
He also proposed a five-year $8.6 billion capital plan for the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, cutting by $1 billion the request by the authority's chairman, Peter E. Stangl.
But the Governor's plan would grant the request of Mr.
Stangl and Mayor David N. Dinkins that the M.T.A. be allowed to allocate its revenues between the Transit Authority and commuter railroads based on need.


Owen Almost In Pinstripes
The Yankees lost their third baseman in the expansion draft, but they are expected to announce today that they have found a shortstop.
Except for contract language, the Yankees reached agreement yesterday with Spike Owen on a three-year deal worth $7 million.
The agreement calls for a $750,000 signing bonus and salaries of $2 million, $1 million and $3.25 million.
The 31-year-old Owen, the Montreal Expos' shortstop the past four seasons, earned $3,255,000 in his previous three-year contract.


Expectations in Somalia
Many Somalis welcome the imminent American military intervention in their country, but they view the narrowly focused goal of protecting the delivery of food to the destitute as a mere sideshow to what really interests them: an end to the clan violence, economic reconstruction and political reconciliation.
And they expect the Americans to deliver on all counts.
This mismatch in expectations, with the Somalis seeing the Americans as the economic and political salvation for their destroyed country and the Americans planning a brief mission designed to avoid any long-term involvement, could turn the operation sour very quickly, Somalis and international aid workers say.


G.M. TO SHUT DOWN 7 PARTS FACTORIES IN STRATEGY SHIFT
The General Motors Corporation identified nine plants today that it will close in the next three and a half years, including seven plants that make parts.
The announcement makes clear that the giant auto maker's strategy for becoming a leaner company involves increasing its reliance on parts purchased from outside suppliers.


Thompson Shifts London Executive
Chris Jones, a top executive at J. Walter Thompson London, will relinquish two positions as he accepts a newly created job with the parent, the J. Walter Thompson Company.
Mr.
Jones, 37 years old, will be succeeded as worldwide director in charge of the agency's important Kellogg account by Norm MacMaster, 51, an executive vice president who has been director in charge of other accounts including Exxon and DeBeers.
The trade publication Adweek reported Nov. 23 that Mr.
MacMaster was likely to join the agency's Kellogg team.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows, performances and art exhibitions in the New York metropolitan region that are to close soon: Closing This Weekend
"JONAS MEKAS," Whitney Museum of American Art, 945 Madison Avenue, at 75th Street.
A retrospective of work by the avant-garde film maker.
Through Sunday.
Screenings: today through Sunday at 1 P.M.
Free with museum admission: $6; $4 for students.
Information: (212) 570-3676.


New Law Doesn't Address Problem of Juvenile Carjackers
To the Editor:
Carjacking is becoming a violent staple of everyday life in the United States, especially in New Jersey.
Our state has the notorious distinction of having 5 of the 10 cities with the country's highest rate of car thefts.
In response to this challenge, Congress passed legislation in October making carjacking a Federal crime punishable by a mandatory 15-year prison term.


In Town, Neighbors Saw It Coming
Like many big Wall Street investors, people here who put their nest eggs in the shares of the Comptronix Corporation, a local electronics manufacturer, have lost a bundle.
The fast-growing company's stock, once a source of glee in the town, plummeted on Nov. 25 to a fraction of its former value after its chairman, William J. Hebding, and two other top executives were suspended for falsifying the books.
The news stunned Wall Street, which had been attracted to the little company's robust growth and clean-cut image.
But if the people here share Wall Street's pain, they do not share its astonishment.
The men who founded and built the company to annual sales of $101 million, and who have now disgraced it, were figures in a society where the distance between the lofty and the humble is often no wider than the local luncheonette counter.


It Is Time to Forgive Schott, A Cincinnati Black Leader Says
The Cincinnati leader of the National Council of Negro Women says it is time to forgive MARGE SCHOTT, the Reds owner, who is under fire for uttering ethnic and racial slurs.
"There is so much to be worried about in this world: racism, homelessness, kids on the streets," said MAMIE DUNSTON-HALL, president of the group and the first black leader to publicly support Schott.
"And we're all getting worked up over something some woman who owns a baseball club says? We're spinning our wheels."


Diner's Journal
Taliesin
The contemporary setting is typically, well, hotel, with institutional art, lots of glass and muted colors.
Yet the food at Taliesin, the dining room of the new Millenium Hotel in lower Manhattan, has more zest.
The chef, Albert DeAngelis, came from the former Maurice in the Parker Meridien Hotel, Tropica and the former Marie-Michelle, all in Manhattan.
The light, salubrious menu is well suited to business meals, with starters like basil-perfumed vegetable soup with ham ($5), a sparkling spinach and beet salad ($6.50) and a nicely balanced focaccia holding mild goat cheese, grilled vegetables and aioli flavored with roasted peppers ($8.95).
Avoid the pallid corn-and-clam chowder with rubbery morsels of clam ($5.50), and go instead with the grilled Louisiana shrimp over white beans with pancetta ($10.95).


Abroad at Home; Changing the Rules
When he decided to send an American force to Somalia under United Nations auspices, President Bush made no great public announcement.
The news emerged in almost a whisper.
But the decision in fact reflected a profound change in the assumptions -- the ground rules -- for military intervention abroad.
The classic reasons for U.S. military action are to protect national security or the lives of particular Americans.
Thus the official rationale for the landing on Grenada was to rescue American medical students.
The invasion of Panama, designed to overthrow and capture Manuel Noriega, was covered by a story of threats to American citizens.


Ford's Chief Says Japanese Still Lag on Parts Purchases
The chairman of the Ford Motor Company says Japanese auto makers are in danger of failing to meet commitments they made during President Bush's visit in January to increase their purchases of American automobile components.
"We're not moving as rapidly as desirable," Harold A. Poling, the chief executive of the second-largest American car manufacturer, after General Motors, said in an interview on Thursday during a business trip here.
"I think it's in jeopardy," he said of the goal.


Jazzing Up a Harlem Concert Hall
It was not just that the 1979 carpeting at Aaron Davis Hall was a lugubrious orange and had gaping holes.
Last year, during the premiere of "Perfect Courage," a Bill T. Jones dance work, the lighting board melted.
The year before, during the gala donor night for the Dance Theater of Harlem, a fuse blew.
All the lights in the hall went out, and the performance was delayed an hour.
Such mishaps were not only embarrassing; they were also unacceptable for the 750-seat home of the Dance Theater of Harlem, Opera Ebony, the Caribbean Cultural Center and the Harlem Dance Foundation, among others.


Laurentian Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Variety of Moving Events Prompt Donors to Neediest
June C. Starck wanted to usher in the 81st annual campaign by making its first contribution.
Kathleen Whelen was eager to thank some men who came to her aid when her car broke down in the middle of the night in the Bronx.
Valerie Eisman used her donation to honor the memory of a friend.
There seem to be an infinite number of reasons for sending money to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.


Excerpt From Fernandez's Book Recalls Drug Use
Following is an excerpt from "Tales Out of School," a new book by Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez.
The beginning of my own fateful turn about came in one night of horror on 135th Street when I was still enrolled at Commerce High.
Jackie Moore had become my closest friend during that time, partly because of the experimenting we were doing with heroin.
Jackie was a Scotch-Irish kid from a poor family, with no father at home.
Actually, he lived outside the neighborhood, up in the 130's, but we were very close, to the point of swapping clothes to wear.


Appeals Court Blocks Plan For Asbestos Compensation
A Federal appeals court overturned a bitterly contested compensation plan late yesterday that had been adopted by the financially strained trust fund responsible for handling the claims of tens of thousands of workers injured by asbestos products produced by the Johns-Manville Corporation.
The 2-to-1 decision, by a three-judge panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit in New York, blocked the effort by a Federal district judge in Brooklyn to treat all current and potential claimants as members of a class instead of as individual cases, at least temporarily.


Review/Pop; Mayhem Before Melody for Ministry
Two notes are all Ministry needs to create sonic mayhem.
Two notes, played loud and fast, repeated and pounded by drums and guitars and bass until they turn into a jackhammer massage.
Most of the songs Ministry played on Thursday night at the Paramount were all riff and rant, dispensing with niceties like melody and change; the vocals, by Alain Jourgensen and sometimes Chris Connelly, were growls and shouts, mostly imprecations: "Thieves and liars! Murderers! Hypocrites!" Some of the riffs used more than two notes; most were topped with a tape-loop of noise that traveled across the stage in stereo; some stopped and started, to add more impact.
The music's power and pleasure come from its sheer relentlessness.
Ministry wouldn't mind being the voice of a generation, one that has had it up to here with its elders' sanctimonious pronouncements and self-serving actions.
Songs shout back at religious and political homilies (sometimes played as sound bites, like "new world order"), countering them with blasphemy and nihilism.
At the Paramount, the audience happily yelled the title (and entire chorus) of "So What," a reggae-and-metal song whose narrator declares, "I only kill to know I'm alive." The music forges a coalition of rage, antisocial tendencies and abrasive sounds: the blare of heavy metal, the drone and stomp of industrial rock, the pummeling of speed-metal, the wails of sirens and feedback, the random static of sound bites.


How to Turn Audacity Into Song and Dance
When Adam Arkin went to audition for the director Jerry Zaks a few weeks ago, it was for a job he was eminently qualified for: a role in Mr.
Zaks's new project, the David Henry Hwang comedy "Face Value," which is headed for Broadway in the spring.
But what Mr.
Arkin got was an offer for which his experience really had not prepared him.
An accomplished comic actor (witness his television stint as a wacko chef on "Northern Exposure") who was last on Broadway in "I Hate Hamlet," Mr.
Arkin had never danced and barely ever sung on stage.
But Mr.
Zaks asked him to stand in for Nathan Lane as the lovable loser Nathan Detroit in "Guys and Dolls" while Mr.
Lane went off to make a movie.
Mr.
Arkin said he had only one question when he learned of the interest of Mr.
Zaks and the music supervisor, Edward Strauss: " 'Do they know I have no musical experience of any kind?' "


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Solid confirmation of a perked-up economy emerged as the Labor Department reported an increase in jobs and a two-tenths of a point decline, to 7.2 percent, in the November unemployment rate.
Unlike earlier improvements that have edged the jobless rate steadily downward from a peak of 7.8 percent in June, the latest included diverse gains in jobs, including factory jobs, and did not result from a shrinking labor force.
Some economists said the figures meant that moderate expansion had replaced weak recovery.  [ Page 1. ]  The economies of New York, New Jersey and Connecticut appear to be bottoming out.  [ 47. ]
Senator Lloyd Bentsen has emerged as the top choice to be Treasury Secretary, Clinton campaign officials confirmed.  [ 1. ]


Corrections
A map in Science Times on Nov. 24 showing nuclear dump sites used by the former Soviet Union defined a unit of radioactivity, the curie, incorrectly.
It is the amount of radioactive material in which 37 billion atoms disintegrate per second.


Pretoria Blames Rebels in Attack
The South African Police said today that they believed a black guerrilla faction was responsible for a satchel bomb that exploded in a popular steakhouse late Thursday night.
The attack wounded 19 patrons and added to growing alarm about a threatened terrorist campaign against white civilians.
No one took responsibility for the blast in Queenstown in the Eastern Cape, but the police said they suspected the guerrilla wing of the Pan Africanist Congress, a militant black nationalist group, which said it had mounted a deadly raid last Saturday at a golf club 60 miles away in King William's Town.
Target Date for Vote
The attacks were the first cases of political terror against whites since the 1980's.
They erupted as the Government was engaged in a new round of talks with the African National Congress aimed at speeding the transition to democracy.


Buying Stock? Ways to Save on Brokers' Commissions
By shopping around assiduously and keeping abreast of changes, investors can make significant savings on brokerage commissions.
Perhaps the most important recent change has been the introduction of automatic trading through touch-tone telephones and with personal-computer software.
Fidelity Investments began such services in February; Charles Schwab &amp; Company has gradually introduced them over the last few years.
At both companies, clients who make automatic trades get a 10 percent discount off the regular charge for trades made through a telephone representative.


Puckett Stays Put With Twins; Swindell Goes Home to Houston
Carl Pohlad, the owner of the Minnesota Twins, made a decision last summer that wound up costing him $2.5 million.
Kirby Puckett made a decision early yesterday that might have cost him up to $5 million.
The Twins had a tentative agreement with Puckett, their franchise player, early last season on a five-year, $27.5 million contract, but Pohlad vetoed it.
But faced with the sudden possibility that they could lose Puckett to another team as a free agent, the Twins retained him yesterday with a five-year, $30 million agreement.


Kenneth D. Zumwalt, Editor, 78
Kenneth D. Zumwalt, a former civilian managing editor of the European edition of Stars and Stripes, the newspaper of the United States armed forces, and a former senior editor of The San Diego Union, died Nov. 25 at his home in San Diego.
He was 78 years old.
A son, Richard, said Mr.
Zumwalt had had heart problems and had recently undergone an operation on his hip.
Mr.
Zumwalt was born in Williams, Calif.
He enlisted in the Army in 1942 and two years later was assigned to the Paris edition of Stars and Stripes as a copy editor.
He later worked in the newspaper's office in Belgium and Germany and stayed on as a civilian managing editor after his discharge from the Army in 1946.


Alaska's Plan to Shoot Wolves Is an Outrage; Predation Helps Herds
To the Editor:
Alaska's plan to kill wolves is destructive not only to Alaska's wildlife but to wildlife management and even to economic interests, which are presumably driving the proposal.


PNC Buying Ohio Bancorp In Deal Worth $250 Million
Continuing an aggressive acquisition strategy, the PNC Financial Corporation of Pittsburgh, the nation's 13th-largest banking company, said yesterday that it had reached a definitive agreement to acquire Ohio Bancorp in an exchange of stock worth about $250 million.
Ohio Bancorp, based in Youngstown, has more than $1.7 billion in assets and more than 50 offices throughout eastern Ohio.


CHRONICLE
Why did the invitation to a party for CAROL BELLAMY'S 50th birthday say "contribution requested?" Did that mean that the former City Council President, who ran for State Comptroller in 1990, was considering another run for office?
"I was raised to believe that you should pay off past debts before incurring new ones," Ms.
Bellamy said yesterday.
"So I am pleased that this party was able to retire my 1990 debt, so I can move on to new debts." But she insisted, "I have no intention of doing anything in 1993."


Poet of the South for the Inauguration
Maya Angelou has a vivid memory of a frail and aged Robert Frost struggling to read his poem at John F. Kennedy's inauguration in 1961, the cold wind blowing at his notes and the sun glaring in his eyes.
Now, a generation later, the white man is replaced by a black woman as the poet to whom the eyes and ears of a nation will be turned during another inauguration, Bill Clinton's.


Khmer Rouge Frees 6 U.N. Soldiers in Cambodia
Khmer Rouge guerrillas today freed six United Nations military observers who had been held captive in central Cambodia this week and warned the United Nations to keep its peacekeeping troops out of Khmer Rouge areas.
The peacekeepers -- three from Britain, two from the Philippines and one from New Zealand -- were abducted on Tuesday in an incident that increased United Nations concern that the Khmer Rouge were on the verge of resuming a full-scale civil war.


Motorcyclists May Be Wonderful People, but Oh! That Noise!
To the Editor:
I agree with Barbara Ann Mahoney ("Forget the Cliches About Motorcyclists," letter, Nov. 19) that motorcyclists are a varied lot, and I salute their free spirit and charitable works.
However, she fails to mention the specter now haunting motorcycling that threatens to destroy its reputation: illegal noise modifications.


MTS Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Why Didn't the N.B.A. Give Magic an Assist?
To the Editor:
Let me get this straight.
You think Karl Malone is courageous for publicly voicing his irrational fears about contracting H.I.V. through physical contact with Magic Johnson ("Malone Is in the Eye of the Storm," sports article, Nov. 8), yet you feel Magic is a coward for retiring in the face of an avalanche of criticism.
You have an odd way of distinguishing the good guys from the bad guys.


G.E. Whistle-Blower Is Awarded $13.4 Million
A former employee of the General Electric Company was awarded $13.4 million by a Federal judge yesterday for bringing forward evidence that the company defrauded the United States in a scandal involving the sale of military jet engines to Israel.
The award was the largest to date under the Federal whistle-blower statue.


Pulaski Furniture reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 1


Bells Toll for Rosset in Davis Cup Upset
The Swiss cowbells, quieted by Andre Agassi's derring-do this afternoon, reigned supreme tonight as Switzerland's Olympic champion, Marc Rosset, upset the world's No. 1 player, Jim Courier of the United States, in a blustery five-set confrontation that evened the final round of Davis Cup competition at 1-1.
The stone-faced Courier and rubber-featured Rosset battled for nearly four hours just to reach the fifth and decisive set.
Once there, Rosset surged ahead by two breaks, wavered, and finally held on for a 6-3, 6-7 (11-9), 3-6, 6-4, 6-4 triumph that left him flat on his back in disbelief and sent Courier from the court in a similar state.


L. G. Derthick Sr., 85, A U.S. Education Chief
Lawrence G. Derthick Sr., a former United States Commissioner of Education, died yesterday at his home in Signal Mountain, Tenn.
He was 85 years old.
Mr.
Derthick had suffered for several years from Alzheimer's disease, said his son, Alan W. Derthick, of Signal Mountain.


Dance in Review
3-D Dance Hudson Theater


Some Software to Ease The Chores of Filing
THE colorful opening screen of Chipsoft's new Turbotax Personal Tax Planner should bring a smile to the face of any aficionado of computer or video games, even if the action seems a bit plodding.
The payoff: triumph over the tax man.
This computer program offers taxpayers ways to cut their tax bills, and it is remarkably easy to use.
It is available for I.B.M. and compatible computers using either the DOS or Windows operating systems as well as for Macintosh computers.


Bill's List; Crack Down on Deadbeat Dads
During the Presidential campaign, Bill Clinton promised to crack down on people who were not making their child-support payments.
He can deliver on that pledge, providing he addresses the overwhelming backlog of cases confronting government agencies.
State governments are collecting on less than 20 percent of 13 million cases.
Tens of thousands of new cases pour in each month, threatening to overwhelm understaffed state agencies.
Until a way can be found to reduce those caseloads to manageable levels, Mr.
Clinton's call for tougher and more effective enforcement of current child-support laws will have little chance of succeeding.


An Annual Quest Is About to Be Renewed


I.A.A.F. Calls Reynolds Ruling Worthless
Track and field's London-based world governing body dismissed a United States court judgment awarding BUTCH REYNOLDS $27.3 million as worthless and said yesterday it would consider filing a libel suit against him.
The International Amateur Athletic Federation also said it could impose a further ban on Reynolds, the world record-holder at 400 meters.
His doping suspension ends Dec. 31.


Classical Music in Review
Petras Geniusas, Pianist Alice Tully Hall


Foundation Executive Named To Hartford Education Post
An executive with the Ford Foundation who was formerly a dean at Wesleyan University was appointed today to be chairman of the State Board of Education.
The new chairman, Edgar F. Beckham of North Haven, was named to succeed John F. Mannix, who announced his resignation last week.
Mr.
Beckham's appointment is subject to confirmation by the General Assembly.


CHRONICLE
ALEXANDER LIBERMAN, the venerable editorial director of Conde Nast, has two reasons to celebrate: his book "Marlene: An Intimate Photographic Memoir" is being celebrated by Random House, and he plans to be married on Monday.
At a book party Thursday at the TriBeCa Film Center attended by dozens of relatives, friends and Conde Nast associates, most of the talk was of Marlene Dietrich, her mystique and her earthiness.
But in the course of the evening, Mr.
Liberman, who is 80 years old, let it slip that he would be married on Monday "in a courthouse, to MELINDA PECHANGCO."


Jones Hopes to Hit Stride in Atlantic City
ROY JONES JR.  paused briefly the other day in Atlantic City for a little schmoozing and a little prefight hype.
Then he bounded off.
Jones is in a rush these days, perhaps because he is approaching the threshold of boxing stardom.
He is four years removed from winning a silver medal at the 1988 Olympics and 19 fights into an unbeaten professional career, and tonight he takes on PERCY HARRIS (15-3) at the Trump Taj Mahal in a scheduled 12-rounder.


Classical Music in Review
Chamber Players League of Composers/International Societyof Contemporary Music Merkin Concert Hall


CHRONICLE
It was a distinctly low-key way to announce a turning point for the Rolling Stones.
On Thursday, during a news program broadcast by MTV Europe, MICK JAGGER confirmed rumors that BILL WYMAN, the 56-year-old bass player who has been with the band since its formation in 1962, would be leaving.
"Yes, seriously yes, Bill has decided he doesn't want to carry on," Mr.
Jagger said.
"For whatever reasons, he doesn't want to do it anymore. So we are looking for a new bass player. I don't think it will faze us too much. We'll miss Bill, but we'll get someone good, a good dancer."


Armstrong Pharmaceuticals Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


George Michaels, 80, Legislator Who Changed Abortion Law, Dies
Former Assemblyman George M. Michaels, who cast the deciding vote to liberalize New York's abortion law in 1970, thereby ending his political career, died on Thursday at his home in Auburn, N.Y.
He was 80 years old.
He died after a long illness, according to the Brew Funeral Home in Auburn.


Teen-Agers Split on Birth Control Plan
The classroom had about 30 girls, 13 to 19 years of age, and every one of them pregnant.
They were discussing birth control and the city health commissioner's proposal to offer them Norplant, the birth control implant, starting in January.
In Baltimore, a city that has one of the highest rates of teen-age pregnancy in the country, the Laurence G. Paquin School is the only high school for pregnant teen-agers.
For these young women, who fight acne along with morning sickness, the issue is not whether to use birth control -- nearly all have used the contraceptive pill at one time or another -- but whether Norplant is now the right birth control for them.


Two Sentenced For an Attempt At Child Selling
A couple who was accused by Suffolk County of trying to sell their two young children for $1,500 pleaded guilty today to attempting an unauthorized adoption, a crime under state social service law.
The children's mother, Karen Gelveles, 31 years old, was sentenced by Judge Gerard D'Emilio of First District Court to four months in the Suffolk County jail.
Mitchell Dedes, 23, her husband, was sentenced to one year of probation.
The District Attorney's office said Ms.
Gelveles had received a jail sentence because she had a prior record, including a probation violation.


Spectral Diagnostics reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


YELTSIN IS WARNING ASSEMBLY ON VOTE
President Boris N. Yeltsin, in a brief but sharp address to an increasingly fractious Congress of People's Deputies, urged lawmakers today not to approve a set of constitutional amendments that he said would weaken the Government, endanger economic reform and lead the country to anarchy.
The Congress, the country's highest legislative body, is set to vote on Saturday in secret balloting on changes to the Constitution that would require the President to submit the nomination and dismissal of top Cabinet ministers to Parliament for approval.


Motorcyclists May Be Wonderful People, but Oh! That Noise!; A Testosterone Storm
To the Editor:
I almost coughed up my morning coffee when I read Barbara Ann Mahoney's Nov. 19 paean to bikers.
Her letter ends, "If you're on a motorcycle, you're welcome anywhere."


Executive Changes at La Roche
Hoffmann-La Roche Inc. announced yesterday that Irwin Lerner would step down on Jan. 1 after 12 years as president and chief executive of the American unit of Roche Holding Ltd., the big Swiss health-care company.
Patrick Zenner, 45 years old, a senior vice president, will succeed Mr.
Lerner, 62, who becomes chairman of the board and executive committee in January.
He will retire on Sept. 1, 1993.


Navistar International reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Iniki Puts Insurer Out Of Business
Battered by claims from Hurricane Iniki, Hawaii's fifth-largest insurer, the Hawaiian Insurance Group, said today that it would leave the insurance business.
Hawaiian Electric Industries, the Honolulu-based utility company, said it would write off its remaining investment in the insurer, a wholly owned subsidiary, in the fourth quarter because estimates of policyholder claims from the hurricane had increased significantly.


Microbix Biosystems reports earnings for Year Sept 30


U.S. Judge Grants New Trial In a Drug Case in the Bronx
A Federal judge has thrown out the conviction of a man on drug charges because prosecutors failed to tell the defense that a Federal drug agent who was an important witness in the case was also the target of a corruption investigation.
Judge Shirley Wohl Kram ruled on Thursday that if prosecutors had notified the defendant's lawyers of the investigation, as they were required to do, the defense could have attacked the agent's credibility, possibly undermining the prosecution's case.
She granted the defendant, Carmelo Bravo, a new trial.


Philadelphia Schools Plan to Screen for Weapons
Prompted by a shotgun attack and two stabbings within school walls this week, officials here plan to issue metal detectors to all 40 Philadelphia high schools to prevent weapons from being carried into the buildings.
"Violence in society, particularly adolescent and teen-age violence, has reached epidemic proportions," Dr.
Constance E. Clayton, Superintendent of Schools, said Wednesday.
"Our schools are no longer exempt from this American phenomenon."


Alaska's Plan to Shoot Wolves Is an Outrage
To the Editor:
We have to sit on our outrage a lot these days, but it is impossible to remain silent when confronted with your article on shooting wolves in Alaska in order that there will be larger caribou herds for tourists to look at and hunters to shoot (Nov. 19).
Surely we have evolved beyond this kind of thinking by now.


An Assertive Approach to Somali Aid
To the Editor:
In his Nov. 19 column ("Shoot to Feed") Leslie H. Gelb advocated a much more aggressive approach by the international community in providing relief assistance to those starving in Somalia.
Now the United Nations, with United States encouragement and an offer of American support troops, has decided to be more assertive.


Chapter 11 Offers No Discounts For Macy
It is not unusual for lawyers and bankruptcy judges to wrangle over fees and expenses.
But a report filed in the bankruptcy proceedings of R. H. Macy &amp; Company illustrates just what happens when a big, fat turkey lands in bankruptcy court and its advisers start scrambling to carve off a juicy slice.
Never mind that the department store chain rolled up a whopping $1.3 billion loss in its last fiscal year and that its cash flow was nil.
In June, July and August, the lawyers, accountants and financial advisers working for Macy and its creditors piled up bills for services and expenses amounting to $5,705,591.30, or about $62,000 a day.


Crown Hts. Beating Described In 2 Sharply Different Ways
Leaders of the Crown Heights Lubavitch community and the police offered further conflicting accounts yesterday of events surrounding the beating of a black man that has made Mayor David N. Dinkins the target of broadening criticism from Jewish groups.
Among the new assertions offered by the Hasidic community -- and denigrated by the police -- were that tools belonging to the victim included items taken from inside a Lubavitch school that members of the ultra-Orthodox Jewish community have accused the victim of burglarizing.


Longview Fibre reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Buddy Schwab Dead; Choreographer
Buddy Schwab, a choreographer, dancer and director, died on Tuesday at the Henry Ford Hospital in Detroit.
He was 62 years old and lived in Los Angeles.
He died of lung cancer, said his sister, Patricia Cywinski of Novi, Mich.


How to Turn Audacity Into Song and Dance
When Adam Arkin went to audition for the director Jerry Zaks a few weeks ago, it was for a job he was eminently qualified for: a role in Mr.
Zaks's new project, the David Henry Hwang comedy "Face Value," which is headed for Broadway in the spring.
But what Mr.
Arkin got was an offer for which his experience really had not prepared him.
An accomplished comic actor (witness his television stint as a wacko chef on "Northern Exposure") who was last on Broadway in "I Hate Hamlet," Mr.
Arkin had never danced and barely ever sung on stage.
But Mr.
Zaks asked him to stand in for Nathan Lane as the lovable loser Nathan Detroit in "Guys and Dolls" while Mr.
Lane went off to make a movie.
Mr.
Arkin said he had only one question when he learned of the interest of Mr.
Zaks and the music supervisor, Edward Strauss: " 'Do they know I have no musical experience of any kind?' "


Tax Credit Likely to Be Retroactive
Moving to prevent delays in discretionary capital investments, the two most senior Congressional tax writers announced yesterday that any tax credits adopted next year for such business spending would be retroactive to yesterday.
The announcement by Representative Dan Rostenkowski, the Illinois Democrat who is chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee, and Senator Lloyd Bentsen, the Texas Democrat who is chairman of the Senate Finance Committee, was intended to encourage businesses not to wait to buy costly items like machinery, Congressional aides said.


Excerpt From Fernandez's Book Recalls Drug Use
Following is an excerpt from "Tales Out of School," a new book by Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez.
The beginning of my own fateful turn about came in one night of horror on 135th Street when I was still enrolled at Commerce High.
Jackie Moore had become my closest friend during that time, partly because of the experimenting we were doing with heroin.
Jackie was a Scotch-Irish kid from a poor family, with no father at home.
Actually, he lived outside the neighborhood, up in the 130's, but we were very close, to the point of swapping clothes to wear.


Nassau Given Time to Explore Sites for Sludge
A Federal judge today moved Nassau County one step closer to jettisoning its plans to build two sludge processing plants and developing an alternative that would involve trucking thousands of tons of waste to processing sites outside the state.
Judge Jacob Mishler of Federal District Court here granted the county a 90-day extension on a consent decree it had signed in 1989 with the Federal and state governments that required Nassau to award contracts for the plants by Dec. 1.
In his decision, Judge Mishler wrote that the added time "will only allow Nassau to explore other long-range alternatives less onerous" than building the plants at a cost of $200 million.
Proposal Due March 1
Nassau must come before the court with a new proposal by March 1 or be prepared to start construction of the plants, the decision said.


Du Pont Halts Compensations in Crop-Loss Furor
After spending $500 million to compensate farmers for crop failures linked to one of its agricultural chemicals, E. I. Du Pont de Nemours &amp; Company has reversed course, rejecting any blame for the damage and halting its payments.
Du Pont officials said the move, announced early last month, was based on new research into the chemical, Benlate.
They described today what they said was an exhaustive scientific hunt for clues at a public meeting here of an advisory committee to the state Department of Agriculture.


Du Pont Halts Compensations in Crop-Loss Furor
After spending $500 million to compensate farmers for crop failures linked to one of its agricultural chemicals, E. I. Du Pont de Nemours &amp; Company has reversed course, rejecting any blame for the damage and halting its payments.
Du Pont officials said the move, announced early last month, was based on new research into the chemical, Benlate.
They described today what they said was an exhaustive scientific hunt for clues at a public meeting here of an advisory committee to the state Department of Agriculture.


Bridge
Social bridge games are sometimes played for tiny stakes, a tenth of a cent a point or even less, and the winners at the end of an evening may collect two or three dollars.
At the other end of the scale is a game in London, where the regular stake is $:1 a point, so that 100 honors is worth $152.
The game is at the TGR Club, perhaps the most luxurious setting for bridge anywhere in the world.
On the diagramed deal the South cards were held by Howard Cohen, a real-estate tycoon who is a founder of the club.
In England, where weak two-bids are not normally used, East could have bid two spades, showing a strong spade suit with at least eight playing tricks.
Perhaps his 60 part-score influenced him to bid two clubs, strong and artificial, the likely choice of many on this side of the Atlantic.


Review/Jazz; Trying to Match a Legend That Kept Changing
Commissioning new music based on the career of a jazz giant seems like an ideal way of escaping the stale routines that plague most of the "tribute" concerts on the jazz circuit.
That, at least, is the theory.
Miles Davis, the subject of Thursday night's tribute at Carnegie Hall, made some of the 20th century's more influential music; he also made some terrifyingly bad music that shook the idea of genius.
Garnett Brown, who composed a long suite covering Mr.
Davis's tortured career, decided to put it all in.
He made a mistake.


Goodbye Tears Mix With Hope of Adventure
It was down to 18 degrees overnight at Fort Drum, N.Y., and with a bone-numbing wind blowing in yesterday across Lake Ontario, some soldiers were telling friends that it was not the worst time to pack up and leave for Somalia, where there is no snow in December.
But that was the sunny side of a wave of conflicting feelings shared yesterday by about 5,000 members of the United States Army's 10th Mountain Division as they and their families prepared for their imminent deployment to Somalia.


Supermarkets General Holdings Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Puckett Stays Put With Twins; Swindell Goes Home to Houston
Carl Pohlad, the owner of the Minnesota Twins, made a decision last summer that wound up costing him $2.5 million.
Kirby Puckett made a decision early yesterday that might have cost him up to $5 million.
The Twins had a tentative agreement with Puckett, their franchise player, early last season on a five-year, $27.5 million contract, but Pohlad vetoed it.
But faced with the sudden possibility that they could lose Puckett to another team as a free agent, the Twins retained him yesterday with a five-year, $30 million agreement.


Data on Region's Economy Improve
The economies of New York, New Jersey and Connecticut, which have been hit much harder by the recession than the country as a whole, appear to be at or near the bottom, according to employment data released yesterday and Thursday.
"Some of the darkest clouds over the tristate economy are breaking up," said Samuel M. Ehrenhalt, the New York-based regional commissioner of the Federal Bureau of Labor Statistics.
"But it is much too soon to throw your hat up in the air."


Review/Dance; Hispanic Versatility, From Dreams of Glory to Nightmares
Ballet Hispanico stressed the eclecticism of its repertory and the versatility of its company on Thursday night at the Joyce Theater.
Everyone always danced well.
But they looked best when the works were concise.
Nancy Turano made a fine impression in "Llamada." Minute by minute and step by step she appeared to be a woman gradually gaining strength in this solo choreographed by William Whitener to recorded music by Sor, Romero and Torroba.
Beginning by standing with her back to the audience, she looked remote and hesitant.
But when she faced front, her presence grew increasingly vivid, and when she raised her hands above her head with her fingers spread, she could have wearing a crown.


Crossing a Line, and Redrawing It
The decision to intervene in Somalia marks a turning point in American foreign policy: for the first time American troops are entering a country uninvited, not to shore up an anti-Communist regime, protect American wealth or stifle a strategic threat, but simply to feed starving people.
President Bush, with the enthusiastic backing of President-elect Clinton, has crossed a red line.


Review/Music; A Diamond Symphony For a 150th Anniversary
If one were to tell a roomful of musical pundits that the question "whither opera?" has become tiresome, inevitably the conversation would turn to "whither the symphony?" Is there a future for the symphony?
Or did it die out long ago, with Mahler, Sibelius and/or Shostakovich?
Alas, this topic is even more tiresome.
The symphony has been a malleable and futuristic form all along, re-invented by every composer who seriously addressed it.
In the hands of contemporary composers as diverse as Robert Simpson, Witold Lutoslawski, Alfred Schnittke and Per Norgard, it remains a vibrant organism, resisting musicological autopsies and epitaphs.
Signs of life could be clearly read in the Symphony No. 11 of David Diamond, given its world premiere Thursday night by the New York Philharmonic under Kurt Masur.
This flawed but intensely ambitious work sprawls across three-quarters of an hour, defying a public that prefers to digest new music in 20-minute morsels.
In the best tradition of Schubert and Bruckner, the structure is capped with a finale that throws out a superfluity of themes and goes on way too long.
Mr.
Diamond's familiar acerbic harmonies and terse lyricism hold sway, giving the piece a somewhat antique sound throughout.
But the confidence and conviction of the voice are unmistakable and, in the end, rather impressive.


Tyson's Lawyer Files a New Appeal
The attorney for MIKE TYSON said evidence from the boxer's rape trial shows his victim and her parents had undisclosed motives to lie while testifying.
The lawyer, ALAN M. DERSHOWITZ, on Thursday began a second appeal of Tyson's conviction for raping DESIREE WASHINGTON, a Rhode Island contestant in the Miss Black America pageant held in Indianapolis in July 1991.


Classical Music in Review
Jeffrey Siegel Pianist 92d Street Y


Ontario Police Issue Warrant for Lindros
Rookie ERIC LINDROS of the Philadelphia Flyers has been accused of elbowing a woman at an Ontario bar and spitting beer in her face, police said yesterday.
A warrant was issued for his arrest after the woman filed a complaint about Lindros and several other young men, Durham Region Police Constable JIM GRIMLEY said.
Others are expected to be charged, Grimley said.


Classical Music in Review
Jose Cuetoand Nancy Roldan Violin-piano duo, Weill Recital Hall


Datapoint Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Hear Ye! Hear Ye! Hear This.
Today, the Committee to Encourage Judicial Service of the New York City Bar Association is sponsoring a conference on how to become a judge.
Amid all the talk of obtaining a judgeship, there is likely to be little about the pitfalls of being a judge.
Here are seven "findings of fact" based on my experience.
Sitting all day is exhausting.


Regulators Seize Carteret Savings
The Carteret Savings Bank, New Jersey's largest savings and loan, was placed in receivership yesterday by Federal regulators, who chartered a new institution in its place.
The new institution, Carteret Federal Savings Bank, will assume certain assets and liabilities of the old institution, operating under the direction of the Resolution Trust Corporation, the agency responsible for dealing with the savings and loan crisis.


Coup Fever in Venezuela
It matters very much to Americans -- North, South and Central -- that the coup fever raging in Venezuela finds a lasting cure.
President Carlos Andres Perez is, plainly, a flawed and unpopular politician.
But he is just as plainly Venezuela's legitimately elected leader.
To replace him by the ballot box next year would reinforce democracy throughout the region.
To replace him by violence before then would undermine troubled democracies elsewhere.


The Top 10 Junk Bond Mutual Funds
Junk bond funds, called "high current yield" funds by the industry, are the highest-risk bond category.
They invest in lower-grade issues rated below BBB by Standard &amp; Poor's or Bbb by Moody's.
To compensate for the risk, junk bond funds have the highest return potential.
Investors have seen the sunny side lately -- the funds yielded 9.78 percent, on average, in October and returned 16 percent in the last 12 months, making them the best performing of all bond funds.


Piedmont Natural Gas reports earnings for Year Oct 31


Equity Loans Lure, but There Are Risks
With interest rates falling to levels that haven't been seen for decades, more homeowners are applying for home equity loans to consolidate other types of consumer debt.
There are two reasons for the popularity of these loans, which are just ordinary second mortgages despite their trendy name.
First, the rates on home equity loans are much lower than those on other types of consumer debt like credit card balances, car loans and personal loans.
Second, with the phase-out of interest deductions for most other types of consumer loans, home equity loans are the only type of tax-deductible consumer borrowing except for regular home mortgages.


COMPANY BRIEFS
AMWAY CORP., a pharmaceutical manufacturer based in Ada, Mich., has expanded its presence in the former East bloc of Europe with an affiliate in Poland, where 55,000 sales kits were purchased within days of the new market's official opening.


Religion Notes
'Others' Are Big Winners
While some people waited with bated breath on Election Night to see how many Democrats and how many Republicans would be in the new Congress, others waited for another analysis: How would the Methodists, Baptists, Jews, Roman Catholics and others do?
A new analysis, released this week, has found that "others" -- those affiliated with smaller religious groups or not affiliated with any religious group -- were the big winners this year.
Among the larger religious groups, United Methodists and Episcopalians lost ground while Catholics and Jews remained about the same.


Who Is Left Standing? Virginia and San Diego
Virginia displayed its undeniable superiority as the nation's top college soccer team in today's National Collegiate Athletic Association semifinals, overwhelming Duke, 3-0, before the first standing-room crowd in the 34-year history of the tournament.
By knocking off their Atlantic Coast Conference rival, the Cavaliers earned the right to defend their title in Sunday's championship game.
They will face the University of San Diego, which beat Davidson College in overtime, 3-2, in the other semifinal.


Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF Price Shares Lead in South Africa  Playing in scorching heat, Nick Price shot a five-under-par 67 yesterday to share the lead at five-under 139 with two South Africans after two rounds of the Million Dollar Challenge golf tournament in Sun City, South Africa.
David Frost and Ernie Els joined Price atop the leader board in the quest for golf's top prize, $1 million.
Both shot second-round 69's.
They were two strokes ahead of the world's No. 1 player, Nick Faldo of Britain, and an American, John Cook.
Fred Couples, the Masters champion, was at 144. (AP)
Mochrie and Forsman Best in Penney: Dottie Mochrie and Dan Forsman scored birdies on four of the last five holes for an 8-under 63 that gave them a 13-under 129 and a three-stroke lead yesterday after two rounds of the J. C. Penney Classic at Tarpon Springs, Fla.
Tied for second were Beth Daniel and Davis Love 3d and the brother-sister team of Larry Rinker and Laurie Rinker-Graham.
The first-round leaders, Hollis Stacy and Jay Haas, shot a five-over 76 to drop to 23d. (AP) SKIING  Kitt Upstaged by Alpine Winds  A. J. Kitt of the United States was not discouraged despite being deprived of a chance to defend his country's only victory in the last eight years in a men's World Cup ski race.
"Even if the race is canceled, I think this proves I'm back," Kitt said yesterday at Val d'Isere, France, before a decision was made to cancel the men's downhill because of high winds.
Kitt injured his left ankle last November and wore a special boot for it yesterday, but said the ankle gave him no problems in his opening run.
He held the lead with a time of 1 minute 52.17 seconds before the race was called off after only 22 competitors made their runs. (AP)


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-6  BUSH ORDERS UNITS TO SOMALIA
President Bush ordered troops into Somalia on a mission to save thousands of starving people.
The Pentagon outlined an operation that will leave soldiers and marines in Somalia well into the Administration of President Bill Clinton. 1  POLICY CHALLENGE FOR CLINTON
News analysis: By sending troops to feed starving people rather than to stifle a strategic threat or protect American wealth, the United States has crossed a red line in foreign policy.
The question is, where will Bill Clinton redraw it?  1


Fetal Tissue Transplants -- and Hope
Ten years ago Juanita Lopez, 40, and George Carillo, 52, were turned into living statues when synthetic heroin destroyed the part of their brains that produces dopamine, leaving them unable to speak and close to immobile.
Like victims of Parkinson's disease, a movement disorder also caused by brain-cell death, they were treated with a drug called levodopa.
L-Dopa, as viewers of the television program "Nova" saw this week, produced constant involuntary movements in Ms.
Lopez, allowed Mr.
Carillo to walk in a curious Chaplinesque shuffle -- and inflicted both with terrifying hallucinations.


Reporter's Notebook; An End Date for the Other Transition
Arkansans who have been waiting for weeks to hear what would happen when Bill Clinton resigns as Governor -- some in an almost ungracious state of anticipation -- received mixed news today.
President-elect Clinton, it seems, will be leaving office by Dec. 14.
And his successor, Lieut.
Gov.
Jim Guy Tucker, announced today that as his first official act as Governor he would probably try to raise taxes.


With Rap, Not Force, 3 Chicago Police Officers Make Progress
Before they discovered the power of song, Eric Davis and his colleagues had a hard time winning friends and trust at Cabrini-Green, the vast public housing development on the city's North Side.
To the hardened children and teen-agers of Cabrini-Green, Mr.
Davis and his partners, Randy Holcomb and James Martin, were spies from the enemy camp.


Value City Department Stores Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 24


Chefs International reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 25


Majors Says His Goodbyes to Volunteers
JOHNNY MAJORS bade farewell to the Tennessee football team yesterday in Knoxville, Tenn.
Majors, who is leaving his alma mater after 16 seasons under a $600,000 contract buyout, said he would not coach the 17th-ranked Volunteers one last time in the Hall of Fame Bowl on New Year's Day against Boston College.
"I have decided to step aside and give up my coaching responsibilities," Majors said yesterday after a team meeting.
The university had named assistant head coach PHILLIP FULMER as Majors's successor, effective immediately for recruiting.
Fulmer would have officially taken over all other aspects of the team after the bowl. (AP)


Democrat Wins Senate Seat in North Dakota
Senator Kent Conrad, who decided against seeking a second term for his own seat, won a special election today to fill the seat left vacant by the death of North Dakota's other Senator, Quentin N. Burdick.
With 85 percent of the state's precincts reporting, unofficial totals showed Mr.
Conrad with 72,536 votes, or 64 percent, to 37,864 votes, or 33 percent, for his Republican opponent, Jack Dalrymple.


A Turn in Advanced-TV Race
Already hampered by technical glitches, a partnership between the Zenith Electronics Corporation and A.T.&amp; T. suffered another setback today in the federally supervised competition to establish an American standard for high-definition television.
The head of a Federal advisory committee that has been testing four rival systems for HDTV, which promises wide-screen pictures almost as crisp as those in a movie theater, said the panel would not conduct additional tests before the date in February when it is to make a recommendation to the Federal Communications Commission.


INSIDE
Du Pont Halts Compensation
After paying out $500 million for crop losses tied to a pesticide, Du Pont declared that new studies showed the product was not to blame.
Page 9.
N.
Dakota Democrat Wins
Senator Kent Conrad won a special election in North Dakota to fill the seat left vacant by the death of Senator Quentin N. Burdick.
Page 8.
U.S.
Puts Off Sale to China
Worried about Chinese sales of missiles, the Bush Administration delayed a decision on whether to sell a supercomputer to Beijing.
Page 6.
Duty to Homeless May Ease
New York State and city officials agreed the city does not have to provide immediate shelter to every family claiming to be homeless.
But the effect on policy is unclear.
Page 21.
When It's Easy to Borrow
Americans have borrowed nearly $400 billion in home equity loans, drawn by low rates and tax deductibility.
Your Money, page 33.


SALE OF COMPUTER TO CHINA DELAYED
The Bush Administration today postponed a decision on whether to sell a sophisticated supercomputer to China, considering evidence that Beijing recently broke its promises to Washington by delivering new ballistic missile technology to Pakistan, senior Administration officials said today.
The White House had hoped to use the sale of a high-speed computer, which is supposed to be used for weather forecasting, as a way to improve relations with Beijing which were strained even further when the United States announced the sale of advanced warplanes to Taiwan.


Containing the Crown Heights Fire
The decades-old hostilities between blacks and Jews in Brooklyn's Crown Heights may never be fully resolved.
The cultural gap between the Lubavitcher Hasidim and the Caribbean-American blacks is as vast as any imaginable; common ground will be difficult to find.
Common ground will be even harder to find if New York City's politicians, with an eye to next year's mayoral elections, choose to exploit Crown Heights for their own purposes.
New York's officials have a special burden not to let the hostilities spread; politicians of every stripe need to start choosing their words with greater care.
The office of the mayor is a good place to begin.


Observer; Mind You, I've Said Nothing
Here are four ideas for columns I am too timid to touch.
They are offered free to all who enjoy receiving abusive mail:
1.
A Little Respect for Lechery, Please:
Accused of sexual harassment, Senator Bob Packwood says he has an alcohol problem.
With this he seems to acknowledge the accusations but plead that alcoholism excuses them.
This reflects medical science's success in persuading us that alcoholism is a disease, hence deserving of compassion.


SBN Systems reports earnings for Year Sept 30


Times Co. Says Holiday Advertising Is Off
The New York Times Company said yesterday that Christmas season advertising for its flagship newspaper was running substantially below last year's figures, and that it would report lower operating earnings for the fourth quarter of 1992.
The company said advertising linage in The Times for the fourth quarter was running 4 percent to 6 percent below the 1991 level.


Crawling to the Forefront Of the Ecological Struggle
THOUGH the symbiosis between mankind and worms has developed quite nicely over the eons, Sheila Brown is trying to do even more to hold up her end of the relationship.
Specifically, she is doling out her wet garbage to more than 1,000 red worms who are living in a specially constructed box in the kitchen of her West End Avenue apartment.
She puts banana peels, grapefruit rinds, leftovers and coffee grinds into the box and then sits back waiting for the worms to turn it all into what she describes as "incredibly rich nutrients."


Quanex Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Nets Dig Out From Under and Win in Overtime
People actually began leaving the arena as the Nets were trailing the San Antonio Spurs late in the game tonight.
It was a mistake, because what they missed was an all-star performance by Kenny Anderson, an acrobatic shot by Drazen Petrovic that sent the contest into overtime and a huge 108-103 victory in which the Nets displayed an inordinate amount of heart.
And all of it happened with their star forward, Derrick Coleman, who was out of the game because of a knee injury.
The Nets, on an emotional high, left immediately after the game on a flight to Miami, where they will play the Heat tonight.
But their bodies are sure to be sore.
Four starters, including Anderson, had more than 40 minutes of playing time.
At one point, New Jersey was down by 18 points but as forward Rick Mahorn said: "We didn't want to roll over. We were having too much fun being ourselves."


David B. Smith, 81, Electronics Expert In Communications
David B. Smith, a retired communications engineer and professor, died on Thursday at Bryn Mawr Hospital in Bryn Mawr, Pa.
He was 81 years old and lived in Gladwyne, Pa.
He died after a brief illness, his family said.


Lev Zetlin, 74, an Expert on Structural Disasters
Lev Zetlin, an internationally known civil engineer who helped to design innovative buildings and was an expert on structural disasters, died yesterday at St.
Mary's Hospital in Milwaukee.
He was 74 years old and lived in Manhattan and Palm Beach, Fla.
He died of cardiac arrest, his family said.


The Cheapest Way to Borrow
Home equity loans offer low rates and tax deductibility, but if you don't pay, you lose your home.
See page 33


Zuckerman to Reopen Bargaining With Daily News Typographers
A day after he lost a court fight with a union of typographers at The Daily News, Mortimer B. Zuckerman prepared to open talks with that union, Mr.
Zuckerman's spokeswoman said yesterday.
Renewed talks with the New York Typographical Union No. 6 and a continuing standoff with a second union, the New York Newspaper Guild, could delay Mr.
Zuckerman's planned purchase of The News, which was to have occurred by the end of this month.


Albany Accord May Ease Duty Of New York To Homeless
In what could portend a significant change in New York City's treatment of homeless families, state and city officials seemed to agree today that the city is not required by the state to provide immediate shelter to every family claiming to be homeless.
How that agreement may be translated into policy is far from certain, and the courts may ultimately have more say than any state and city officials who have discussed the issue in the last two days.


NCH Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


In Chancellor's Past Drug Use, a Lesson
In a remarkably frank memoir, New York City Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez describes how he regularly snorted and injected heroin for years as a teen-age dropout on the streets of Harlem, more than once passing out from a near overdose.
In the book, Mr.
Fernandez, the leader of the nation's largest school system, appears to cast his drug experience as a parable of redemption to show how education, in his case the mathematics classes he took in the Air Force, can save troubled, impoverished youngsters from the squalid life of the streets.


The Good, The Bad, And Now The Ugly
Mark Messier might as well have rested his sore back tonight rather than take the ice against the Washington Capitals.
Healthy or not, he couldn't have saved the Rangers.
No one could.
The Rangers have been both good and bad this erratic season, but tonight they were absolutely awful.
Sub-par goaltending, ineffective offense and, most notably, an even more woeful defensive effort than usual resulted in an 8-4 victory for the Capitals, who are 5-1-1 in their last seven games.


Use of Force Is Questioned By Defense In Sex Trial
The defense in the Glen Ridge sex assault trial today attacked the state's contention that physical force was used when the four defendants engaged in sex acts with a mildly retarded woman.
During cross-examination, Sheila Byron, a Glen Ridge detective active in the investigation, said that she had questioned 10 or 11 of the 13 teen-age athletes present for some or all of the episode on March 1989 and that none had told her that force was involved.


The True Meaning Of Being a Catholic
To the Editor:
Pamela J. Maraldo, the newly elected president of the Planned Parenthood Federation of America, stated (Chronicle, Nov. 21) that, as a Catholic, she supports contraception and abortion and: "I go to church on Sunday but do not subscribe to many of the basic tenets of the church. That does not mean I am any less a Catholic."


Corrections
An obituary yesterday about Joseph P. Lyford, a journalism teacher who studied city life, misidentified his home state in some editions.
He lived and died in Orinda, Calif.


Chapter 11 Offers No Discounts For Macy
It is not unusual for lawyers and bankruptcy judges to wrangle over fees and expenses.
But a report filed in the bankruptcy proceedings of R. H. Macy &amp; Company illustrates just what happens when a big, fat turkey lands in bankruptcy court and its advisers start scrambling to carve off a juicy slice.
Never mind that the department store chain rolled up a whopping $1.3 billion loss in its last fiscal year and that its cash flow was nil.
In June, July and August, the lawyers, accountants and financial advisers working for Macy and its creditors piled up bills for services and expenses amounting to $5,705,591.30, or about $62,000 a day.


Reuters Clarifies Plans
Seeking to clarify its plans to relocate some employees, the North American division of Reuters, the news and financial information company, said Thursday that it had not yet decided how many workers would be moved out of New York City.
On Wednesday, Robert A. Crooke, a spokesman, said that about 300 employees, of whom about 120 were involved in news operations, would be given the option of taking jobs elsewhere in the country.
But the following day, Brian Vaughan, the division president, said, "No final decisions have been made, but most of the 300 will move to other offices in New York City."


For the Giants, Roster Precedes the Redskins
Coach Ray Handley of the Giants said today he was "99 percent sure" he would activate strong safety Myron Guyton and wide receiver Mark Ingram for Sunday's game here against the Washington Redskins.
To make room for the moves on Saturday, he will probably waive kicker Ken Willis and place inside linebacker Steve DeOssie on injured reserve.
Guyton has been on injured reserve all season after back surgery.
He is scheduled to start, but Lamar McGriggs, who had been playing for him, will continue to play in the nickel and dime defenses.


Jobless Rate Dips to 7.2% for Month on Jump in Hiring
Solid confirmation of a perked-up economy emerged today as the Labor Department reported a rise in jobs and a two-tenths of a point decline, to 7.2 percent, in the November unemployment rate.
Unlike earlier improvements that have edged the jobless rate steadily downward from 7.8 percent in June, the latest included diverse gains in jobs, including factory employment, and did not result from a shrinking labor force.
As a result, 9.2 million people are now out of work, nearly 800,000 fewer than in June.


Muslims From Afar Joining 'Holy War' in Bosnia
The conflict between Serbs and Muslims in Bosnia and Herzegovina, while provoking little more than official condemnation and appeals for increased United Nations intervention by Arab governments, has been adopted by Islamic fundamentalists as the newest holy war against Christian infidels bent on the destruction of Islam.
In the last few weeks the conflict has lured several hundred militants, many of them veterans of the war in Afghanistan, to volunteer for the Bosnian forces.
Although the number of volunteers is small, their commitment reflects a much larger public outpouring of support for the Bosnian Muslims that is placing increased pressure on Arab rulers to respond to the crisis.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
7.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
4.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.75
3.00
4.62
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.25
3.28
4.24
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.38
3.43
4.23
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.46
6.56
6.73
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.48
7.55
7.80
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.50
8.54
8.87
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.40
6.41
6.87
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


A TBS Look At Heritage Of Indians
The Turner Broadcasting System has announced a series of television movies, documentaries and publishing ventures about the culture and heritage of American Indians.
The plans were announced on Thursday by R. E. (Ted) Turner, the company chairman, who called them "a guilt trip for us to a degree" and said the projects would cost $30 million to $40 million.
Scott Sassa, president of Turner Entertainment, said, "There is no guarantee that we'll make any money on these projects."


Fed-Up Knicks Want to Step to the Line
Pat Riley remained unhappy today about the way some of the Knicks' games have been officiated, and he cited statistics to back up his point.
The Knicks have attempted 7.4 fewer free throws a game than their opponents.
On the road, New York is averaging 10.8 fewer free throws than the home teams.


F&amp;M Distributors Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Insurance Group Asks U.S. to Weigh Recall of G.M. Pickups Prone to Fires
A widely respected insurance industry group yesterday urged Federal officials to consider recalling five million pickup trucks manufactured by the General Motors Corporation, saying the company had misportrayed and had played down the danger of fires in collisions.
The industry group, the Insurance Institute for Highway Safety, also made public a study that supported earlier claims by consumer groups that full-sized Chevrolet and G.M.C.  pickups in the model years 1973 through 1987 were far more prone than competitors' vehicles to catch fire in certain accidents.
The insurance group blamed a faulty gas tank design.


Corrections
A front-page article in some copies yesterday referred incorrectly to the General Motors Corporation's vice president for worldwide purchasing.
He is Jose Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua. (During the preparation of yesterday's article, an identical error was discovered in a front-page article published on Sept. 30; it did not come to The Times's attention then.)


U.S. Is Sending Large Force As Warning to Somali Clans
The Pentagon is sending a large-scale force to Somalia to dominate the famine-stricken regions and send a signal to the armed clans there that they cannot disrupt the humanitarian effort, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff said today.
But even as Gen.
Colin L. Powell outlined the Pentagon plan for decisive military action, he said it might be necessary to leave a "residual" American force in Somalia after Washington has officially turned over the mission to a United Nations peacekeeping force after two to three months.


Oshkosh Truck reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Brokerage Statements: Making Most of Them
IF you stuff them, unread, into your file drawer, you'd better keep reading.
If you're one of those investors who just throws them out, give up all hope and go back to finish the crossword puzzle.
Brokerage account statements are important to your financial health.
Ignore them at your peril.
Get smart about what they say -- and how to use them to your advantage -- and you can stay a step ahead of problems, commanding a bigger slice of your broker's attention in the meantime.


G.E. Whistle-Blower Is Awarded $13.4 Million
A former employee of the General Electric Company was awarded $13.4 million by a Federal judge yesterday for bringing forward evidence that the company defrauded the United States in a scandal involving the sale of military jet engines to Israel.
The award was the largest to date under the Federal whistle-blower statue.


Byrd and Teammates Hook Up in a Two-Way Pep Talk
Dennis Byrd, whose career-ending injury in a game last Sunday left him partly paralyzed and his teammates completely distraught, joked with his Jets teammates and coaches by telephone today and left them all feeling uplifted.
Two days ago, Byrd underwent surgery to stabilize the vertebra he fractured in his neck after colliding with a teammate during the game against Kansas City.
Today, he was transferred from the intensive care unit of Lenox Hill Hospital to the orthopedic unit, where he will begin the first stages of physical therapy.
He is expected to be released from Lenox Hill in two weeks, and his rehabilitation will be continued elsewhere.


Dance in Review
MacFarlane and Ornelas 'The Laurie and Ruben Show' Washington Square Church


Rochester Medical Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Q &amp; A
Keeping Personal Records
Q Is there a book that outlines an efficient way to keep track of your resources?
GLORIA LEWIT, SCARSDALE, N.Y.


What's the Goal in Somalia?
President Bush made a powerful humanitarian case yesterday for sending American troops to Somalia.
One image tells the story: tons of food bursting out of a warehouse in Mogadishu "while Somalis starve less than a kilometer away because relief workers cannot run the gantlet of armed gangs roving in the city."
With 1.5 million Somalis facing death, the world had no choice.
Hence the strong support the President has already gotten at home and abroad for sending 28,000 American troops to ride shotgun for the United Nations.
Joined by soldiers from perhaps a dozen other countries, Mr.
Bush promised, the U.S.-led coalition will take all necessary steps to insure safe delivery of food.


Bentsen Termed Clinton's Choice For the Treasury
Senator Lloyd Bentsen, Democrat of Texas, has emerged as President-elect Bill Clinton's top choice for Secretary of the Treasury, Clinton campaign officials said tonight.
Mr.
Bentsen, 71 years old, has been informed that he is Mr.
Clinton's first choice for the sensitive economics post, but officials of the transition team have not yet completed the required background examination of his financial records.


SALE OF COMPUTER TO CHINA DELAYED
The Bush Administration today postponed a decision on whether to sell a sophisticated supercomputer to China, considering evidence that Beijing recently broke its promises to Washington by delivering new ballistic missile technology to Pakistan, senior Administration officials said today.
The White House had hoped to use the sale of a high-speed computer, which is supposed to be used for weather forecasting, as a way to improve relations with Beijing which were strained even further when the United States announced the sale of advanced warplanes to Taiwan.


Celtics Trade Barry and Obtain Abdelnaby
The Boston Celtics yesterday traded guard JON BARRY, their first-round draft choice, to the Milwaukee Bucks for power forward ALAA ABDELNABY.
Boston also gave up its second-round draft choice in 1995.
The trade helps fill the Celtics' need for a rebounder and solves the problem of what to do with Barry.
Barry, a son of Hall of Famer RICK BARRY was the 21st player drafted this year but never played a game for the Celtics because of a contract impasse. (AP)


After a Layoff (and a Struggle) Catherine Horgan Started a Business
In July 1991, after being laid off from an admisnistrative job in an engineering company (and after four months of unanswered job inquiries), Catherine Horgan of Commack, LI.I, decideed it was time to become an entrepreneur.
Her husband, Paul, is a salesman for a packaging company; his income and benefits helped support them while she set up shop.
Mrs.
Horgan's glass-etching hobby offered a head start; with equipment on hand, and years of experience in etching, she founded Crystique Ltd., which sells custom-designed, hand-etched crystal, ceramics and plaques.
After 16 months, her business is breaking even and she expects it to become profitable early in 1993.
Here are her steps along the way.


Anxiety and Fear in Somalia In the Waiting for U.S. Forces
As the first ship of the American-led United Nations military intervention to help starving Somalis was sighted off the coast this morning, this port city swirled in an uncertain atmosphere of anticipation mixed with disquiet.
Much of the anxiety had little to do with whether the hungry, who are in the countryside, would get food, but how order would be restored in a city terrorized for the last two years by gangs of teen-age gunmen.


New York To Remove Directors Of Garden
New York City announced yesterday that it would revoke the license and remove the directors of the Queens Botanical Gardens Society, amid accusations that the executive board of the nonprofit organization had mismanaged the gardens and wasted city and charitable money.
The decision, delivered to the more than 20 directors on Thursday, would be the first time the city's Department of Cultural Affairs had revoked the license of one of the city's major cultural organizations.


The Silence the Students Left Behind; In Bridgeport, a University's Decline Has a Ripple Effect
On a gray overcast day, Kitty Davis sat on her front porch smoking a cigarette and staring sadly at the University of Bridgeport campus, recalling what her South End neighborhood was like just a few years ago.
"There were students everywhere," she said.
"It was a bustling, exciting neighborhood filled with student houses and all the sights and sounds of an active college community."


Transactions
Baseball  American League
MINNESOTA TWINS -- Agreed to terms with Kirby Puckett, outfielder, on a five-year contract.
National League
CINCINNATI REDS -- Waived Mickey Brantley, outfielder.
HOUSTON ASTROS -- Agreed to terms with Greg Swindell, pitcher, on a four-year contract.
Basketball  National Basketball Association
BOSTON CELTICS -- Signed Jon Barry, guard, to a three-year contract, then traded him, along with a 1995 second-round draft choice, to the Milwaukee Bucks for Alaa Abdelnaby, forward.
Football  National Football League
TAMPA BAY BUCCANEERS -- Activated Dave Moore, tight end, from the practice squad.
Hockey  National Hockey League
LOS ANGELES KINGS -- Reassigned Guy Leveque, center, to Phoenix of the International Hockey League.
Soccer  National Professional Soccer League
MILWAUKEE WAVE -- Acquired Fahmi El-Shami, forward, from the Canton Invaders for the rights to Jon Szczepanski, defender, and a conditional 1993 second-round draft choice.
Track and Field
U.S.
TRACK AND FIELD -- Named Frank Gagliano men's coach and Deanne Vochatzer women's coach for the World University Games.
Named Roy Chernock men's coach and Daniels Elder women's coach for an indoor dual meet against Britain.
Named Roy Griak men's coach and Doris Heritage women's coach for a United States-Britain outdoor dual meet.
Named Ron Mann men's coach and Laverne Sweat women's coach for the Pan American Junior Championships.
College
DELTA STATE -- Named Todd Knight football coach.


Michigan's Brash Attitude: Duke Game Is No Sweat
Will this be a season of destiny for the brash young Michigan Wolverines, or a season of bitter lessons learned?
The Wolverines, favored by many to end Duke's string of consecutive national basketball championships at two, will be in Durham, N.C., tonight to play the Blue Devils in one of the most heralded early-season college games in recent seasons.


Trenton Activity-Fee Bill: Is It Rights or Retribution?
The New Jersey Legislature is preparing to take up a bill that backers say will allow college students more control over how their activity fees are spent.
Critics, including a broad coalition of college leaders, say the measure is nothing more than an attempt to kill a group that is an aggressive and effective advocate for environmental controls.
At issue is a $6.50 fee, to rise to $7.50 next semester, that about 90 percent of students at New Jersey's public colleges and universities contribute to the New Jersey Public Interest Research Group, commonly called PIRG.
The organization derives about $300,000 of its annual operating budget of $500,000 from the fees.


No Headline
I want to emphasize that I understand the United States alone cannot right the world's wrongs, but we also know that some crises in the world cannot be resolved without American involvement, that American action is often necessary as a catalyst for broader involvement of the community of nations. -- PRESIDENT BUSH.  [ 4:5. ]


Dance in Review
The Nutcracker New York City Ballet New York State Theater


Venezuelan Troops Dispatched on Election Eve


Electric Gas &amp; Technology Inc. reports earnings for Year July 31


Sports of The Times; Weaving Threads Of History
COACH BANKS used to call us "radicals": Greg Ogle was the right cornerback for the Morgan State football team, I was the left.
For two seasons -- 1970 and 1971 -- the three of us had running debates about everything from the state of the country to employing a four-deep secondary.
After practice, depending on the point he thought needed to be made, Banks would recall or invent a debate we may have had.
He would begin by saying, "You know, I talk to Ogle and Rhoden." Then he would cite some news item or some awful breach of discipline within the team that ripped to shreds whatever argument we had made.


Saudi Fighter in Afghanistan Becomes 'Martyr' in Bosnia
Majda al-Guttub carefully unfolded a map from a pile of photos and letters and pointed to a circle drawn around an unfamiliar city.
"Travnik," she said, stumbling over the pronunciation.
"This is where my son was martyred."


Democrat Wins Senate Seat in North Dakota
Senator Kent Conrad, who decided against seeking a second term for his own seat, won a special election today to fill the seat left vacant by the death of North Dakota's other Senator, Quentin N. Burdick.
With 85 percent of the state's precincts reporting, unofficial totals showed Mr.
Conrad with 72,536 votes, or 64 percent, to 37,864 votes, or 33 percent, for his Republican opponent, Jack Dalrymple.


Plan to House Homeless In a Hotel Is Abandoned
In response to neighborhood protests, a plan to house homeless families in the Cambridge House Hotel on the Upper West Side was dropped yesterday by the Dinkins administration.
Marsha A. Martin, the director of the Mayor's Office on Homelessness and S.R.O.
Housing, said in a letter to the West 86th Street Neighborhood Coalition, one of the plan's opponents, that the hotel's manager, Morris Horn, "has expressed his wish to withdraw his offer of available vacancies and has communicated to the city that current circumstances make it impossible for the hotel management to make rooms available at Cambridge House Hotel."


Law Will Regulate Private Van Service
New York City's efforts to regulate the legions of private vans that operate in parts of Brooklyn and Queens took a step forward yesterday when Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo signed a bill that gives the city new powers to seize or fine vehicles that are operated illegally.
The new law authorizes the city to license vans, designate areas where they can operate legally and integrate their routes with those of public buses so that they complement, rather than compete with, each other.


Love It or Call It Unfair: Alabama-Florida Is Big
The direction of this season, and possibly the course of college football, will be determined Saturday when unbeaten Alabama meets Florida in the inaugural Southeastern Conference championship game, at Legion Field.
For the first time, the S.E.C. championship will be settled by a playoff between division winners, with a tie breaker of alternating possessions from the opponent's 25-yard line to take place if the teams are even after regulation time.


Greenman Bros. Inc.  reports earnings for 13wks to Oct 31


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY
CHANCELLOR REVEALS  DRUG USE IN YOUTH
In a remarkably frank memoir, New York City Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez describes how he regularly snorted and injected heroin as a teen-age dropout on the streets of Harlem.
Mr.
Fernandez, the leader of the nation's largest school system, appears to cast his drug experience as a parable of redemption to show how education can save troubled, impoverished youngsters from the squalid life of the streets.
Page 1.
Excerpt from book, page 22.


Europe's Champagne Goes Flat
Europe's climate has soured in a dramatic reversal of the celebrations at the start of 1992, when the West was forging to a new union, Germany was enthusiastically putting itself together and the liberated East was hailing democracy and the market.
Now the mood is worse than glum, full of bewildered anger and dire warnings that, I hope, are as exaggerated as 1991's euphoria.
Economic pressures, political mismanagement and the nasty resurgence of old demons are provoking fears of a relapse into nightmares Europe thought it had left behind.
The summit meeting in Edinburgh on Dec. 11-12 threatens more of a confrontation than the resolution of issues it was meant to solve.


Foundation Executive Named To Hartford Education Post
An executive with the Ford Foundation who was formerly a dean at Wesleyan University was appointed today to be chairman of the State Board of Education.
The new chairman, Edgar F. Beckham of North Haven, was named to succeed John F. Mannix, who announced his resignation last week.
Mr.
Beckham's appointment is subject to confirmation by the General Assembly.


Corrections
An article in Weekend yesterday about seasonal store windows misidentified the artist whose illustrations were the basis of Bloomingdale's windows.
She is Jessie Hartland.


Bush Declares Goal in Somalia to 'Save Thousands'
President Bush ordered troops into Somalia today on a mission to "save thousands of innocents," as the Pentagon outlined an operation that will leave soldiers and marines in Somalia well into the Administration of President Bill Clinton.
Mr.
Bush gathered broad support for the intervention from top leaders of Congress, from other world leaders and from Mr.
Clinton himself, and then went on television at midday to announce an operation that thrusts the United States into a new post-cold-war role as a military force on behalf of humanitarian, not strategic ends.


Analogic Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Alaska's Plan to Shoot Wolves Is an Outrage; What Tourists Want
To the Editor:
Regarding your Nov. 19 news article "Alaska to Kill Wolves to Inflate Game Herds":
Killing wolves is not only "bad biology," it is also bad business.
David Kellyhouse, director of the Alaska Division of Wildlife Conservation, may think of his Alaskan habitat as another Serengeti, but as I am quite familiar with the real one, let me mention an East African fact of economic life:


In Chancellor's Past Drug Use, a Lesson
In a remarkably frank memoir, New York City Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez describes how he regularly snorted and injected heroin for years as a teen-age dropout on the streets of Harlem, more than once passing out from a near overdose.
In the book, Mr.
Fernandez, the leader of the nation's largest school system, appears to cast his drug experience as a parable of redemption to show how education, in his case the mathematics classes he took in the Air Force, can save troubled, impoverished youngsters from the squalid life of the streets.


Islanders and Sabres Get Nowhere Fast
The final score, a 5-5 tie between the Islanders and the Buffalo Sabres, was an appropriate bottom line for a frantic game between two struggling teams.
The path to that result was strange, and it featured two stars who know the opposition very well.
The featured subjects were Pierre Turgeon, a former Sabre who leads the Islanders, and Pat LaFontaine, a former Islander hero who was sent to Buffalo in the deal that exchanged stars from one corner of the Empire State to the other.


Kuwaiti Operation in Spain Stops Payment on Its Debts
Grupo Torras S.A., a Spanish holding of the Kuwait Investment Office, said today that it was filing for insolvency protection, suspending payments on more than $2.9 billion in total debts.
Mahmoud al-Nouri, deputy chairman of Grupo Torras since May, said the decision was taken to avoid adding to losses that have already exceeded $4 billion.
He said the losses had been a result of "mismanagement on a massive scale" by former managers.


Offshore Pipelines reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Altai Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Meyer (Fred) Inc. (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 7


Tokyo Journal; Quoth Japan's Crows: Evermore and Everywhere
Specialists gathered recently in northern Japan for a symposium titled "Crows -- Can They Co-Exist With People?" It doesn't take living in Tokyo long to know that co-existence is not a problem, at least for the crows.
The big, black, ornery birds seem to be everywhere in Tokyo and in many other parts of Japan, perched atop trees and utility poles like something out of a Hitchcock movie.
They break open garbage bags for food and scatter the contents, awaken people with cawing that begins at 4:30 A.M., and occasionally befoul tourist sites.


Britons and Americans At Top of Women's List
RECENTLY the World Bridge Federation produced updated standings of women's rankings, based on a complex system that makes recently won master points more valuable than older ones.
The list is dominated by the Americans and the British, and the British have the best of it, with Sandra Landy in the top spot, Nicola Smith and Pat Davies tied for second and Sally Horton seventh.
Eight Americans are in the top 13: No. 4, Lynn Deas; 5, Judi Radin, tied with Kathie Wei; 9, Kerri Shuman; 10, Carol Sanders; 11, Betty Ann Kennedy; 12, Jacqui Mitchell, and 13, Beth Palmer.
The lone representative of the rest of the world is Bep Vriend of the Netherlands, who is eighth.


The White House Office That Isn't There
IN Victorian households, women's work was "the distaff side," a phrase evoking medieval images of bent backs, spinning wheels and flax.
In White Housespeak, generic tongue of Presidential aides of all parties, the equivalent is "the East Wing." The words connote a bevy of flower arrangers, letter writers and efficient women who know the make of the White House china, the origins of the White House Christmas tree and the foibles of the Presidential pets.
The office that "East Wing" is code for -- the Office of the First Lady -- is not mentioned in the United States Constitution, is neither elective nor strictly appointive (and certainly not subject to Senate confirmation) and yet has a score or more of employees on the Federal payroll and a claim on White House real estate just like the National Security Council.
Its occupant-to-be, Hillary Clinton, has her own transition team.
All of which raises the question: How did this happen?


To Buy Support, Serbia's President Prints Money
The President of Serbia has passed out stacks of newly printed bills and successfully evaded United Nations economic sanctions, taking advantage of the reeling economy to insure he renews his five-year hold on power in elections on Dec. 20.
"The Government is doing all it can to keep things together until election day," said Dejan Popovic, an economist at Belgrade University's law school.
"The balloon will burst afterward. It has to."


Boogying With the Romper Room Set
Mother Goose now raps her rhymes and, in keeping with a hipper image, calls herself Mama Goose.
Thanks to Little Richard, Old MacDonald and his farm animals have soul.
Raffi is celebrating mankind's power to preserve the earth's beauty; Alvin and the Chipmunks are crooning country, and Cedella Marley-Booker, Bob Marley's mother, is telling stories to reggae and calypso rhythms.
Both in content -- and in competitiveness -- children's music is not what it used to be.


The Executive Life; An Open-Door Policy In Salt Lake City
The Salt Lake City that Michael L. Joseph knew as a child is not quite the same place where he now earns his living as a high-tech exec.
It has become, to use his words, "very cosmopolitan."
With the success of such local software giants as Novell Inc. and the Wordperfect Corporation, and the presence of an estimated 850 other technology companies, the Salt Lake City area is now one of the hottest high-tech centers in America.


One Man's Drag Is Another's Sober Suit
NAME: Ru Paul.
IDENTITY: Singer and drag performer.


Laura B. Winter, Alan D. Falk
Mr. and Mrs.
Donald A. Winter of Yorktown Heights, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Laura Beth Winter, to Alan Daniel Falk, a son of Oscar N. Falk of New Rochelle, N.Y., and the late Florence J. Falk.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Winter, 27 years old, is the manager of database services at the CBORD Group Inc., a maker of computer software in Ithaca, N.Y.
She and her fiance graduated from Cornell University.
Her father is a physical-education teacher and a baseball and volleyball coach at Ossining (N.Y.) High School.
Her mother, Henrietta Winter, teaches English at the George Fischer Middle School in Carmel, N.Y.


Darrow Lost One Case Defending a Murderer
There was one historical inaccuracy in an otherwise excellent and informative article on Laurence Luckinbill and his current dramatic portrayal of Clarence Darrow ("Luckinbill, Portrayer of Giants, Takes One to the Courthouse," Nov. 8).
At one point the article stated that Darrow "defended a total of 102 men on death row, none of whom was executed."


Where to Place Blame For Latin Misery
While I am sympathetic to the struggling largely El Salvadoran immigrants, it should be apparent by now that most of them are not political refugees, but rather victims of an economic and social order that has long abandoned them, and they're here more or less permanently.


Dina DeLucia and Owen Robinson
Dina Amelia DeLucia, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Vic DeLucia of Glen Cove, L.I., was married there on Friday to Owen Michael Robinson, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
John F. Robinson of Douglas Manor, Queens.
The Rev.
Joseph Burns performed the ceremony at St.
Patrick's Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.
Robinson, 30 years old, is a manager for the Norrell Corporation, a diversified services company in Uniondale, L.I.
She graduated from the State University College at Oswego, N.Y.
Her father is a photographer for The New York Times.


Public &amp; Private; The Skirt Standard
This time around, we were the ones who didn't get it.
Senator Bob Packwood had always been someone feminists could count on, to support abortion rights and family leave, to vote against confirming Clarence Thomas for the Supreme Court.
And then one morning we discovered that, like a Capitol Hill Dorian Gray, the Senator was suspected of keeping an ugly portrait in the attic of his character.
Ten women told The Washington Post that he had sexually harassed them over what had been a long and, until now, illustrious career.
Kissing, fondling, sexual suggestions -- there was nothing subtle about the behavior they alleged.


Beating Victim Says He Will Speak to Grand Jury
After almost a week in hiding, Ralph Nimmons made his first public appearance yesterday in Brooklyn, and, flanked by the Rev.
Al Sharpton, said that he had been "viciously attacked by a gang of Hasidic Jews" last week and would "describe how I was victimized" before a grand jury tomorrow.
Mr.
Nimmons's statement was read by his lawyer, Michael W. Warren, at a news conference outside the 71st Police Precinct station house in Crown Heights, only blocks from where the beating occurred Tuesday.


THE TRANSITION: Foreign Policy; Clinton's Team Narrowing Policy and People Choices
While the crisis in Somalia intensifies pressure on President-elect Bill Clinton to fill out his national security team, the transition director, Warren M. Christopher, has been giving some of the advice and counsel normally provided by a Secretary of State, Clinton aides said today.
Mr.
Christopher, who served as Deputy Secretary of State in the Carter Administration, is a top contender for the secretary's job in the Clinton Administration, along with Representative Lee H. Hamilton, Senator Bill Bradley, Senator Sam Nunn, and a newly mentioned long shot, Gen.
Colin L. Powell, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
Clinton aides say General Powell greatly impressed the President-elect at their first meeting in Washington two weeks ago.


It's Cold, So the Landscape Is Gorgeous
A FRIEND of mine was longing for a car the other day so he could get out of the city and find some wild grapevines.
"I'd make a ball of the vines and put white lights in it and hang it in my maple tree in the garden," he said.


Army Tops Navy as Wind Blows
An implausible Army-Navy game had an implausible ending today when Army's Patmon Malcom hit a 49-yard field goal with 12 seconds to play.
That kick gave the Cadets a 25-24 victory in the 93d game of a series that now is tied at 43 triumphs for each service academy and seven ties.
Twice Army had trailed by 17 points, the last time five minutes into the third quarter at 24-7.
Then came the comeback, culminated by three big plays from Malcom in the last 3 minutes 17 seconds.
Before his winning kick, Malcom had connected on a 44-yard field goal, but it was erased by a penalty that still allowed another attempt.
Key Punt Pins Navy
The first vital play was a Malcom punt that stopped dead on the Navy 1-yard line.
The Midshipmen, who had dominated the game through most of three quarters, were pinned there, and Brian Schrum, facing a strong wind that affected the flow of the game, punted to the Middies' 32.


Windows on the Fin-de-Siecle City
"The Impressionist and the City: Pissarro's Series Paintings" is a revelation, in its way as beautiful and intelligent as the traveling show two years ago of Monet's series paintings.
This exhibition, at the Dallas Museum of Art, brings together 70 works from the last, astonishingly productive and until now poorly appreciated decade of Camille Pissarro's life.
At no other time did Pissarro convey the same sustained sense of pleasure and freedom.
And at no other time does he seem so accessible.
To see these late paintings brought together as they are here is almost to feel yourself standing beside him in the Grand Hotel de Russie in Paris while he records in one canvas after another the unfolding scene outside his window along the Boulevard Montmartre.
The show (which goes to Philadelphia and London after closing here on Jan. 31) should earn for him a more prominent place in the popular imagination.
Of the great Impressionists, he is the least understood.
Think of the art of Renoir or Monet, and an image comes immediately to mind.
Not so with Pissarro, whose career was such a constant search for new ways to paint that even to describe him as an Impressionist is problematic.
Influenced by artists as diverse as Millet, Monet, Degas and Seurat, he laid himself open to the ungrateful remark by Gauguin, who had studied with him, that he "always wanted to be on top of the latest trend."


Mazzilli Comes Up With Another Hit
The Italian Stallion will marry twice today.
He married twice yesterday, as well.
He has been doing it for five weeks now but says it is not yet second nature.
"The other actors ask me how you go up to hit with 50,000 people screaming," Lee Mazzilli, on a break between a wedding doubleheader, said last Sunday.
"I ask them how you stay in character with 150 people staring."


Police Searching for Suspect in 3 Sexual Assaults
The police are looking for a man who they say has sexually assaulted three women since late October in Midwood, Brooklyn, near Avenue J and East 16th Street.
Each attack occurred when the victim left the elevated train station, a police spokesman said yesterday.
The man, who approached the women from behind, and on one occasion brandished a knife, apparently followed the women as they left the station, on the D line, said Sgt.
Paul Byrd, a detective in the Brooklyn Special Victims Squad.
The victims gave similar descriptions of their attackers, , leading the police to believe one man was responsible, Sergeant Byrd said.


A Hispanic Center for North Philadelphia
A two-square-block area in the center of North Philadelphia's Hispanic community is being redeveloped to preserve its role as an economic and cultural hub.
The site, near Fifth Street and Lehigh Avenue, used to house St.
Christopher's Hospital for Children.
It has been dark nearly two years.
Construction is scheduled to begin by year's end on a $20 million, 250,000-square-foot complex with housing, municipal and social services and educational facilities.


Devils Couldn't Buy a Shot From Bruins
A week ago, it appeared that the Devils had righted themselves, but today they offered further proof that they might have a rough journey in store for them this season.
This afternoon, following a tie Thursday night with the expansion Ottawa Senators, the Devils couldn't do anything against Boston.


Terrifying Games
Joseph Cornell's wry, surreal "shadow boxes," those miniature worlds he assembled from found objects, intrigue not only the public but also other creative artists.
In "Dime-Store Alchemy," to be published this month by Ecco Press, the Pulitzer Prize-winning poet Charles Simic talks about various Cornell works.
"This box has the appearance of a game board, a puzzle or perhaps some abacuslike calculating machine. The balls have stopped randomly on their own, or they were moved by an invisible hand. Whichever is the case, this is their position now. In other boxes of the same series, balls may be replaced by blocks and their position varies.


Norway Can Add a Super-G Notch
The best skier from the United States was asked on Friday to name the best ski team in the world.
A. J. Kitt didn't even blink.


In the War Against Zebra Mussels, The Front Is Getting Closer
THERE is a horde of European mollusks heading toward Westchester County, zebra mussel experts say, adding that the mussels have already invaded the Hudson River, and it is only a matter of time before they infiltrate New York City's reservoirs, which provide 85 percent of Westchester's water.
From there, they say, the mussels will attack the pumping stations that keep the water flowing during droughts.
If the bivalves establish that beachhead, they can easily choke the system's subterranean aqueducts with foot-thick walls of shellfish.


Milan Report
There was a time when we really believed that all you needed was love.
Bras were abandoned in the dresser drawer.
Hair was ironed and Afro-ed.
We all knew who had what kind of bellybutton.
But what we looked like wasn't really about fashion, it was about expressing ourselves -- and the Beatles getting back together.
Free love.
Free Angela Davis.
This is the era many designers in Milan have chosen to retrieve -- but they're talking style, not substance.
Dolce &amp; Gabbana's show, though weighed down with overaccessorizing, was full of fresh riffs on the decade.
But how many others deserve hosannas for reproducing Penelope Tree's old wardrobe?


Robin M. Reinke, Robert D. Wilder
Robin Marie Reinke, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard E. Reinke Jr., of Miami, was married there yesterday to Robert Duane Wilder, a son of Robert O. Wilder of Nashua, N.H., and the late Anne G. Wilder.
The Rev.
Leonard Brusso performed the Episcopal service at St.
Andrew's Church.
Mrs.
Wilder, 30 years old, is the legal personnel administrator at Piper &amp; Marbury, a law firm in Washington.
She graduated from American University.
Her father is a consultant on education in Miami.
Her mother, Alma Reinke, is a fund-raising consultant there.


McEnroe Takes Shelter in Quietness
He has, with a mixture of paranoia and apologia, banned the friendly Fort Worth public from his practice sessions.
He has refused to open his mouth, a mouth that is usually loquacious if not always gracious, to the news media for fear of being hounded about his domestic doldrums instead of his Davis Cup desires.
His discomfort at the event he had looked forward to all year is tangible, and he has welcomed the protective cocoon the United States Tennis Association has woven around him in deference to his wishes and to his dozen years of Davis Cup patriotics.


Days and Nights in Disney World
THERE is a perverse rule in economics that applies to luxury goods: All else being equal, people believe that when they pay more, they get better quality.
This applies to furs, platinum watches, Lamborghinis, Gucci briefcases and, apparently, Walt Disney World.
Little else can account for the difference in price between the low-end and high-end hotels at the Walt Disney World complex in Lake Buena Vista, Fla.
In a 10-night visit last summer, our family of three stayed in eight Disney World hotels ranging in price from $85 to $400 a night, excluding taxes.
To our surprise, we found that $100 a night buys good accommodations and nearly the same level of comfort that the high-end places offer.
At Disney World, a guest at any hotel can use the facilities of any other hotel.
No matter where we were staying, we were able to ride throughout the complex on the sophisticated transportation system, including water taxis, monorails and trams; we had our pick of pools, restaurants, parking lots, even laundry facilities and baby-sitting services.
As Disney guests we could reserve meals at park restaurants two days in advance.


Fannie Bear Besser Dies at 92; Did Legal Work for 70 Years
Fannie Bear Besser, who at the age of 20 became one of New Jersey's first female lawyers and did legal work until she was 90, died on Friday at St.
Barnabas Hospital in Livingston, N.J.
She was 92 years old and lived in East Orange, N.J.
She died of multiple ailments, her family said.


Mutual Funds; Enticing Investors by Waiving Fees
Banks have always had a chunk of the institutional mutual fund business, but lately they've been trying hard to grab a share of the retail market, too, by waiving fund expenses, a time-tested way to build assets quickly.
When a fund sponsor absorbs some or all costs, rather than charging the investor, the return is proportionately higher.
The waivers show up all the more in money market and bond funds, whose returns move in relatively fixed ranges.
So it is not surprising that investors get the biggest breaks there, with roughly three-quarters of all bank funds absorbing expenses.


Ex-Communist Countries Look to U.S. Cities
When the former Communist countries of the old Soviet bloc seek advice on capitalism, they look not just to financial centers like New York and Chicago.
More and more, former Soviet republics and other Eastern European countries are turning to smaller post-industrial American cities, like Baltimore and Pittsburgh, for economic advice and intellectual exchange.
"Old industrial societies of the West have faced the same environmental and economic problems Russia now faces," said Blair A. Ruble, director of the Kennan Institute for Advanced Russian Studies in Washington.
"Russians see difficulties and need desperately to talk to people who have faced these issues on a similar scale."


About Those White-Collar Jobs . . .
To the Editor:
A word of advice to the white-collar managers who have been dismissed from their plum assignments: Nobody owes you a living!
A position in corporate America today is not (and for the sake of our future economic growth, should not be) a lifetime appointment.


Your Highness, Meet Neil Young
To the Editor:
The very idea -- calling the Queen's dresses dowdy!  [ Nov. 15 ] .
Mr.
Rich should have asked what would be appearing on the page facing his article.
Perhaps he would have thought she was more "with it" in grunge.
VIRGINIA JONES Pittsburgh


Baseball, Heal Thyself
To the Sports Editor:
How touching it is to see major league baseball work itself into a seeming tizzy over the banal and, let's face it, not unfamiliar peccadilloes of Marge Schott while it outrageously coddles people like Steve Howe, routinely countenances the likes of Rob Dibble and goes about its business making decision after decision that disgrace the game.
Is Marge Schott off base?
Yes, but worse, she is a sacrificial lamb (as was Al Campanis).
Open the big Webster's and under the word hypocrisy there will be a full-color portrait of some participant in the Grand Old Game and it might just be a sportswriter.
RICHARD MERKIN New York


Installing Insulation, at Least in Theory, Is Not Difficult
INSULATING the floor above an unheated basement or crawl space can save on heating bills and increase comfort in the winter.
In theory, the job is not difficult.
It usually consists of fastening strips of fiberglass or mineral-wool insulation between the floor joists.
But in practice the task can be dirty, awkward and time-consuming unless the basement is in a new house and there is plenty of headroom.
In an older house with unevenly spaced joists and a maze of electrical wiring and plumbing or in a house with a crawl space, consider having a professional carry out the installation.
As when hiring any contractor, obtain bids from at least three companies, have them show proof of insurance coverage and ask for the names of previous customers to be called as references.


Old Hand
Yevgeny Kissin -- THE 21-year-old Russian pianist who is being talked about in terms of Vladimir Horowitz, who is a throwback to the old Russian Romantic style, who is currently the hottest item on the international circuit of classical pianists, who is a child and beneficiary of the new Russian revolution -- was fooling around at the piano.
He was playing not Chopin, not Liszt, not Rachmaninoff but Scott Joplin rags.
He adores Joplin.
"Why not play one of them as an encore in your American recitals?" he was asked.
"Or, better yet, why not a rag by a living American?"


A Noteworthy Collection
This selection of paperbacks is from the New &amp; Noteworthy column since the 1992 summer reading issue.
It includes novels, stories, poetry, biography, memoirs, essays, travel and current affairs.
AFRICAN SILENCES, by Peter Matthiessen. (Vintage, $10.) Three essays on the disappearance of African wildlife, based on trips by the author.


'Everything's Coming Up Roses'
Vince H. realized that times were tough when he discovered that he had worn out his record of Ethel Merman belting out the finale of "Gypsy." That song, "Rose's Turn," had raised his spirits on the days that he could not find work.
And there were many.
Like thousands of New Yorkers, Vince H., a 52-year-old office clerk, was laid off this year for the first time in decades.
And like so many people in a city whose unemployment rate has jumped to more than 10 percent, he searched for a new job for months, visiting every employment agency and office temporary firm that he could find.


Cookies for Eating and Giving as Christmas Gifts
MANY years ago, some friends of mine made it a rule that their three children were never to buy them presents.
Since then, these children have come up with gifts they have made themselves, ranging from paintings and hand-knitted sweaters to cookies and cakes.
Of course, these were appreciated much more than anything bought in a store, and the children liked making them, too.
My son is now 4, the age for pinch pots (a term new to me; in my day these pots were called ashtrays) and paintings that of course compare favorably with most of the works on display in the galleries in SoHo, where we live.
He is also an enthusiastic chef, and recently our attention turned to cookies as holiday gifts.


How High Is 'Low'? It's All Relative
About a week before seeing the recent revival of Philip Glass and Robert Wilson's stunning theater piece "Einstein on the Beach" at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, I heard the premiere of Mr.
Glass's first symphony in the same hall, a composition based on themes by the rock musicians Brian Eno and David Bowie.
Two days before "Einstein," I heard an exhilarating oratorio by William Bolcom at Carnegie Hall, "Songs of Innocence and of Experience," that also used elements drawn from music outside the concert hall -- rock and jazz and country and reggae.
So this time "Einstein" seemed quite different from the way it did at its American premiere in 1976 at the Metropolitan Opera House and its resurrection in 1984 at the Brooklyn Academy.
It was experienced not just in a post-Einstein universe -- a world of atomic blasts, space travel and altered conceptions of time and space -- but also in a post-"Einstein" universe, in which musical perspectives have fallen under the spell of relativity as well.
In recent years there has been less and less sense of an absolute frame of reference, and more a confluence of once distinct traditions.


Being Fat Is as American as, Well, Apple Pie
To the Editor
How amazing that you publish a comprehensive article on American fat people ("The Burdens of Being Overweight: Mistreatment and Misconceptions," front page, Nov. 22) and never once mention American food, which is unique in the world .
Visitors from abroad are struck by the rampant obesity.
And they all complain of weight gain when they come to America.
I've been here one month and have gained five pounds.
There are four reasons why America's fat problems are worse than elsewhere.


Moynihan Expected to Lead Finance Committee


Miss Brinckerhoff, James Henderson
Deborah B. Brinckerhoff of Scarsdale, N.Y., and William H. Brinckerhoff of Palm Beach, Fla., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Carol Beckley Brinckerhoff, to James Robert Henderson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter W. Henderson of Rumson, N.J.
A March wedding is planned.
Miss Brinckerhoff, 27 years old, is a marketing manager at American Baby magazine in New York.
She graduated from the University of Vermont.
Her father, now retired, was a vice president at HMB/Creamer Inc., an advertising agency in New York.
Her mother is the collections manager at the Bruce Museum in Greenwich, Conn.
The prospective bride is the stepdaughter of Natalie G. Brinckerhoff of Palm Beach.


Gifts of Gab for '93
With all thy getting," the publisher B. C. Forbes liked to quote from Proverbs 4:7, "get understanding."
With all thy quoting, get a quotation book.
The old editions are good, but the new ones are better be cause people are making new quotations every day.


An Artist Comes to Terms With Dachau
When the Yugoslavborn painter Zoran Music first came to notice, in 1948 at the revived Venice Biennale, it was with two paintings, one called "Donkeys" and the other called "Umbrian Landscape." They were modest little pictures, and the work was quiet, subdued and resistant to hype.
But those who saw them liked them.
Music is someone to watch, people said.
From the start, he has worked mainly with a gamut of pale browns, pale yellows and faded pinks.
Even where the subject matter was seductive, as it was in his views of Venice and his panoramas of vividly accoutered Slovenian peasants on horseback, he edited out the picturesque.


Effort to Get Food Out to Somalis Falls Prey to Arms and Frustration
In a renewed example of the instability that threatens famine relief efforts here, aid workers were thwarted today as they tried to move 400 tons of food stacked up at the city's port.
As hungry Somalis awaited the rations at feeding centers, the aid effort again bogged down because warlords would not guarantee safe passage.
The cargo of United Nations wheat and sorghum, part of a 12,000-ton shipment stranded at the harbor here since early last month, was to have been delivered to the northern part of the capital under a written agreement with rival warlords controlling the city's two sectors.
By noon, 40 windowless, rusted trucks were loaded and ready to depart on a dangerous three-mile trip from the heavily fortified port.


Sara E. Barcan, Marc D. Draisen
June wedding plans have been announced by Sara Ellen Barcan, a master's degree candidate in city planning at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in Cambridge, and Marc Douglas Draisen, a Massachusetts State Representative in Boston.
Ms.
Barcan graduated magna cum laude from Harvard University.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen E. Barcan of Westfield, N.J.
Her father is a senior partner in Wilentz, Goldman &amp; Spitzer, a law firm in Woodbridge, N.J.
Her mother, Bettye Barcan, is a reference librarian at the Springfield (N.J.) public library.


2 Teen-Agers Report Bias Attacks to Police
The police yesterday were investigating two separate incidents, in Brooklyn and on Staten Island, in which teen-agers were beaten in what the police said appeared to be bias attacks.
One victim, Marc Goldberg, 19 years old, who is partly blind, told the police he was robbed and assaulted late Friday night in Flatbush, Brooklyn.
The police said he was walking across the intersection of Bay Avenue at East 17th Street when two black men approached him, struck him in the face and stole his beeper, while yelling, "Jew boy" and "white boy."


RAGE IN A TENURED POSITION
While some may view Heilbrun's resignation from Columbia as a defeat in the struggle for women's empowerment in institutional settings, I believe that her willingness to tell this particular story and to continue to write feminist fiction and biography makes her a victor over those who openly or secretly attempt to silence women or discredit their stories.
As long as Heilbrun continues to speak and write about the lives of women, she is not "a woman alone in a room, writing" but a teacher of women's stories and a strong influence on the lives of her readers.
LYNN BECKER
River Vale, N.J.


Dr. Bruce Ruddick, 77, Psychiatrist and a Poet
Dr.
Bruce Ruddick, a psychoanalyst, psychiatrist and poet, died on Friday in White Plains Hospital.
He was 77 years old and lived in Manhattan and Amagansett, L.I.
He died of pulmonary fibrosis, his family said.


Why I Carry a Torch For the Modern Library
Somebody gave me this book for Christmas.
It's a Giant Modern Library Book.
Did you ever see one of those?
It's less attractively bound than the Proceedings of the New York State Assembly and it weighs more.
Helene Hanff, "84 Charing Cross Road."


Tucking In for a Long Winter's Nap
THE word mulch or the practice of mulching is quite often the brunt of jokes.
But those who are serious gardeners know how important mulching is.
Gardeners shouldn't mind the jokes because they may have the last laugh.
For those who have not learned about mulching, some advice: A mulch is a layer of organic material (preferably) that is placed over the ground several inches deep.
A mulch accomplishes many things.
During the growing season it will keep the soil cool and moist, and it will also prevent weeds from growing.


Twins Trade West
The Minnesota Twins sent left-handed pitcher DAVID WEST to the Philadelphia Phillies for right-hander MIKE HARTLEY yesterday in the first trade of the winter meetings.
West, 28, was 1-3 with a 6.99 earned-run average in nine games for the Twins last year and was 7-6 with a 4.43 e.r.a. in 19 games at Portland of the Class AAA Pacific Coast League.


'SO HOW DID I GET HERE?'
It seems that bashing the poor has become our new national pastime.
Bray brought home the injustice of this dangerous trend.


'SO HOW DID I GET HERE?'
I found it difficult to muster much sympathy for Rosemary Bray's father, whose gambling forced his wife and four children to go on welfare.
Bray loses credibility and an empathetic ear when she seems to excuse her father's behavior by writing: "For all his anger, for all his frightening brutality, he loved us, so much that he swallowed his pride and periodically ceased to exist so that we might survive." I would think that a man who loved his children would do everything in his power to see that they had food, clothing and shelter.
Because he abdicated his responsibility, Bray's mother was forced onto the welfare rolls in order to survive.
Trying to turn her father into a victim undermines Bray's story of her mother's courage and fortitude.
MARIE CONWAY
New York, N.Y.


Gann Has Surgery
Atlanta Falcons defensive end MIKE GANN underwent surgery for a testicular tumor and will miss the team's final three games.
Gann, an eight-year veteran from Notre Dame, was seventh on the team in tackles with 81. (AP)


Data Update
*4*VALUE OF CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTS
*4*(Residential in millions of dollars)
Oct. 92
Oct. 91
Change
New York
453.7
410.8
+25%
New Jersey
197.0
222.9
-12%
Connecticut
98.6
101.7
- 3%
*4*Source: F.W. Dodge Division, McGraw-Hill Information
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
8.58
8.62
8.92
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.52
5.49
6.47
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
8.39
8.41
8.80
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.31
5.18
6.36
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
8.47
8.49
8.80
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.19
5.10
6.38
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
8.55
8.62
9.06
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.93
5.97
7.03
*4*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
3.76
3.64
4.74
National Mortgage Contract Rate
7.40
7.44
8.78
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes.  (Source: HSH Associates)


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: December 6, 1992
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
3
THE DOOMSDAY CONSPIRACY, by Sidney Sheldon. (Warner, $5.99.) An American probes a mysterious balloon accident in the Alps.
2
2
ANGEL, by Johanna Lindsey. (Avon, $5.99.) A young woman enjoys a torrid romance while visiting a Texas ranch in the late 19th century.
3
5
HIDEAWAY, by Dean Koontz. (Berkley, $5.99.) A man miraculously resuscitated after he has technically died is haunted by visions of evil.
4
45
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
5
6
A RIVER RUNS THROUGH IT, by Norman Maclean. (Pocket, $4.99.) Three tales of the outdoors in western Montana.
6
7
MIDNIGHT WHISPERS, by V. C. Andrews. (Pocket, $5.99.) The travails of Christie Longchamp, haunted by her relatives' passions.
7
34
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) Racial tensions surface during the trial of a man charged with murder in rural Mississippi.
8
3
RECKLESS, by Amanda Quick. (Bantam, $5.99.) A Sussex maiden in distress finds help and romance during a midnight encounter.
9
1
DRACULA, by Bram Stoker. (Signet, $3.99.) The 1897 novel about the exploits of a vampire-count.
10
2
ALL THE WEYRS OF PERN, by Anne McCaffrey. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $5.99.) The 11th volume in the science fiction series "The Dragonriders of Pern."
11 *
5
A RIVER RUNS THROUGH IT, by Norman Maclean. (University of Chicago, $9.95.) Three tales of the outdoors in western Montana.
12
6
REMEMBER, by Barbara Taylor Bradford. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A television correspondent seeks the truth about her fiance's suicide.
13
11
A THOUSAND ACRES, by Jane Smiley. (Fawcett, $12.) The fortunes of a family that operates a large industrialized farm in the Midwest.
14
7
PRIVATE EYES, by Jonathan Kellerman. (Bantam, $6.50.) The psychologist-detective Alex Delaware goes to the rescue of an actress menaced by a man recently released from prison.
15
9
SCARLETT, by Alexandra Ripley. (Warner, $6.99.) The sequel to Margaret Mitchell's "Gone With the Wind."
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
2
2
DIANA: Her True Story, by Andrew Morton. (Pocket, $5.99.) An updated biography of the Princess of Wales.
3
8
BACKLASH, by Susan Faludi. (Anchor/ Doubleday, $12.50.) A journalist contends that the media and political groups are staging a war against women's rights.
4
5
WHEN YOU LOOK LIKE YOUR PASSPORT PHOTO, IT'S TIME TO GO HOME, by Erma Bombeck. (Harper Paperbacks, $5.99.) The tribulations of travel suffered in all parts of the world.
5
81
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
6 *
14
UNITED WE STAND, by Ross Perot. (Hyperion, $4.95.) The Texas billionaire's suggestions for "rebuilding America."
7 *
474
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist. (LP)
8
9
PUTTING PEOPLE FIRST, by Bill Clinton and Al Gore. (Times Books/Random House, $7.99.) The next Administration's program for "changing America."
9 *
5
MOLLY IVINS CAN'T SAY THAT, CAN SHE? by Molly Ivins. (Vintage, $11.) Essays about the recent political and cultural scene.
10
6
SEX, ART, AND AMERICAN CULTURE, by Camille Paglia. (Vintage, $13.) Twenty-one essays on contemporary subjects, ranging from Madonna to Anita Hill to date rape.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
69
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
2
11
THE INDISPENSABLE CALVIN AND HOBBES, by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) A collection of previously published cartoons.
3
1
WHEN FOOD IS LOVE, by Geneen Roth. (Plume, $10.) The connection between compulsive eating and intimacy in personal relationships.
4
4
COWS OF OUR PLANET, by Gary Larson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $8.95.) A new collection of "Far Side" cartoons.
5
98
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles for success.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Lyrical Expansion
WHEN baby makes three, house contractors make money.
Last week Paul Simon applied for a variance to add a 1,735-square-foot addition to his oceanfront house in Montauk.
The singer and songwriter and his singing-and-songwriting wife, Edie Brickell, are expecting a baby this month.
No one is saying whether the addition will house a nursery.
"He's adding to the first and second floors," his lawyer, Richard Mathew of Bridgehampton, said.
"It's four rooms and several bathrooms. That's all I know."


And There Was Snow


The World According to Steinberg
THE DISCOVERY OF AMERICA By Saul Steinberg.
Introduction by Arthur C. Danto.
Illustrated. 208 pp.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $50.


Corrections
An item in the Egos and Ids column in Styles of the Times last Sunday, about Avery Lucas, who designed the suits Denzel Washington wore in some scenes of the film "Malcolm X," misidentified the owner of Saint Laurie, a wholesale clothing company in Manhattan.
The owner is Andrew D. Kozinn.
Mr.
Lucas is the company's fashion director.


Cookies for Eating and Giving as Christmas Gifts
MANY years ago, some friends of mine made it a rule that their three children were never to buy them presents.
Since then, these children have come up with gifts they have made themselves, ranging from paintings and hand-knitted sweaters to cookies and cakes.
Of course, these were appreciated much more than anything bought in a store, and the children liked making them, too.
My son is now 4, the age for pinch pots (a term new to me; in my day these pots were called ashtrays) and paintings that of course compare favorably with most of the works on display in the galleries in SoHo, where we live.
He is also an enthusiastic chef, and recently our attention turned to cookies as holiday gifts.


The Fragrant Food of Morocco
MOROCCO is a country that takes its food seriously.
A stroll through the market stalls of any souk reveals vibrant spice stands, glistening pyramids of black and green olives, mounds of preserved lemons, sacks of golden grains, freshly quarried blocks of almond-studded nougat, enticing arrays of mahogany dates and huge aromatic bouquets of deep green mint.
It's not just this wondrously decorative array of ingredients that is so mouth-watering.
Children rush past on their way home with palletes of fragrant bread fresh from communal ovens.
Pastry makers hawk sticky, honey-dipped fritters and morsels of nut brittle.
Pause briefly to look at a rug and the merchant will pour endless glasses of sweetly soothing mint tea all around.


American Express Begins Search to Replace Chief
The American Express Company said yesterday that it had begun to seek a replacement for James D. Robinson 3d, its chairman and chief executive for 15 years.
Mr.
Robinson is participating in the search for his replacement and will step down when a successor is chosen, perhaps as soon as next year.


Wounded Waterbury: No Place to Go but Up
IT is a Chamber of Commerce nightmare.
There lies Waterbury, perched up and down on some hills in western Connecticut, still known as the Brass City though the big brass companies have all passed away, a community down on its luck that obviously could use a bit of encouragement.
So what happens?
Money magazine, in its annual survey of the best and worst places to live, rated the city No. 300 out of the 300 largest metropolitan areas in the country.
That's dead last, the end, the pits.
Adding insult to injury is that it is the second straight year that Waterbury has attained the status of lowest of the low: 1991, No. 300; 1992, No. 300.


Serbian President May Face a Real Contest
Serbia's Supreme Court overturned a ruling by the republic's electoral commission that would have barred the Serbian-American Prime Minister from running for the presidency in elections on Dec. 20, the Yugoslav press agency reported tonight.
The decision appears to set the stage for a confrontation between Serbia's hard-line nationalist President, Slobodan Milosevic, and Prime Minister Milan Panic, a 62-year-old California industrialist, who is considered the only candidate who stands a chance of unseating Mr.
Milosevic.


Alex Armendaris, 62, An Aide to 3 Presidents
Alex Armendaris, an aide to three Presidents on minority business development and an expert on Hispanic affairs, died on Thursday in McLean, Va.
He was 62 years old.
His family said the cause of death was a brain tumor.


Talking: Town Services; Condos And Co-ops Ask Equity
Residents of condominiums, co-ops or homeowner associations spread over many acres have been fighting for more than a decade for such municipal services as garbage pickups and road maintenance.
Their argument has been that they pay the same level of property taxes as neighbors in one-family houses on separate lots, so why shouldn't they get the same services?


Erica Petersen, Richard Dunckley
Mr. and Mrs.
Harry E. Petersen Jr. of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter Erica Petersen to Richard Dunckley, a son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
James M. Dunckley.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
Petersen is an account executive at Standard Rate and Data Service, a publisher of industry directories in New York.
She graduated from Boston University and received an M.B.A. from New York University.
Her father is a limited partner at Salomon Brothers in New York and an independent marketing consultant.


Mary McNear, David J. Bialer
Mary Hopkins McNear, a daughter of Suzanne W. McNear of New York and the late Robert E. McNear, was married yesterday to David Jonathan Bialer, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Irving Bialer of Teaneck, N.J.
Judge Charles Sifton of Federal District Court in Brooklyn, officiated at the Cosmopolitan Club in New York.
Ms.
McNear, 27 years old, is keeping her name.
She graduated cum laude from Colby College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and is a doctoral candidate in American history at the University of Pennsylvania.
Her mother is a writer in New York.
Her father was a mystery writer.


Susan P. Burks, Sean P. Brennan
Susan Parnelle Burks, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert W. Burks of Chatham, N.J., was married yesterday to Sean Patrick Brennan, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Walter B. Brennan Jr. of Villas, N.J.
The Rev.
Karen C. Murphey performed the Episcopal ceremony at Grace Church in Madison, N.J.
Mrs.
Brennan, 25 years old, is a fifth-grade teacher at the Cedar Hill School in Basking Ridge, N.J.
She and her husband graduated from Princeton University, and she received a master's degree in elementary education from Rutgers University.
Her father is the area manager for Latin America and Africa in the treasurer's department of Exxon International in Floral Park, N.J.
Her paternal grandfather, the late Dr.
Harry G. Burks Jr., was the coordinator of worldwide refining operations for Standard Oil, now Exxon.


Creating Landscapes Out of Paper
IN an exhibition of handmade paper landscapes at the Westchester Art Workshop here, Carol Herd has transformed plant materials into meditative images of nature.
Each of the dozen two-dimensional works, collectively entitled "The Forest Series," is like a window with a limited view of a woods.
The pictorial elements are pared to the essence.
Slender vertical strips, slanted slightly to imply treelike gestures, rise from the bottom edges to the top of the compositions.
They occupy color fields alluding to landscapes, not referring to specific places but to seasons or climatic moods.
The absence of such conventions as horizon lines and foregrounds puts the emphasis on the emotional content of a landscape rather than on its description.


What's in Store For the West Side
ON the west side of lower West End Avenue, a scrubby and uninhabited quarter of abandoned rail yards, parking lots, rubbish heaps and a service station, an entirely new neighborhood is being planned with enough room for 14,650 residents and a variety of impacts that will be felt citywide.
As a focal point, this new neighborhood might have something akin to a town square: a privately owned, one-acre park between 63d and 64th Streets where three enormous developments converge.
The park is part of Daniel Brodsky's Manhattan West proposal, whose 38-story towers would border it on the south.
A twin-towered, 41-story apartment building, one of 16 in Donald J. Trump's Riverside South project, would rise to the west.
Over the north end of the park would be the 39-story apartment towers of a residential and studio complex proposed by Capital Cities/ ABC.


Piano Variations


Photography
OF making many coffeetable books there is no end.
Big books with small souls are here to stay; Christmas would not be Christmas without them.
There are the usual oversize scenic books, each with a few choice images and page after page of technically perfect cliches.
However, as befits a year punctuated by the controversial phenomenon of Madonna's book, "Sex," the focus in the coffeetable category is now on celebrities.
There are books about stars, books by photographers who achieved fame by photographing the famous, and books on the personalities who trod the stage of recent history.
In a slow economy, personalities are just about the only growth sector and image the only bankable commodity.


Vote on Tariff-Free Zone Has the Swiss Astir
In a referendum widely described as Switzerland's most important vote since it became a confederation in 1848, the Swiss people will decide Sunday whether to move toward economic integration with Western Europe and eventual membership of the European Community.
The heated campaign of recent months has deeply divided the 4.5 million electorate between those who fear erosion of the nation's sovereignty and identity if they say yes and those who fear economic isolation in a fast-changing Europe if they vote no.


U.S. and Europe
To the Editor: On a recent visit to Europe -- where most approaches to and from airports are clean, well planned and well designed, whether by road or train -- I could not help but make a comparison with the filthy, disgraceful and unsafe roads from Kennedy Airport to the city and beyond.
This kind of symbolic calling card requires a special effort by the city and state to clean up what will otherwise continue to give an unforgettable bad impression.
On another recent trip, I traveled to Michigan on Amtrak, boarding the Lake Shore Limited at Penn Station in New York.
It left one hour late and arrived at Toledo more than two hours late.
We missed our connection to Dearborn.
I was told that this sad state of lateness is normal.
Amtrak provided buses to Dearborn, which arrived very late.
European trains are very punctual by comparison.


Clinton Tries to Learn From Carter and History
ONE big shadow hanging over the Clinton transition is the shadow of the early failures of the Carter Administration.
Hardly a day goes by without a warning to Little Rock about well-known mistakes, like being too much of an outsider, or without an answering boast that the canny new guys won't casually insult Congress.
But many of these dark images are false or exaggerated, cast by shadow puppets constructed out of cardboard memories, shaped by the defeat of 1980, and so they do not offer very useful hazard signs for the new "outsider" administration from the South.
These images have haunted the Clinton team to the extent that the President-elect's aides have spent hours talking with former Carter Administration officials to find out what worked and what didn't.


Bob Dylan Revisits His Roots And Finds a Gift for the Young
In the December issue of Details magazine, the 26-year-old super model Cindy Crawford sums up the age difference between her and her 43-year-old husband, Richard Gere.
"I don't worship Bob Dylan," she says with a smirk.
To anyone under the age of 30 or so, Dylan is a bit like ancient history: we know he changed the face of popular music, just as we know that Thomas Jefferson and the signers of the Declaration of Independence changed American politics.
The early Dylan is something we know only secondhand, captured in museum pieces like the 1967 film "Don't Look Back," the 1985 three-CD retrospective "Biograph" or the recent 30th anniversary tribute concert at Madison Square Garden.
It's history borrowed and learned rather than experienced, and, as a result, less exciting.
Sure, he changed pop music.
What's he done for us lately?


Allyson Armbrust, Peter M. Burns
Allyson Redmond Armbrust, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
L.
Martin Armbrust of Boca Raton, Fla., was married yesterday to Peter Martin Burns, a son of Mary Van Nostrand of Huntington, L.I., and the late J. Richard Burns.
The Rev.
Theodore Hoskins performed the ceremony at the Saugatuck Congregational Church in Westport, Conn.
Mrs.
Burns, 27 years old, is a product manager at R. H. Macy &amp; Company.
She graduated from Wittenburg University.
Her father is the president of Parts International Inc., a computer exporter in Miami.


Tina I. Young, Alvin Poussaint
Dr.
Tina Inez Young, a neuroradiologist at Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston and an instructor in radiology at the Harvard University Medical School, was married yesterday to Dr.
Alvin Francis Poussaint, an associate professor of psychiatry and the associate dean for student affairs at the medical school.
The Rev.
Otis Moss, a Baptist minister, performed the ceremony at the home of the bride's parents, Drs.
Florence and Lionel W. Young of Redlands, Calif.
The bride graduated magna cum laude from Mount Holyoke College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received an M.D. degree from Yale University.
Her father is the chief of pediatric radiology and a professor of radiology at the Loma Linda (Calif.) University School of Medicine.
Her mother was until recently a podiatrist at the Veterans Administration Hospital in Pittsburgh.


Jennifer Berry, Scott Henderson
Jennifer Clement Berry, a daughter of Benjamin L. Berry 4th of Haverford, Pa., and Alexandra S. Berry of New York, was married yesterday to Scott Allan Henderson, the son of Marsha Henderson of Yorktown Heights, N.Y., and the late Allan F. Henderson.
The Rev.
Thomas Pike performed the Episcopal ceremony at Calvary/St.
George's Church in New York.
Mrs.
Henderson is the models editor at Elle magazine in New York.
She graduated from Emory University.
Her father is the director of marketing at White Eagle Laboratories, a medical testing lab in Doylestown, Pa.
Her mother is the showroom manager in New York for Tabby of California, a dress manufacturer.


Laura Hall and Philip Jonas
Laura Anne Hall, a daughter of Drs.
James and Wilma Hall of Saratoga Springs, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Philip Alexander Jonas, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Albert M. Jonas of Boston.
The Rev.
Robert Long performed the ceremony at the United Methodist Church.
Mrs.
Jonas, 27 years old, is a substitute teacher in the Albany public schools.
She graduated from Wesleyan University and received a master's degree in education from the College of St.
Rose.
Her father is the president of the Empire State College of the State University of New York, with headquarters in Saratoga Springs.
Her mother is a lecturer on American studies, English and liberal studies at Skidmore College in Saratoga Springs, and a playwright.


Focus: Philadelphia; A Center for the Hispanic Community
A TWO-SQUARE-BLOCK area in the center of North Philadelphia's Hispanic community is being redeveloped to preserve its role as an economic and cultural hub.
The site, near Fifth Street and Lehigh Avenue, used to house St.
Christopher's Hospital for Children.
It has been dark nearly two years.
Construction is scheduled to begin by year's end on a $20 million, 250,000-square-foot complex with housing, municipal and social services and educational facilities.


Single White Female


Eskimos Learn They've Been Living Amid Secret Pits of Radioactive Soil
The season of darkness, two months without a sunrise, has fallen over much of the Alaskan Arctic, and with it has come a sense of betrayal and uneasiness among the native people not seen for some time.
Thirty years ago the Inupiat Eskimos north of here successfully stopped a plan by the Federal Government to create an Arctic harbor with a huge atomic blast near the village of Point Hope, on the Chukchi Sea in northwestern Alaska.
Now the Eskimos have learned they were not free, after all, of the Government's nuclear experiments.


Sound Bites of Our Times: A Quiz
A QUICK glance through the average book of quotations gives the impression that most of history's enduring statements came from either Shakespeare or God.
It's refreshing, then, to discover five collections, recently revised or newly published, that go well beyond Hamlet, the Old Testament and that other perennial favorite, Anonymous.
THE OXFORD DICTIONARY OF QUOTATIONS: Fourth Edition, edited by Angela Partington (Oxford University, $35), and THE NEW PENGUIN DICTIONARY OF QUOTATIONS: Updated and Expanded, edited by J. M. and M. J. Cohen (Viking, $30), include not only words that live, but speakers who do.
THE NEW YORK PUBLIC LIBRARY BOOK OF 20TH-CENTURY AMERICAN QUOTATIONS, edited by Stephen Donadio, Joan Smith, Susan Mesner and Rebecca Davison (Warner, $24.95), has close to 9,000 resounding statements culled just from this country and century, while THE BEACON BOOK OF QUOTATIONS BY WOMEN, compiled by Rosalie Maggio (Beacon, $25), specializes in that half of the population that is often quoted but frequently unsung.
Finally, even the venerable BARTLETT'S FAMILIAR QUOTATIONS: Sixteenth Edition, edited by Justin Kaplan (Little, Brown, $40), has been thoroughly updated since its last appearance, in 1980.


3 TV Films, 3 Versions of Amy Fisher Case
WHERE does the movie begin and reality end?
While she was in Huntington Hospital on a suicide watch, Amy Fisher was meeting with a screenwriter.
That was acceptable, a film executive said, because the screenwriter "has a background in mental health."
Alternately confessing one's deepest thoughts to a psychiatrist and a movie maker could make for interesting drama, but it is not a scene you will see in the Amy Fisher television movie.
At least not the NBC-TV movie being made with KLM, a Long Island production company that bought Miss Fisher's story rights for $80,000 worth of bail money.


Fiery McEnroe Lets His Tennis Do the Talking
With a match-ending ace from the maestro, and with a match-ending embrace between two players who embody this nation's Davis Cup past, present, and future, John McEnroe and Pete Sampras culminated their comeback from a two-sets-to-none deficit to defeat Switzerland's Marc Rosset and Jakob Hlasekand give the United States a 2-1 advantage today in the Davis Cup finale.
The United States, now in its third consecutive Davis Cup final, can claim its second title in three years on Sunday when top-ranked Jim Courier faces 34th-ranked Hlasek, and Andre Agassi meets Rosset.


World Markets; On the Rebound in Argentina
In the world of emerging markets, Argentina was the golden boy throughout 1991 and the first five months of this year.
Prices on the once-sleepy Buenos Aires Stock Exchange rose more than 400 percent last year alone.
Foreign investors flooded the market, encouraged by a surprisingly effective effort by the Government of Carlos Saul Menem to stabilize the economy and cut inflation.
Then disaster struck.
Corporate profits started to fall, exposing a lack of attention by investors to fundamentals.
The market collapsed, a victim of excessive leveraging, speculation and weak regulation.
Foreign institutional investors got out early, leaving many local investors with huge losses.
On Oct. 10, the exchange hit its low point, when the Merval index closed at 318.57, 64.5 percent below its record high of 899.86 on June 1.


Cooking
WHEN my family and I visited Italy earlier this year -- determined not to let the weak dollar lay us low -- we decided that the best and happiest survival tactic would be to eat only in the humblest
trattorias
we could find.
From the Amalfi coast to Rome to Umbria, we never set foot in anything with the whiff of high class.
As you might have guessed, we dined so well that we wouldn't change a thing next time -- even if the dollar makes it back from the dead.
Many of the culinary lessons from this experience were straightforward.
And TRATTORIA COOKING (346 pp., Macmillan, $25), by Biba Caggiano, spells them out emphatically -- never oversauce the pasta, for instance, and there can be beauty in the sparseness of ingredients when they are unstinting in their quality.
Look at the dish called
bucatini all'amatriciana bianca
-- bucatini with pancetta, hot red pepper and pecorino.
The title is just about the whole ingredient list, and Spartan though it may be, it is a marvelous, traditional treatment of the thick, hollow pasta one finds all over Rome.


As Americans Adjust Nature, Wolves Get Pushed Around
MORE than half a century after wolves disappeared from the American West, the orange-eyed carnivores have started to return to some of the old haunts, well ahead of a Government plan to bring them back with extensive bureaucratic help and regulation.
This handful of colonizing wolves, migrating from Canada into Montana, Washington and Idaho, are being studied, followed, worshiped and cursed with the kind of attention that is light years removed from the days when wolves were poisoned like sewer rats.
Some of the finest minds in wildlife biology are working to insure that wolves recover their place atop the predator chain.


Tucking In for a Long Winter's Nap
THE word mulch or the practice of mulching is quite often the brunt of jokes.
But those who are serious gardeners know how important mulching is.
Gardeners shouldn't mind the jokes because they may have the last laugh.
For those who have not learned about mulching, some advice: A mulch is a layer of organic material (preferably) that is placed over the ground several inches deep.
A mulch accomplishes many things.
During the growing season it will keep the soil cool and moist, and it will also prevent weeds from growing.


A Bad Year for Palaces


The Riddle Solved
When The Book Review asked Edward Sorel to create the drawings for many of the features in this holiday issue, we asked him, as has been our custom, to include an extra picture that would challenge the imaginations of some of our best storytellers.
Six writers rose to the occasion.


Folk Singers Take Shelter in Country
One of the more intriguing aspects of country music's recent surge in popularity has been the influx of female performers whose influences are as likely to be Judy Collins and Linda Ronstadt as Tammy Wynette and Dolly Parton -- and, no, they don't do sequins.
After coming close to extinction at the hands of rock- and rap-obsessed MTV and commercial pop radio, many folk artists and singer-songwriters have found shelter under country's expanding umbrella.
And they've been repaying the favor, with literate lyrical perspectives and stylistically rich musical brushstrokes that are, subtly but perceptibly, altering the very nature of the genre.
New releases by Suzy Bogguss, Maura O'Connell and Tish Hinojosa underscore country's impressive new folk-driven, enlightened diversity.


An Artist Comes to Terms With Dachau
When the Yugoslavborn painter Zoran Music first came to notice, in 1948 at the revived Venice Biennale, it was with two paintings, one called "Donkeys" and the other called "Umbrian Landscape." They were modest little pictures, and the work was quiet, subdued and resistant to hype.
But those who saw them liked them.
Music is someone to watch, people said.
From the start, he has worked mainly with a gamut of pale browns, pale yellows and faded pinks.
Even where the subject matter was seductive, as it was in his views of Venice and his panoramas of vividly accoutered Slovenian peasants on horseback, he edited out the picturesque.


THE TRANSITION: The Economic Team; CHOICE OF BENTSEN IS CALLED A SIGNAL OF NEW TEAMWORK
President-elect Bill Clinton picked Senator Lloyd Bentsen to be his Treasury Secretary to send the political signal that the deadlock between the White House and Congress is over and to assure the financial markets of a calm, steady hand on the nation's economic levers, Clinton advisers said today.
But the advisers, here and in Arkansas, also said the Texas Senator's selection and the fact that the top candidates for the directorship of the Office of Management and Budget also come from Congress indicated how, after 12 years of Republican Presidents, Congress is the only realistic place to turn for experts who have dealt with pivotal matters like taxes and the budget deficit.


Lilly Lee, Gary Tsang
Lilly Lee, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Wing Yui Lee of Brooklyn, was married yesterday to Gary Tsang, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Kin Sown Tsang, also of Brooklyn.
The Rev.
Matthew Lui performed the ceremony at the First Chinese Presbyterian Church in New York.


Getting Down to Business, They Become Professional
Speaking in a voice charged with hope and determination, Angelique James talked about her next big step in a life marked by deep challenges and long strides.
In May, she is to graduate from City College, earning a bachelor's degree in sociology.
At age 23, and the youngest of seven children, Ms.
James will be the first in her family to receive a college degree.
She is the second of her siblings to graduate from high school.


THE UNINVITED
It is rare that a piece in any newspaper brings me to tears, but William H. MacLeish's About Men column "The Uninvited" (Nov. 8) did just that.
The article brought home, once again, how as a lesbian I expect so little and how quick I am to settle for mere acceptance instead of pushing for true emotional support.
Twenty years ago, I told my mother in a letter that I was a lesbian.
After three weeks of no response, I phoned her.
She said I should have shot her instead.


Let Punishment Fit Crime
As a native Cincinnatian who has followed the escapades of Marge Schott (often with embarrassment), I agree with Ira Berkow ("Baseball's Big Red Headache," The Times, Nov. 29) that something needs to be done about the racial and ethnic slurs she used to refer to her players and business associates.
While I believe Hank Aaron's call for her suspension is extreme, I think she should be required to apologize to the people she offended and pay a fine.
The best fine would be a contribution of both financial resources and personal time to some black and Jewish charities that might raise her level of consciousness about this issue.


A VICIOUS UNDERTAKING
Susan Dworkin's article "A Vicious Undertaking" (Nov. 8), about one of my favorite actors, Gary Oldman, neglected to mention two of his films that I liked very much: "Criminal Law," with Kevin Bacon, a murky but interesting film because of Oldman's faultless American accent as a defense attorney, and "We Think the World of You," a quirky British comedy in which he plays a bisexual cockney sailor who, when put in jail, leaves his German shepherd dog in the care of his male lover, played by Alan Bates.
A very funny film.


Help Baltics Deal With Russian Minority
To the Editor:
Your news article on Russians living in the newly independent Baltic states (front page, Nov. 22) was well informed but somewhat imprecise as to suggested remedies.
Today we face a strange situation in that important elements of the former Soviet occupying power -- the army, the K.G.B., officials of the ministries of interior and the special Omon forces -- are insisting on staying on and making a permanent home among the Soviet Union's principal victims, an absurd situation for the Baltic peoples and a potentially dangerous one for the West.


INSIDE
Giants and Bonds Agree To $43 Million Contract
The San Francisco Giants and Barry Bonds, a two-time most valuable player, agreed on a six-year contract that is the biggest total package ever granted in baseball.
Late editions of SportsSunday, Section 8.
TB Moves Out From Cities
Experts say tuberculosis is increasingly appearing in suburban and rural areas where awareness of the disease's threat is limited.
Page 49.
Furor Over Space Mission
Fearful of radiation dangers, astronomers are protesting a military test in which an American satellite is to carry a Russian reactor.
Page 36.


Natalie Monroe, Richard Thigpen
June wedding plans have been announced for Richard Thomas Thigpen, a Congressional aide in Newark, and Natalie Patrice Monroe, an associate product manager at Best Foods, the food manufacturer, in Englewood Cliffs, N.J.
Miss Monroe, 28 years old, graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and received an M.B.A. degree from Columbia University.
She is a daughter of Patricia Hart of Teaneck, N.J., and Nathaniel Monroe of Montclair, N.J.
Her father is a food service manager at the Isabella Geriatric Center, a nursing home in New York.
Her mother is a social studies teacher at Dwight Morrow High School in Englewood, N.J.
The bride is a stepdaughter of Jarnell Hart of Teaneck.


Sports of The Times; Knicks, Nets Upgrading Their Games
CHARLES SMITH'S knees are not that old, but the ice packs on the knees are brand new.
He never needed to ice his knees until he came to play for Pat Riley.
"I can play both ends of the court; I just never did it at the same time," Smith said yesterday while icing his knees and his feet after scoring 23 points in a 111-98 victory over Milwaukee.


Voting Booth For Skeptics
To the Editor:
While I found your articles "Machine Politics" and "Poll Watchers"  [ Nov. 1 ]  timely and informative, I thought the concern with an ideal curtain for the voting booth was misplaced.


The Game's Internal Threat
To the Sports Editor:
The most problematic aspect of baseball now is not the artificial lighting or the artificial turf or the artificially inflated player salaries or the artificial substances in pitchers' gloves or the artificial commissionership or the demographically correct yet nonetheless artificial ball-park sites.


Leading Health Insurers Into a New Age
A DINOSAUR sits on the desk of Carl J. Schramm, president of the Health Insurance Association of America.
The plastic toy is an apt symbol of an industry struggling to save itself from extinction as the political climate changes.
Mr.
Schramm, chief lobbyist and spokesman for the nation's commercial health insurance companies, says many people tell him "this is an industry of dinosaurs."


Recitals Usher In Holiday Season
THE holiday music season is in full swing and the good news is that a fair number of concerts are free for the listening.
A pair of recitals with free admission are offered today at Sprague Memorial Hall at Yale, for instance, starting at 2 o'clock when fellows of the School of Music take turns conducting the Yale Repertory Orchestra in works by Mozart, Schubert, Debussy and Brahms; then at 6 two faculty members, Erick Friedman and Boris Berman, collaborate on three of the Beethoven sonatas for violin and piano (432-4158).


Gardening
HENRY MITCHELL has helped me survive the annual deluge of numbing garden books.
In ONE MAN'S GARDEN (illustrated, 262 pp., Houghton Mifflin, $21.95), a collection of his Earthman gardening columns for The Washington Post, he writes, "I have a useful rule of thumb for judging garden books: whenever I see charts in which you read down one side, then across, I know the book was written by some idiot whose learning and whose love are exhausted by a three-word summary."
You know the ones.
Endless charts of plants, with their colors, heights and so forth.
More English cottage garden books than Burpee tomatoes.
Though I like one: ENGLISH COTTAGE GARDENING FOR AMERICAN GARDENERS, written and photographed by Margaret Hensel (239 pp., Norton, $50), has the usual charming photographs, but the plant combinations are interesting and the information on hardiness, culture and sources undeniably useful -- albeit only to the hopelessly English-obsessed.
Still, I draw the line at paint-by-number gardening books in which each typically beautiful photograph is now accompanied by a diagram of curving numbered blobs with corresponding plant lists.
You can even, those books claim, crack the genius of Gertrude Jekyll this way.


Rob Reiner's March To 'A Few Good Men'
For Rob Reiner, the film "A Few Good Men" carries remarkable personal resonance.
Not that Mr.
Reiner has served in the Navy or faced a high-stakes military trial, which is the centerpiece of the movie.
Instead, the 45-year-old director identifies almost eerily with the Navy lawyer Daniel Kaffee (played by Tom Cruise), whose glib, wise-guy style masks intense fears about living in the shadow of a father, now dead, who was a renowned naval attorney general.


Data Bank/December 6, 1992


Red Sox and Dodgers Are Desperate to Add Punch to Lineups
Don't tell the Boston Red Sox and the Los Angeles Dodgers that pitching is 75 percent of the game, or 90 percent, or whatever Connie Mack proclaimed many decades before the 1992 Red Sox and Dodgers proved a team has to hit home runs and score runs occasionally to win games.
Because they didn't hit home runs and score runs, the Red Sox finished last for the first time in 30 years and the Dodgers finished last for the first time since 1905, when Connie Mack was in only the fifth year of his 50-year tenure as manager of the Philadelphia Athletics.


Yule Tidings


'Coup Within the Coup' Cut the Toll in Venezuela
One week after the abortive military coup in Venezuela, the death toll has climbed to more than 300, human rights workers say.
With more details emerging, it appears that the toll would have been higher if there had not been a "coup within the coup" and sabotage by air force ground crews, politicians and military leaders interviewed in Caracas said.


Seminarians and Samaritans
Head of the Ford Foundation given a Jewish institution's award, Nov. 30.


Cookies for Eating and Giving as Christmas Gifts
MANY years ago, some friends of mine made it a rule that their three children were never to buy them presents.
Since then, these children have come up with gifts they have made themselves, ranging from paintings and hand-knitted sweaters to cookies and cakes.
Of course, these were appreciated much more than anything bought in a store, and the children liked making them, too.
My son is now 4, the age for pinch pots (a term new to me; in my day these pots were called ashtrays) and paintings that of course compare favorably with most of the works on display in the galleries in SoHo, where we live.
He is also an enthusiastic chef, and recently our attention turned to cookies as holiday gifts.


Margo H. Miller, Michael C. Weill
Margo Hope Miller, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul S. Miller of Livingston, N.J., was married last evening to Michael Charles Weill, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Alan Weill, also of Livingston.
Rabbi Robert Fierstein performed the ceremony at the Marriott at Glenpointe, in Teaneck, N.J.
Mrs.
Weill, 24 years old, is a social worker at the Mount Carmel Guild Mental Health Center, a nonprofit social service agency in Jersey City.
She graduated from the University of Maryland and received a master's degree in social work from Columbia University.
Her father is a senior vice president and the general counsel at Pfizer Inc., the pharmaceutical company in New York.
Her mother, Carol Miller, is a partner at Designers 2, an interior design firm in Livingston.


NOV. 28-DEC. 5: A Bigger Melting Pot; Census Officials Revise Population Predictions Up
The Census Bureau said last week that the nation's population would grow by 50 percent in the next 60 years.
And it adopted new demographic assumptions that alter the image of America as a melting pot.
The bureau expects the population, now 255 million, to rise to 275 million in the year 2000 and 383 million in 2050 -- much higher numbers than the last projections, made four years ago, which showed the population peaking at 301 million in 2038.


A Sorter-Out of Ideas That Clog the Imagination
Until his obituary came in over the fax two weeks ago, I had no idea what Sir John Summerson looked like, knew almost nothing about the personal life of this great architectural historian.
But for years his words have been marching around in my brain, and his death (at 87) won't halt the march.
Many of those words were written before I was born, including one sentence that for me sums up a critic's marching orders.
"The most a critic can do," Summerson wrote in 1947, "is to sort out those aging ideas that get encrusted round past creative achievement and clog the proper working of the imagination in changing times."
Summerson was some sorter.
His critic's credo appears in "The Mischievous Analogy," a 1947 essay that anticipated by two decades the post-modern critique of modern architecture.
The "analogy" of Summerson's title was the historicist fallacy to which modern architects often appealed.
The Egyptians, the Greeks, the medieval Europeans had their architecture, so the analogy went.
Therefore, we should have ours.
And it should all look more or less the same.


Just Park Your Fire Truck Outside the Store
IF you're a firefighter, or a fire-truck chaser, you don't have to worry about missing anything while shopping at the New York Firefighter's Friend.
The store, which sells items related to firefighting, from antique brass hose nozzles ($45 and up) to chocolate fire trucks ($9), keeps its radio tuned to the frequencies that New York Fire Department dispatchers use to talk to their truck operators.
"I've had firemen bolt out the door, forgetting they were off duty," Nate Freedman, the owner of the store on Lafayette Street in Manhattan, said one recent Sunday.
"For tourists, it's atmosphere."


TRANSACTIONS
Hockey National Hockey League  SAN JOSE SHARKS -- Agreed to terms with Trevor Robins, goaltender.
Assigned Ed Courtenay and Brian Lawton, forwards, to Kansas City of the International Hockey League.
Colonial Hockey League  FLINT BULLDOGS -- Placed Larry Bernard, right wing, on the injury list, retroactive to Dec. 4.
Signed Glen Lazurowski, right wing.
East Coast Hockey League  LOUISVILLE ICEHAWKS -- Placed Steve Shaunessy, defenseman, on injured reserve.
Activated Ken House, forward, from injured reserve.


Barkley and Toney Start Tuneup for Next Round
Sometimes, the post-fight news conferences can be more dangerous than the fights.
In the aftermath of a tripleheader at the Trump Taj Mahal tonight, chairs and epithets flew, boxers cursed one another and the buildup began for an Iran Barkley-James Toney championship fight that might not be so bad if it lives up to its hype.


Angela B. Levy, Antony R. Beck
Angela Brooke Levy, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Paley Levy of Bryn Mawr, Pa., was married there last evening to Antony Rowland Beck, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Graham J. Beck of Cape Town.
Rabbi Joel Alpert performed the ceremony at the home of the bride's parents.
Mrs.
Beck, 26 years old, is an owner of Too Daughters Inc., which makes Ellen Brooke hair accessories in Lexington, Ky.
She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father is the chairman of the Atlantic City Racing Association, which operates the Atlantic City Race Course.
He is also the president of DRT Industries Inc., a diversified holding company in Philadelphia.
The bride is a niece of the late William S. Paley, the chairman of CBS.


An Exultation of Voices Warms Up the Season
VOICES are raised in song this week, as classical arias, choral favorites, Renaissance and Baroque works, carols and spirituals ring in the holiday season.
Today at 3 P.M., arias from operas of Mozart, Donizetti and Gounod lend a festive note to the first concert of the year by the Yonkers Philharmonic, the free program conducted by Jeroma Sala at the Saunders School.
The program includes Khatchaturian's "Masquerade Suite" and Beethoven's Second Symphony.
The number to call for more information is 965-5232.
Handel and Bach arias, original settings of familiar carols, and Corelli's "Christmas Concerto" -- as transcribed for solo harpsichord by the 18th-century composer Thomas Billington -- are among the attractions of a candlelight concert today of Baroque and Renaissance Christmas music in Chappaqua's Lutheran Church of our Redeemer.
The program begins at 4 P.M.
The performers include Nancy Young, soprano; Mark Kramer, playing viola da gamba, and Shelly Robbins, harpsichordist.
The number for more information is 238-8144.


Off the Couch
It was midafternoon in the psychiatric emergency room of Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center in Washington Heights.
Suddenly Dr.
Alison Phillips, a psychiatric resident, heard the thud of something heavy, a body hitting the wall outside the small office where she was working, then loud voices.
Someone pushed the panic button at the nurses' station, and in moments several security guards moved into the hallway near the patient rooms.
"Don't run, don't run!" said one in an urgent whisper.
Their best bet with an agitated patient was not to alarm.
On the other side of the office wall, circled by nurses, was a psychotic teen-ager, undoubtedly frightened at this, his first admittance to the psychiatric emergency room.
Phillips's supervising psychiatrist had gone with the guards, and Phillips waited, listening, to see if she would be needed as well.
"We hate forcing shots on them," she said to me.
"It makes forming an alliance later on so much harder."


Ms. Geoghan, Donald Sullivan
Margaret Mary Geoghan, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph E. Geoghan of Wilton, Conn., was married there yesterday to Donald Patrick Sullivan, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles Sullivan of Garden City, L.I.
The Rev.
Michael Palmer performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Our Lady of Fatima Church.
Mrs.
Sullivan, 30 years old, is a psychologist and the director of management assessment at the Applied Research Corporation, a consulting concern in Ford, N.J.
She graduated cum laude from the University of Scranton and received a master's degree in psychology from the Graduate School and University Center of the City University of New York.
Her father is the general counsel and corporate secretary for the Union Carbide Corporation, the chemical company, in Danbury, Conn.


Mutual Funds; Recovering From Annus Horribilis
Funds that invest in health and biotechnology companies have had a tough year, falling 10.2 percent through Nov. 19, on average, compared with a 3.7 percent rise in all growth funds, according to Lipper Analytical Services in Summit, N.J.
As a group, the funds lost 11 percent in a first-quarter bloodbath and had not posted positive results for two consecutive months until November.
The industry was sanguine about the funds last year, when they gained an average of 74 percent, and a handful of new health care funds -- Franklin Global Health, Dean Witter Health Sciences, Govett Global Health Care and Merrill Lynch Healthcare (spun off from its old Science and Technology Fund) -- started up in 1992.


Aides Say U.S. Role in Somalia Gives Bush a Way to Exit in Glory
Friends and advisers to President Bush say that mounting concern about the fate of more than one million starving people was the major goad to his decision, 11 days ago, to offer troops for use in Somalia.
But it is no coincidence, they add, that Mr.
Bush is leaving office with a show of American might in a noble cause.
Having seen a chance to exit with an example of America's global responsibility in a fragmented world, they said, the President has shaken off considerable bitterness over his political loss and seized it.


Homeless Plan Not Dropped, Hotel Residents Say
Residents of the Cambridge House Hotel expressed concern yesterday that the city's decision on Friday to drop a plan to house homeless families in their building on West 86th Street was not final.
The city, they said, seemed to be delaying rather than abandoning its plans.
"It's not over at all," said Kennedy Fraser, acting president of the building's tenants association.
"It has just gone to a new level."


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ended Nov. 21  MANHATTAN  Greenwich Village  $215,000
1 Fifth Avenue (8th St.)  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 700-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; needs work; 24-hr. doorman, landmark building, 2 exposures, Washington Square Park view; maintenance $1,057, 51% tax-deductible (Brokers: Anne Weintraub-Bellmarc Realty)  Greenwich Village  $535,000
522 LaGuardia Place  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,600-sq.-ft. duplex penthouse condo in a loft building; elevator, dining area, fireplace, 500-sq.-ft. roof deck, 3 exposures; common charge $482, taxes $5,556 (Brokers: Barbara M. Kaufman-Manhattan Homes)  SoHo  $320,000
93 Mercer Street  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,900-sq.-ft loft co-op; elevator, 10-ft. tin ceilings, 2 exposures; maintenance $645, 40% tax-deductible (Brokers: Sinvin Realty-Halstead Property Co.)  Upper East Side  $300,000
171 East 84th Street  (Evans Tower)  1-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,000-sq.-ft. condo in a 6-year-old building; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, dining area, marble bath, terrace, pool and health club, Central Park view; common charge $602, taxes $4,404 (Broker: Bellmarc Realty)  Upper West Side  $682,500
325 West End Avenue (75th St.)  3-bedroom, 4-bath, 2,800-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; concierge, 2 maid's rooms, renovated kitchen, 2 exposures; maintenance $2,345, 37% tax-deductible (Broker: Halstead Property Co.)  West Side  $295,000
104 West 70th Street  (Walton)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,200-sq.-ft. prewar condo; 24-hr. doorman, 10-ft. ceilings, 2 exposures; common charge $700, taxes $600 (Broker: Klara Madlin Real Estate)  BRONX  Castle Hill  $179,000
2041 Watson Avenue  2-family detached frame house; 2 baths in upstairs unit; 1 bath in other; 3 bedrooms, dining room in each; 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,100 (Broker: Marland Real Estate)  Wakefield  $142,500
656 East 241st St.  3-bedroom, 1-bath, one-family attached brick house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 1-car garage, 18- by 87-ft. lot; taxes $1,200 (Broker: ERA/Best Match Real Estate)  BROOKLYN  Cobble Hill  $395,000
240 Kane Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, one-family 3-story brick and brownstone building; central staircase, dining room, double-parlor, 2 fireplaces, wide-plank floors, 14- by 95-ft. lot; taxes $1,833 (Broker: Harborview Realty)  Prospect Park South  $343,000
1305 Albemarle Road  10-bedroom, 5-bath, one-family detached, Grand Colonial Revival mansion; dining room, 24- by 50-ft. ballroom, billiard room, 4 fireplaces, 2-car garage, 100- by 130-ft. lot; taxes $3,900 (Broker: Mary Kay Gallagher)  QUEENS  Bayside  $155,000
56-20 206th Street  3-bedroom, 1-bath, one-family attached brick house; dining area, eat-in kitchen, full basement, 18- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,100 (Broker: Value Lane Realty)  Forest Hills  $270,000
67-60 Ingram Street  3-bedroom, 5-bath, one-family brick semi-attached house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, fireplace, 1-car garage, 30- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,550 (Broker: Century 21/F.H.)  STATEN ISLAND  Bulls Head  $226,000
49 Firth Road  2-family detached hi-ranch; 3 bedrooms, 1 1/2 baths, dining room, den in primary unit; 1 bedroom, 1 bath in other; 1-car garage, 42- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $2,000 (Broker: Century 21/Papp Realty)  Graniteville  $115,000
263 Jules Drive  2-bedroom, 2-bath, one-family semi-attached frame house; dining area, eat-in kitchen, 1-car garage, 30-by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,300 (Broker: Kingsley Real Estate)


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Glen Rock  $245,000
14 Grandview Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 92-year-old colonial; new roof, siding and heating system, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $4,665.
Livingston  $170,000
1 Claremont Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 38-year-old split level; family room, 1-car garage, fireplace in living room; $3,853.
Maplewood  $159,900
32 Colgate Road  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 45-year-old colonial; 2-car garage, 2-zone heat; taxes $4,555.
Short Hills  $780,000
65 Lake Road  4-bedroom, 4-bath, 4-half bath, 36-year-old colonial; family room, 2-car garage, fireplace, porch; taxes $12,927.
South Orange  $360,000
332 West End Road  5-bedroom, 2-bath, 3-half bath, 42-year-old Tudor; deck, fireplace, 2-car garage, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $9,664.
West Orange  $195,000
35 Edgewood Avenue  5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 45-year-old Cape Cod; enclosed porch, full basement, 2-car garage, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $5,085.
OTHER AREAS Ossining, N.Y.  $202,000
57 Park Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 34-year-old Cape Cod; fireplace, formal dining room, den, deck, hobby room, family room; taxes $5,287.
Bayville, L.I.  $214,000  5 Hilltop Drive  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 68-year-old Tudor; dining room, fireplace, finished basement, carport; taxes $3,200.
New Canaan, Conn.  $1,325,000
110 Greeley Road  5-bedroom, 4 1/2-bath, 4-year-old custom colonial; french doors, brick terrace, invisible fence, 2 acres; taxes $11,671.


When Cups and Saucers Spoke Volumes in Russian
Politicized frequently since its introduction in Europe during the 18th century, porcelain became a formidable propaganda tool under the Soviets.
After the 1917 Revolution, teapots and platters were emblazoned with boldly graphic Communist images and mottoes, much as dinnerware had been decorated in earlier regimes elsewhere with royal crests and revolutionary slogans.
The hammer-and-sickle emblems and Cyrillic calligraphy in "Revolution, Life and Labor: Soviet Porcelains, 1918-1985," at the Cooper-Hewitt Museum through April 4, are among the most powerful icons in the history of ceramics.
Similar images can be seen at the Art Institute of Chicago through May, in a smaller show of porcelains that were made shortly after the Bolshevik takeover.


A Show by Contemporary Italian Artists
IT took Simon Rodia from 1921 to 1954 to erect the Watts Towers in Los Angeles.
Rodia was one of the countless Italian artisans whose skills were indispensable to American architects in the early 20th century.
His labor of love (and patriotism), however, is a masterpiece of folk art nouveau, reminiscent of its high-art predecessor in Barcelona, the Church of the Sagrada Familia, by Gaudi.
Vito Russo was a later immigrant, and his Shrine of Our Lady of Mount Carmel, on Staten Island, begun in the 1940's, is comparatively modest.
Nevertheless, it belongs to the same tradition of folk obsessiveness.
Or so it seems from the photograph accompanying this review -- one of a series taken by Michael Angelo Falco for "Lo Spirito," the current exhibition at the Snug Harbor Cultural Center.


Vietnamese, Easy Target, Fear Ouster by Germany
At a cramped social worker's office in the gritty Marzahn neighborhood of eastern Berlin, a young Vietnamese man heard the bad news.
"Your permit to live here expires at the end of this month," an interpreter told him after examining his passport one recent afternoon.
"Unless something changes, you're going to have to go back home."


Museum-Grade Underwear
Richard Martin, who becomes the curator of the Costume Institute at the Metropolitan Museum of Art on Jan. 1, is planning a bold and bare debut: His first show, to open in April, will feature underwear, among other garments.
"The working title we're using is infra-apparel," said Mr.
Martin, who is leaving the Fashion Institute of Technology this month.
"The show will cover two areas. One is the externalization of undergarments. The other is the revealing of the structure of clothing."


Insightful Reading on Hunting and Fishing to Pass the Winter
Choosing a holiday gift for a well-equipped outdoors person can be difficult because it is usually impossible to keep track of his sporting gear.
On the other hand, it's relatively easy to check out the books on his shelves.
Nick Lyons's SPRING CREEK
(Atlantic Monthly Press, $20)
is a superb, perceptive account, elegant and enthusiastic by turns, of a fly fisherman's monthlong sojourn on a rare trout stream.
From it, one learns how a sensitive, intelligent fly fisher becomes captivated by the sport and by a lovely river.
It also describes, in the most graceful, unobtrusive manner, what must be done to catch trout on a challenging stretch of water.
In the chapter on the "Second Pool," you'll encounter some of the attitudes and writing precepts that created this marvelous little book.


Correction
An article on Nov. 22 about living in South Brunswick, N.J., misstated the prices of town houses in the Southridge Hills community.
Two-bedroom units there are priced at $114,990 to $116,990.


Are Disabled Just Regular People?
In response to reading "Coram Housing Project for Disabled Imperiled"  [ Nov. 15 ] , I propose the creation of a new organization entitled Nimby, for Negative Insensitive Mistrusting Biased Yahoos, to combat this frightening trend of warm community acceptance of housing for people with disabilities.
This organization should focus on a two-prong attack.
First, mount an educational campaign to convince the masses that affluence affords intolerance, and immunity from differences, whether it's on the Upper West Side or Nassau-Suffolk County.
But more importantly, it should muster all of its resources to halt these unwelcome efforts, for there could be dire consequences to integrating the deaf, the mentally ill, the homeless, the developmentally disabled and the retarded into the community.
They could actually begin to be viewed as just people -- people who are struggling as all people do, to one degree or another.
ANITA SHANKMAN Forest Hills


NUNN UNDER FIRE FROM GAY GROUPS
Senator Sam Nunn removed two aides a decade ago for being gay, and gay rights groups are now contending that his action disqualifies him from a post in a Clinton Administration.
Mr.
Nunn, the Georgia Democrat who is chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee, has confirmed that he asked the two aides to leave because of their homosexuality.
He says he had no choice because his office deals in sensitive security matters and the two men, because of their homosexuality, were considered security risks by the Central Intelligence Agency and the Defense Department.
The agencies contended that being homosexual made the men vulnerable to blackmail, even though both were open about their homosexuality.


Mazzilli Comes Up With Another Hit
The Italian Stallion will marry twice today.
He married twice yesterday, as well.
He has been doing it for five weeks now but says it is not yet second nature.
"The other actors ask me how you go up to hit with 50,000 people screaming," Lee Mazzilli, on a break between a wedding doubleheader, said last Sunday.
"I ask them how you stay in character with 150 people staring."


Far Away From the Crowded City, Tuberculosis Cases Increase
Last January, four months after their twins were born, Michelena Hallie and Andres Valdespino noticed one of the babies wheezing with a cold that did not go away.
The parents say that doctors, initially unable to pinpoint a cause, looked into frightening possibilities, including cystic fibrosis or a hole in the esophagus.
The baby, it turned out, had tuberculosis.
So did his twin brother and his father.
Ms.
Hallie and another son, a 5-year-old, did not have the disease but tested positive for the germ that can cause it.


Winning, By a Neck
The long neck highlighted with a black ribbon or leather thong tied high around the throat is the latest fad with young men and women.
The ribbons, wide or narrow, are always black.
They are often decorated with jeweled pins or pendants, and are worn both day and evening.
It is a style with a history.
Women have long aspired to the almost unobtainable swanlike neck immortalized in the ballet paintings of Degas.
At the end of the century, John Singer Sargent painted velvet ribbons around the necks of his dowagers to lift their necks into an idealized form, which was the only solution until the advent of plastic surgery.


Crashed Tanker Threatens Spain's Coast


Patsy McCall's Saloon Dream
When The Book Review asked Edward Sorel to create the drawings for many of the features in this holiday issue, we asked him, as has been our custom, to include an extra picture that would challenge the imaginations of some of our best storytellers.
Six writers rose to the occasion.


Now and Always, Fashion Mad
SUNDAY morning.
A car arrives to take you to the Abyssinian Baptist Church in Harlem.
Andre Leon Talley, Vogue magazine's ambassador to Paris, is waving from the back seat.
His shoulders are festooned with gold braid, part of an officer's uniform in some navy that sails only in the mind of Yohji Yamamoto.
You jump into the car.
"Come on," Billie Holiday is singing as the car heads uptown. "Let's dream."


Paris Report
The set should have been a tip-off.
The designer Karl Lagerfeld, returning to the house of Chloe after an absence of nearly 10 years, had asked that the bare tent in a courtyard of the Louvre -- where the French pret-a-porter collections are shown -- be transformed into a sentimental valentine.
The backdrop was sky blue with fluffy clouds and cupids.
A white trellis enclosed the runway.
Then out came a parade of the world's top models, beautiful creatures who are used to being tricked up in everything from heavy metal to the most beautiful (or dreariest) clothes.
They had, however, never looked like this.
Their startlingly sheer outfits, pajamas, tunics, dresses and jackets were softly colored or subtly printed in blocks of pastel.
Rickrack lace edged or made up whole dresses.
Everything fluttered with femininity.


Andrea LoCascio, James Lardiere
Andrea Lauren LoCascio, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Vincent LoCascio of Yonkers, was married yesterday to James Joseph Lardiere, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Lardiere of Basking Ridge, N.J.
The Rev.
Peter Donohue performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of the Transfiguration in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Mrs.
Lardiere, 25 years old, is a legal-claims examiner for the Material Damage Adjustment Corporation, an insurance company in Somerset, N.J.
She graduated cum laude from Villanova University and received a law degree from St.
John's University.
Her father is an education consultant in New York.
Her mother, Jeanne LoCascio, is the principal of Public School 182 in the Bronx.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
THE HURON CAROL
By Jean de Brebeuf.
Illustrated by Frances Tyrrell.
Unpaged.
New York: Dutton Children's Books. $15. (All ages)
PANCHO'S PINATA
By Stefan Czernecki and Timothy Rhodes.
Illustrated by Stefan Czernecki. 40 pp.
New York: Hyperion Books for Children. $14.95. (Ages 5 to 9)


Bank Failures Raise a Question: Who Does the Final Audit?
IT seems paradoxical that guards should themselves need guardians.
But today the accounting profession faces just that possibility, now that it is being held accountable for lapses in auditing financial institutions that failed.
Last month, Ernst &amp; Young paid a $400 million settlement to three Federal regulatory agencies that had charged the accounting firm with improperly auditing many of the banks and thrifts that recently went under, costing taxpayers untold billions of dollars.


Amtrak to Test Fast Train In Northeast
Amtrak plans to begin testing a high-speed train between Boston and Washington in February and March.
Metroliner passengers traveling between New York and Washington will be among those to ride the train, called the X2000, which is being leased from Swedish State Railways.
The top speed of both the X2000 and the Metroliner is 125 miles an hour, but while the Metroliner goes fast only on straightaways, the Swedish train can hold speed around curves.
The fastest trip on the Metroliner, a nonstop sprint between New York and Washington, is 2 hours 35 minutes, but more typical service that includes intermediate stops is 2 hours 55 minutes.
The X2000 will reduce the New York-to-Washington ride to 2 hours 15 minutes.
Other projections for the new train include a reduction of one hour in the four-hour run (on the New England Express) between Boston and New York, and faster trips between smaller cities in the Northeast corridor, such as Baltimore, Philadelphia, Trenton, Providence and New Haven.


Good Deeds For Girls
A winter festival benefits the Girl Scout Council of New York, Dec. 3.


In Hong Kong, Foreigners May Lose Again
Faith in China remains strong, especially if you are far enough away from it.
That became clear Friday when foreign investors rushed in to halt the slide in Hong Kong stock prices, a plunge that had sliced 16.8 percent off the Hang Seng index in the first four days of the week.


POSTINGS: Queens 'Incubator'; Storage for Start-Up Businesses
Construction on a new warehouse designed to provide storage facilities for small start-up businesses began last month in Long Island City, Queens, across the East River from mid-Manhattan.
The building, the first new commercial structure started in Long Island City in two years, is on 49th Avenue and 11th Place, 200 feet from the entrance to the Queens-Midtown tunnel.
It is across the street from the IND subway line's Vernon Boulevard-Jackson Avenue stop and the Long Island Rail Road's Hunter's Point station.
The warehouse, which will cost $125,000 to build, is expected to be completed by the end of February; no agreements have yet been reached with potential tenants.


Serious Stravinsky


Potential For a Series?
To the Editor:
It isn't all that surprising to hear that one or two of the networks will turn a sensational news story into a docudrama, but when three of them are going to produce versions of the Amy Fisher story, that
is
mind-boggling  [ "Murder, Mayhem Stalk TV," Nov. 22 ] .


Scientists Alarmed Over Plan to Launch Reactor Aboard a Satellite
Astronomers are raising a hue and cry over plans by the American military to launch a satellite carrying a Russian nuclear reactor in a test for the "Star Wars" antimissile defense system.
They say radiation from the reactor could disrupt operations of several important science missions.
Quietly and without publicity, the "Star Wars" scientists have been laying the groundwork for flying one of the reactors, called Topaz 2, at the end of 1995 or in early 1996.
The flight would test nuclear energy as a generator of electricity for operating long-duration propulsion systems and high-powered sensors considered essential in surveillance and missile tracking.


Rome Hotels
To the Editor: Since the article "A Room With a View in Rome" by Michael Mewshaw (Sept. 13)mentions the Excelsior Hotel as being in the luxury class, I want to say that a recent stay at the hotel convinced me otherwise.
There is nothing luxurious about the Excelsior except its prices.
We were booked through a cruise line and paid $600 a day, in United States dollars, with Continental breakfast included.


Union Rides the Wind To North Jersey Crown
When Lou Rettino, the coach of Union High School's football team, woke up this morning and heard the howl of a brisk wind outside his bedroom window, he must have smiled.
He had to know then that Randolph, a pass-happy offensive machine, would be in for a long day in its showdown with Union for the North Jersey, Section 2, Group 4 championship.
"I told my kids that we had to take advantage of them early," said Rettino.
"And that's exactly what we did."


A Mother Learns Some Vital Lessons About Caring
When Angela P. struck her 2-year-old son so hard that he fell against the wall, she knew it was time to get help.
She did not know why she hated her child so much, she said, only that her anger had flared even more with her own mother's recent death.
Angela said that even the slightest irritation prompted her rage, like the time her son's voice rose in a sing-song whine or when he playfully dismantled furniture in their cramped apartment.


Notable Books of the Year 1992
This list has been selected from books reviewed since the Christmas Books issue of December 1991.
It suggests only high points in the main fields of reader interest, and it does not include titles chosen by the editors of The Book Review as the Best Books of 1992.
Books are arranged alphabetically under subject headings.
Art, Music &amp; Popular Culture  THE AGE OF MISSING INFORMATION.
By Bill McKibben. (Random House, $20.) Two dramatic, intertwined reports -- one an account of the world as reflected in a 24-hour period in the Adirondacks, the other an account of the world as broadcast on 103 television channels in a single day.


A German Envoy Seeks to Reassure a Wary Israel
A few hours earlier, seven survivors of the Treblinka extermination camp had come calling, to say how worried they are about what is happening in Germany.
Right away, Otto von der Gablentz said, he was struck by how "they were extraordinarily disciplined, considering their background." They were firm but not rancorous, polite but not obsequious.


Offense Vows to Shake Shades of Finals Past
The University of Virginia and the University of San Diego are determined to overcome the stigma of the scoreless tie that has marred the championship game of the Division I soccer tournament in recent years.
Virginia and San Diego each displayed an entertaining attacking style by scoring three goals in their semifinal victories on Friday.
The Cavaliers beat Duke, 3-0, and the Toreros defeated Davidson, 3-2, in overtime to set the Sunday title game.


'It's Not Me That's Guilty. My Addiction Just Took Over.'
DON'T blame Senator Bob Packwood. It was the booze.
And don't blame Judge Sol Wachtler. It was mental illness.


Rangers Continue Plodding
John Vanbiesbrouck likens the situation to raking leaves.
You finish one pile, and another falls down upon you.
The Rangers solve one problem, and another slaps them in the face.
They beat one team, and another comes along and outright embarrasses them on the ice.
The Rangers (12-11-3) are host to the Maple Leafs (11-11-3) at Madison Square Garden tonight and will have neared the one-third mark of their regular season.
And they will have played it like a Jekyll-and-Hyde team, good one day, bad the next.
"It's 26 games into the season and we haven't played up to our potential," Mark Messier said after the Rangers followed a 5-3 Wednesday night victory over Detroit with a humiliating 8-4 loss to the Capitals on Friday.
"Obviously, we expected to be better, and there has been some concern."


Topics of The Times; Presidential Pronouncement
There are still people who say "Roo-zuh-velt" when speaking of the Presidents Roosevelt; it's "Roe-zuh-velt." And there are doubtless some who never caught on to Ronald Reagan's "Ray-gn."
Comes now a Southerner who's concerned that the rest of America will mispronounce Clinton.
In a letter to the editor of The Washington Post, the writer -- a Virginian -- observes that Hamilton Jordan's name still trips up most people, despite his years at the right hand of President Carter.


Where Holiday Gifts Have an Individual Touch
HANDMADE ceramics, glass, woodwork, jewelry and even tree ornaments can be highly individual holiday gifts.
They can introduce friends to the delights of collecting craft items or please connoisseurs.
The range of styles and prices in New Jersey galleries and museum shops is so varied that there should be a present for every hard-to-please person on the list.


Art
THE good news this season is that there has been a distinct upturn in the publishing of innovative and revelatory art history.
Symptomatic of this is the fact that after a bad moment a year or two ago in which the jury could find no book worthy of selection, the Mitchell Prize for Art History has been revived in association with the British art history journal, The Burlington Magazine.
The winners this year were "Caspar David Friedrich and the Subject of Landscape," by Joseph Leo Koerner, for the Mitchell Prize itself and "Corot in Italy," by Peter Galassi, for the Eric Mitchell Prize, which is given for a first book.
Both were published in this country by Yale University Press, the Koerner in 1990 and the Galassi in 1991.
Among this season's new books, there is much to admire, both among exhibition catalogues and among independent studies.
A current favorite is, quite rightly, the catalogue of the current Matisse exhibition at the Museum of Modern Art by its curator, John Elderfield.
Published by the museum at $75 in hard covers and $37.50 in paperback, with every painting in color and a text and chronology that are full of new insights, it is both a lifetime's treasure and (in today's terms) a bargain.


Few Using Curriculum In Dispute
Even as the Schools Chancellor has suspended a school board in Queens for its defiant rejection of a multicultural curriculum that teaches first graders to respect gay people, few teachers in New York City have actually begun using it in the classroom.
And given the bureaucracy and vagaries of the nation's largest school system, it is unlikely that the curriculum will become an integral part of a first grader's ABC's for a long time, if ever, in most of the 32 local school districts, parents and educators say.


Price of Disability Has Few Guarantees
A week ago tonight, the Jets' owner, Leon Hess, visited Dennis Byrd at Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan.
Byrd's neck was broken and he was paralyzed from the waist down after colliding head-first with his teammate Scott Mersereau during a loss to the Kansas City Chiefs that afternoon.
"We'll get the best for him," Hess assured Byrd's wife, Angela. "Whatever he needs."


Taking a Leaf Out of California's Book
CALIFORNIA GRILLE is lighting up the North Shore with its creative West Coast cuisine and fresh good looks.
The newcomer in Glen Head has transformed what was once Old Gerlich's into a bustling pale-pink hacienda.
California is written all over this new restaurant.
A dramatic flaming torch welcomes diners.
Inside, decorative tiles, luxuriant plants, a greenhouse dining room, stained-glass sconces, an open kitchen a la Spago in Los Angeles and creamy walls hung with framed wine posters and earthenware plates create a crisp, classic California milieu.
Unfortunately, the high noise level intrudes on the "California Dreamin' " laid-back scene.


Tech Notes; Help for Life on the Tarmac
SUPPOSE you have to do some maintenance on your B-2 bomber.
There are a thousand different maintenance manuals, each a thousand pages long.
Cross-referenced.
With updates to consult.
And you have to lug them out onto the tarmac, where it's extremely cold or steamy hot or very wet.
Perhaps a laptop computer, crammed with the essential information, would help.
But if you dropped the thing, it could split in half.


Corrections
A report in Styles of The Times last Sunday about the wedding of Nannette Christine Cavanagh and George Gardner Herrick was published in error.
The wedding was postponed because of illness in the family of the bride-to-be.


Changing Face of AIDS In the County
EVERY time her 2 1/2-year-old son cuts himself, Iris F. begins another vigil.
"I wait to see if it's going to heal," she said, "because then I know he's still O.K."
A year ago, both the 36-year-old Mount Vernon resident and her son tested positive for H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS, and ever since, her days have been spent fearfully measuring little symptoms that could mean they are losing their battle and contracting the disease.
The woman agreed to be interviewed on the condition that only her first name and last initial be used.


Installing Insulation, at Least in Theory, Is Not Difficult
INSULATING the floor above an unheated basement or crawl space can save on heating bills and increase comfort in the winter.
In theory, the job is not difficult.
It usually consists of fastening strips of fiberglass or mineral-wool insulation between the floor joists.
But in practice the task can be dirty, awkward and time-consuming unless the basement is in a new house and there is plenty of headroom.
In an older house with unevenly spaced joists and a maze of electrical wiring and plumbing or in a house with a crawl space, consider having a professional carry out the installation.
As when hiring any contractor, obtain bids from at least three companies, have them show proof of insurance coverage and ask for the names of previous customers to be called as references.


Ms. Denison, Jeffrey Walsh
Mary Ellen Denison, a textiles company executive in New York, was married in Larchmont, N.Y. yesterday to Jeffrey James Walsh, a newspaper editor in White Plains.
Msgr.
Walter Kenny performed the ceremony at St.
Augustine's Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.
Walsh, 41 years old, is the director of the furniture division for Kravet Fabrics Inc., a fabric and furniture manufacturer.
She graduated from Rosemont College.
She is the daughter of David and Patricia Denison of Larchmont.
Her father is a consultant at the Wall Street Group, an investor-relations consulting concern in New York.


Hurdler Wins Award
Olympic gold medalist KEVIN YOUNG, the first intermediate hurdler to break 47 seconds, received the 1992 Jesse Owens Award, presented on Friday by United States track and field's governing body.


CALIFORNIA SPURNS ITS OWN WATCHDOG
For the last seven and a half years, Dale Carlson looked for fraud and mismanagement in state agency budgets.
But this week Mr.
Carlson was looking for work.
A staff auditor with California's Office of the Auditor General, Mr.
Carlson and his 94 colleagues received layoff notices last month after California voters soundly defeated a ballot measure that would have restored financing to the Auditor General.
The office closed on Friday after 37 years of keeping an eye on state government.


War on Drugs In Peru Shows Limited Gains
The muddy Huallaga River runs swiftly past the airstrip that represents the frontline in the drug war.
And recently, Peruvian and American troops were celebrating.
The drug police, with the help of 25 agents from the United States Drug Enforcement Administration, had made their biggest seizure on record -- 3,000 pounds of coca paste from a processing lab 100 miles to the north.
As the police loaded the drugs onto a military transport plane for shipment to Lima, many were joking about not breathing too deeply.
Others wanted their pictures taken next to the sacks.


Wendy Walker, Ralph Whitworth
Wendy Walker, the executive producer for White House news at the Cable News Network in Washington, was married there yesterday to Ralph Victor Whitworth, the owner of Whitworth &amp; Associates, a corporate-consulting firm in Washington.
The Rev.
Stuart Kenworthy performed the Episcopal ceremony at Christ Church, Georgetown.


'SO HOW DID I GET HERE?'
Rosemary Bray and her family are quite remarkable, but why is she so bitter?
Why does she feel "hounded by the state, eager to prosecute us for the crime of survival?" Does she think the rest of the country lives in a country club?
There is more to the United States than the ghetto and Yale.
T.
S.
HARDY
New York, N.Y.


Cooper Will Be Back
JOHN COOPER will remain as head coach at Ohio State.
The university president, GORDON GEE, said on Friday that Cooper would be back for his sixth year as coach.
It was a tumultuous year for Cooper, with numerous reports that he would either be dismissed or resign.


Bequest Blends Into a Museum's Scheme
AT the New Britain Museum of American Art, the spotlight is on a collection bequeathed by Olga Knoepke, who died recently.
Little of the collector's life is revealed, beyond her having been a member and friend of the museum for the last four years.
But it is clear from the two dozen paintings, drawings and sculptures in the exhibition that her taste was for 20th-century American art excluding abstraction.
Hence, the gift should fit easily into the museum's collection.
One of the best works is Charles Hawthorne's circa-1910 "Dressmaker," a canvas that sparkles with Impressionist light -- the artist studied with William Merritt Chase -- but derives its color more from the Venetians.


Envoy Asserts Intervention in Somalia Is Risky and Not in Interests of U.S.
In a strongly worded warning to Washington, the American Ambassador to Kenya has said that the military intervention in Somalia presents more risks than the United States realizes and is not in this country's interests.
The warning by Ambassador Smith Hempstone Jr., while considered a minority view, shows that some American officials are uneasy over the operation and it suggests the possibility of a broader debate in the United States over foreign policy objectives.


Even the Sportscasters Are Sort of Speechless
Under the eight crystal chandeliers of the Marriott Marquis Hotel's grand ballroom Thursday night mingled some of the luminaries of sportscasting: Bob Costas, Vin Scully, Don Dunphy, Mel Allen and Marty Glickman.
Major executives of sports business were there as well: CBS Sports President Neal Pilson and his NBC counterpart, Dick Ebersol; New York Mets executive vice president Frank Cashen; LeRoy Walker, president of the United States Olympic Committee, and N.B.A.
Commissioner David Stern..


Being Fat Is as American as, Well, Apple Pie; Weight-Loss Programs
To the Editor:
Re your series "Fat in America" (front page, Nov. 22-24): we do not agree that there are "consistent findings by obesity researchers that most people actually have little control over their body weight."


A Hot Ticket: Home Theaters
Latest reports on video sales show that -- cost notwithstanding -- home theater is the season's hot ticket.
After a long stretch of frugality, people seem ready to give themselves a treat.
Not everyone has a clear idea of just what a home theater is.
Basically, it's a big video screen linked to high-quality audio equipment.
That way, video sound is delivered with the fidelity of a good stereo system.
This alone is an advantage over ordinary television sets.


A Municipal Morality Play
Since he was beaten in a Brooklyn alley, a homeless black man with an arrest record has become a racial and political crisis.
Page 51.


Where to Place Blame For Latin Misery
"Immigrants Grab a Toehold of American Dream"  [ Nov. 15 ]  is one of a series of reports the Long Island Weekly has written concerning illegal aliens on Long Island.
We are told of their poverty and working two or more jobs or of being unemployed.
We are told Some cannot go on welfare, and most are exploited by Long Island businesses and landlords.
We are told that many came from El Salvador, fleeing from war.
We are told of our obligations and the illegal aliens' rights to medical care and education.


Let the Brewer Beware, Home Brew Packs a Punch
AT J. J. Mannion's Tavern here, you can drink beer from all over the globe: German Dinkelacker, New Zealand Steinlager, Mexican Chihuahua and Chinese Tsing Tao, to name a few.
But for those not content just to buy and pour, there is another way.
Make it yourself, say Matthew Palazola and Terry Soloman, who claim that home-brewed beer can be as full-bodied and satisfying as any commercial beer in the world.


'SO HOW DID I GET HERE?'
Bray should be directing most of her anger at her father, not at the state or at the people who have jobs and pay taxes.


Was Oswald a Spy, and Other Cold War Mysteries
In moscow early in the evening of May 13, 1981, the teletype clattered to life in the headquarters of the K.G.B. in Dzerzhinsky Square.
The flash was top priority.
"From Rome, May 13: John Paul II was wounded by an unknown assailant. The crime was perpetrated while the Pope was driving through a crowd of the faithful in an open automobile. . . . Early reports connect this attempt on the life of John Paul II with the complex political situation in the country."


Memorial for Stinchfield
A memorial service for Dr.
Frank E. Stinchfield, a leader in orthopedic surgery who died on Tuesday, will be held at 11 A.M. tomorrow at the Riverdale Presbyterian Church, at 4765 Henry Hudson Parkway West near 246th Street in the Bronx.


Rev. Morris F. Arnold, Episcopal Official, 77
The Rev.
Morris F. Arnold, the retired assistant bishop of the Episcopal Diocese of Massachusetts and an advocate on housing, poverty and other social issues, died Thursday at Mount Auburn Hospital in Cambridge, Mass.
He was 77 years old and lived in nearby Belmont.
He died of heart disease, his family said.


NOV. 28-DEC. 5: Russian Politics; Once More, Yeltsin Takes a Punch And Bounces Back
President Boris N. Yeltsin has faced more than a few harrowing challenges from the aggressive Russian Parliament, complete with narrow escapes.
Even so, last week's struggle was unusually harrowing and the escape unusually narrow.
In the past the fight was about the outlines of reform; this time it was about Mr.
Yeltsin's ability to carry on.
Striking suddenly, hard-liners called a secret ballot on changing the constitution to give Parliament a veto over the choice of ministers.
That is normal in Western democracies, but Russia's Parliament is still far from a creative partner in government.
Mr.
Yeltsin said a veto would "bind the Government hand and foot."


Kathryn Van Deusen, William Hatfield
John and Lois Van Deusen of Livingston, N.J., have announced August wedding plans for their daughter Kathryn Lynn Van Deusen and William Stephen Hatfield, the son of Ross and Cornelia Hatfield of Stratford, Conn.
Ms.
Van Deusen, 25 years old, graduated from Lehigh University.
She and her fiance are third-year law students at Vermont Law School, and are currently attending classes at the Hastings College of Law of the University of California.
Her father owns John A. Van Deusen &amp; Associates, an elevator-consulting company in Livingston.
Her mother is a partner at the Newark law firm of McCarter &amp; English.


From Poverty to Pushcart to Pros
The shame of poverty kept his brothers under their sheets during those unbroken mornings.
The feeling, if not overpowering, wasn't foreign to Tony Fernandez, either, as he prepared to step into the streets and the stench and the dreams of San Pedro de Macoris.
Fernandez would rise with his parents.
His father, with his quick smile and the deliberate, hitched stride of a field worker, would leave for the distant acres of sugar cane.
His mother, sterner than his father, would set before Fernandez the pathetic pushcart his older brothers scorned.


Ancient Collections: A Lesson in History
WITH the decline of the economy in the last several years, sales of coins have slowed and prices are down.
But several auctions this month may tell whether times are changing.
Two auctions next weekend should show if the market for ancient coins is improving.
Ancient coins are often more difficult to sell in this country than their American cousins.
Most American collectors prefer the United States coins they saved as children.
Certainly the quality of those collections has improved over the years, but rarely do the collectors move to the larger and more complex domains of Greek, Roman or Byzantine coins.


Yankees Point Magnet at Maddux
Even before Barry Bonds reached agreement on a contract with the San Francisco Giants today, the Yankees, the other team in the running for Bonds, said they had made right-hander Greg Maddux as their top target.
"If we are going to step out, we're going to step out for this guy," Gene Michael, the general manager of the Yankees, said of Maddux, the free-agent right-hander who won the 1992 National League Cy Young Award.
The Yankees have presented a standing five-year offer for $34 million to the 26-year-old Maddux.


40 Wall Street
To the Editor:
A small sidebar to your Streetscapes column on Nov. 15 about 40 Wall Street deals with my late father, who put $500 or so into the cumulative debentures used to erect the building.
When things went bust in the economy he didn't sell out for cents on the dollar; nor did he paper a wall or frame his "worthless" paper.
He just put it away.


Nader Is Promoting a 'Radical' Civics Course
When it comes to civic responsibility, Ralph Nader would like students to follow his lead.
The nation's schools, the consumer advocate says, should adopt a radical new approach to teaching civics courses, aimed at making students understand what they can do to make a difference.


THE TRANSITION: Reaction in Congress; Some Republicans, but Not All, Praise the Expected Appointments
Republican members of Congress joined their Democratic colleagues today in praising the expected appointment of Senator Lloyd Bentsen as Treasury Secretary, but some raised concerns about other leading candidates for President-elect Bill Clinton's economic team.
Democrats said the reported list of economic advisers reflected Mr.
Clinton's commitment to move the party away from traditional tax-and-spend liberalism toward pragmatism..


Corporate Japan's Unholy Allies
The Ito-Yokado Company is not the kind of company you would expect to find cutting deals with gangsters in public toilets.
Japan's most profitable retailer, it is respected here as a model of disciplined management and no-nonsense efficiency.
Its 7-Eleven Japan convenience-store chain has become such a cash machine that when the Southland Corporation, the chain's American founder, went bankrupt, Ito-Yokado could afford to rescue it.
That is why the company caused such a sensation here recently when three of its senior executives were arrested for making large illegal payments to the mob.
According to a confidential police document, Ito-Yokado's internal auditor and another senior executive entered the ground-floor men's room of the Nippon Life Insurance Building on July 13 and handed over one million yen, the equivalent of about $8,000, to a group of sokaiya -- a type of gangster that specializes in corporate extortion.


No Headline
I've got a lover who has got AIDS and I have to support him.
Then I have to contend with my own diagnosis.
Then I have my friends who are struggling and dying.
Then my patients.
It's sort of like Camus's 'The Plague.' When there are so many dead bodies, what do you do, just step over them? -- DR.
LEON McKUSICK, a psychologist who is infected with H.I.V.  [ 32:3. ]


At Euro Disney, Mickey Mouse Takes a Back Seat
Driving up to Euro Disney, the Walt Disney Company's resort and theme park 20 miles east of Paris, I suddenly realized that I was approaching not the magic but the mythic kingdom.
Like a pink version of the Emerald City of Oz, the pastel towers of the Victorian-style Disneyland Hotel abruptly rose up on the horizon.
It was the perfect metaphor for Euro Disney as theater.


RAGE IN A TENURED POSITION
Little wonder that Heilbrun left Columbia's English department.
The current departmental chairman's "plaintive" remark -- "I found her a very maternal figure" -- reflects the inability of the men in the English department to see Heilbrun as a colleague.
Matthews's article is a cautionary tale for any woman who rejects stereotyping by the "the good old boys." JUDITH E. FUNSTON
Potsdam, N.Y.


Freedom Fighters
LIBERATORS
Fighting on Two Fronts in World War II.
By Lou Potter with William Miles  and Nina Rosenblum.
Illustrated. 303 pp.
New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. $29.95.


Elizabeth Bram, Eric Rothstein
Elizabeth Helen Bram, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William B. Bram of New York, was married last evening to Eric Edward Rothstein, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Louis Rothstein of New York.
Rabbi Robert Levine performed the ceremony at the Essex House in New York.
Mrs.
Rothstein, 26 years old, graduated from the University of Colorado at Boulder.
Her father is a vice president of Merrill Lynch &amp; Company in New York.
Her mother, Jane E. Bram, is a psychotherapist in New York.


Editor's Choice
THERE are nine titles on the Best Books of the Year list: four novels, one by a British writer, one by a Canadian and two by Americans; a volume of three connected stories by an American poet; a biography of Henry Kissinger by an American journalist; a historical essay by an American historian on the most famous Presidential speech; a grand old writer's posthumous account of a tragic forest fire; and a history of a battle over scientific ideas by a British philosopher who has become a scientist.
They were chosen by 11 editors of The Book Review from a list of 36 nominated by the editors themselves from among books reviewed since last year's Christmas Books issue.


It Sounds Like 'Hamlet,' But It's in Manhattan
NOW at the Arena Players Repertory Theater in East Farmingdale is "I Hate Hamlet," a droll comedy whose ordinary message is that money cannot buy personal satisfaction.
What is extraordinary are the theatrical flourishes that the author, Paul Rudnick, employs to make his point.
The play opens as a real-estate agent in Manhattan shows John Barrymore's former residence to a young television actor who has just rented it sight unseen.
The apartment resembles a Shakespearean set on which a play like "Hamlet" might be staged.


RECORD BRIEFS
Tom Ze: 'The Hips of Tradition'
Luaka Bop 945118-2; CD and cassette.
TXT&gt;
Art rockers will find each other no matter where they live.
This is the case with the American star David Byrne and the Brazilian Tom Ze.
Ze is exactly the type of musician -- reclusive, with a subtle acumen -- that needs celebrity sponsorship, and his work justifies Byrne's enthusiasm.
"The Hips of Tradition" is less polished than 1990's "Best of Tom Ze" and sometimes has the loose feel of rough sketches.
The irregular meters and Ze's odd moans suggest parodies of peppery sambas and languid bossa novas.
At times, the tunes tick along with the combined whimsy of Erik Satie and Captain Beefheart.
Like many of the local pop progressives, Ze ponders Brazil's riotous juxtapositions of poverty and high technology, science fiction and prehistory.
More explicitly than any of his peers, however, Ze's music proudly embodies the disquieting jostle of what he calls "Jungle de Disco."


Cookies for Eating and Giving as Christmas Gifts
MANY years ago, some friends of mine made it a rule that their three children were never to buy them presents.
Since then, these children have come up with gifts they have made themselves, ranging from paintings and hand-knitted sweaters to cookies and cakes.
Of course, these were appreciated much more than anything bought in a store, and the children liked making them, too.
My son is now 4, the age for pinch pots (a term new to me; in my day these pots were called ashtrays) and paintings that of course compare favorably with most of the works on display in the galleries in SoHo, where we live.
He is also an enthusiastic chef, and recently our attention turned to cookies as holiday gifts.


NUNN UNDER FIRE FROM GAY GROUPS
Senator Sam Nunn removed two aides a decade ago for being gay, and gay rights groups are now contending that his action disqualifies him from a post in a Clinton Administration.
Mr.
Nunn, the Georgia Democrat who is chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee, has confirmed that he asked the two aides to leave because of their homosexuality.
He says he had no choice because his office deals in sensitive security matters and the two men, because of their homosexuality, were considered security risks by the Central Intelligence Agency and the Defense Department.
The agencies contended that being homosexual made the men vulnerable to blackmail, even though both were open about their homosexuality.


Casting For Dollars
Some movies seem beyond the reach of commercial tie-ins.
Take "A River Runs Through It," Robert Redford's lyrical story of two brothers who love fly-fishing and each other.
What would they sell?
Bait?
Not quite.
But if you shop from the Sundance Catalogue, the next time you go fishing you can wear the "River Runs Through It" all-cotton T-shirt, pack a snack of Sundance Granola ("17 wholesome ingredients") and carry the "River Runs Through It" knife (in photograph).
The knife is engraved with a fishing scene and the movie's title on one side, a quote from Norman Maclean's novella (the film's source) on the other.


Barthelmismo
THE TEACHINGS OF DON B.
Satires, Parodies, Fables, Illustrated Stories, and Plays of Donald Barthelme.
Edited by Kim Herzinger.
Introduction by Thomas Pynchon. 352 pp.
New York: Turtle Bay Books. $25.


Viewpoints; When Airline Fares Are Hardly Fair
AFTER nearly a decade of laissez-faire neglect, it is imperative that the Government restore pricing equity to the nation's troubled domestic airline industry.
Federal law once mandated that airlines serve the "public convenience and necessity," and that all fares and charges be "just and reasonable," meaning reasonably related to the cost of providing service and unencumbered by inequitable restrictions.
As a result, if you wished to fly from Point A to Point B, whether you bought your ticket two months, two weeks or two hours before departure, you were not gouged by virtue of your choice.
Neither were you forced to remain at your destination over a Saturday night in order to obtain the only affordable air fare.
And, if you canceled your trip, or changed the date or flight, your ticket was fully refundable or bore minimal penalties.


SURFACING
TELECOMMUNICATIONS --
Personal 800 numbers:
Gives individuals the 800 option.
Particularly popular with parents of college students.
STATUS SYMBOL --
The "Kelly" pill box:
A sterling silver miniature of the famous Hermes handbag.
It's an in-the-know "wink" among sports chic women in their 20's and 30's, who are wearing it attached to their lapels or looped through neck chains.
Retails for $650.
MUSIC --
Adult lullabies:
Songs for insomniacs (which is to say, one third of Americans).
They combine the soft lilt of new-age chiming sounds with lyrics like, "Give your wings a try/You were meant to fly."


Frustrations Blaze a Path For Egypt's Fundamentalists
TWO recent developments one a natural disaster and the other a rising political threat -- underline the growing crisis of confidence in Egypt's leadership under President Hosni Mubarak.
The natural disaster was the earthquake that ripped through Cairo on Oct. 12, not only killing hundreds of people but also leaving many others homeless and angry over the Government's failure to meet the pressing needs of its citizens.


How Level Is the Field For D.A. Election?
As the 1977 Democratic nominee for District Attorney of Westchester, I was amused by the article on Nov. 15.  [ "Shifts in Top Spots to Affect '93 Elections" ] .
It reported that Carl Vergari, the present District Attorney of Westchester, who has announced that he will not run again for re-election in 1993, asserted he never had any intention of resigning beforehand "because it would be completely unfair for me to quit during my term to permit a Democratic governor to appoint a Democrat who would run as an incumbent."
He also said he wanted to insure that his successor will be "running on a level playing field." It is ironic that this observation comes from the same Carl A. Vergari who 25 years earlier was named the interim D.A. by a Republican Governor when his predecessor was elevated to the Supreme Court.


Streetscapes: Readers' Questions; A Converted Orphanage, and a Stickley Connection?
This is another in a series of columns answering questions from readers about New York's changing streetscapes.
402 East 90th Street
Q.
We live in a condominium at 402 East 90th Street, converted about nine years ago from an old building.
I've been told it was once a convent with land and gardens extending almost to the East River.
Can you tell me about the building? . . .
Ruth J. Natinsky, Manhattan.


The Master's Voice Restored
At long last RCA/BMG has repaid its debt to Arturo Toscanini, reissuing its stock of recordings of the maestro in 71 volumes comprising 82 CD's.
The volumes are available individually and, in an edition of 5,000, in a "deluxe box set." A display case with a gold-embossed glass door is also available separately for those who acquire the CD's individually.
So your own personal ton of Toscani niana can sit self-contained in your living room, right next to your big-horned phonograph and your quizzical dog, still loyally attending to his master's voice.
One wonders what Toscanini would have thought of the hype.
One knows what the curmudgeonly cultural critic Joseph Horowitz thinks, since he wrote a book about it.


Commercial Property: Chinatown; Beneath the Bustle, A Malaise Emerges
COMPARED to the rest of the city, Chinatown is booming.
Rents are high, buildings are still going up, offices are still being leased.
What promises to be its largest restaurant ever, with a capacity of nearly 1,500, is scheduled to open on Elizabeth Street next year.
And Chinatown long ago crossed its traditional Canal Street boundary, making ever deeper inroads into Little Italy.


Students of Experience Try Their Hand At Models by the Master Experimenter
LEONARDO DA VINCI once noted that "presumptuous" people scorned his limited literary skills.
"They do not know," he wrote, "that my subjects require for their expression not the words of others, but experience."
Now William Brown, his students, and the Eli Whitney Museum in Hamden champion Leonardo and "la sperienzia."


Amelia Marshall and Daryl Waters
DARYL WATERS is the assistant music director of "Jelly's Last Jam," the Broadway show about Jelly Roll Morton, the self-proclaimed inventor of jazz with the Picassoesque temper.
When Mr.
Waters proposed to Amelia Marshall, an actress who plays Gilly Grant on the soap opera "Guiding Light," he did what Jelly rarely did: he coolly accepted rejection.


Color Almost Too Good To Be True
IF it lives up to its claims, a new color printing process will let your great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-grandchildren see if they have your ears.
With it, fine-art photographs should last longer than museum paintings.
The process is called Carbro II Ultrastable.
Tests suggest that if the prints are properly stored, they should last 500 years (as compared with dye-transfer prints, which, at 45 years or so, are some of the longest-lasting color prints now available).


In Time of Growing Need, Harsh Attitudes Grow Softer
The cycle seems to be turning.
Slowly perhaps, but turning.
Images of self indulgence so flagrantly flaunted for so long are blushingly turning more sedate.
Stretch limousines seem less obvious and less stretched, perhaps as budgets become more so.
And charitable organizations are reporting increases in the numbers of volunteers as well as requests.
As it does every few years, the relationship of the contented "us" to the unfortunate "them" is changing, drawing closer.
Compared with a few years ago, people now seem less inclined to take full credit for their own good luck and are not quite as ready as they used to be to blame the down-and-out for their poverty.
Denial is giving way to compassion and the idea seems to be growing that to a greater degree than we believed, we really are all in this together.


This Week's Numbers
Consensus
Last Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. Inc.)
Monday
Nov. consumer credit, in billions
$1.6
-$0.5
Wednesday
Nov. wholesale trade, percent change
1.6
0.3
Thursday
Nov. producer prices, percent change
0.1
0.2
Late Nov. jobless claims, thousands
362
355
Friday
Nov. retail sales, percent change
0.9
0.2
Nov. consumer price index, percent change
0.5
0.2
Monday: Group of 10 central bank governors meet in Basel  Tuesday: Johnson-Redbook survey of retail sales  Wednesday: Federal Reserve releases beige book on economic conditions


Mark Morris Gives 'The Nutcracker' a Twist
Once upon a time, in the land of dreams and sweets called The Ballet, there lived a princess who was beautiful, forlorn but no longer young.
At her birth, you see, she had been given the gift of eternal youth -- conditional on her being in love.
It had been a long time since the last suitor who had pleased her.
Now the annual pilgrimage to the Shrine of the Nutcracker was about to begin.
From far and wide, men, women and children would come to pay homage to the princess, though many of them had never even heard of Ballet.
It was a tough time to be alone.
Yet as she gazed from her casement window, she saw a raw youth striding up the hill to the castle carrying a large, gaudily wrapped package.
He had traveled the world.
His boots were dusty.
But his long curls swung as he climbed, a cigarette hung jauntily in his free hand, and his eyes seemed filled as much with affection as with amusement as he glanced her way.
Could this be the prince she was waiting for?


YELTSIN SURVIVES PARLIAMENT TESTS BY HAIR'S BREADTH
By a hair's breadth, President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia today survived the most serious challenge yet mounted by hard-line opponents in Parliament intent on altering the course of his economic changes and curbing his powers.
In secret balloting, the country's highest-ranking legislative body fell a few votes short of adopting constitutional amendments that would have diluted Mr.
Yeltsin's control over the Government and given new powers to a Parliament dominated by an increasingly militant majority of hard-liners.


My Epiphany
When The Book Review asked Edward Sorel to create the drawings for many of the features in this holiday issue, we asked him, as has been our custom, to include an extra picture that would challenge the imaginations of some of our best storytellers.
Six writers rose to the occasion.


In My Backyard? Where New York City Puts Its Problems
The Dinkins administration's plan to move 100 homeless families into two Upper West Side hotels has transformed the neighborhood into yet another not-in-my-backyard battleground.
One argument that even socially conscious West Siders raise against the proposal is that there is already a surfeit of treatment centers and shelters in the neighborhood, many of them privately administered with public money.
And, echoing the complaints routinely heard in many parts of the city, they say their neighborhood is ill-prepared to absorb any more of the city's stopgap solutions to persistent citywide problems.


Snow Sculpture Festivals
Four-person teams from several countries, including one from China and another from Moscow, will compete in the American International Snow Sculpture Championships at BRECKENRIDGE, COLO., from Jan. 5 to 9.
Snow sculpture has been a major winter activity in the ski resort town since the 1960's when residents carved whimsical creations from snow during their Ullr Fest winter carnival.
A Colorado championship was held in Breckenridge in the 1980's, and then the community started the international competition in 1991.
Contestants assemble in a parking lot on Main Street to carve 10--by-10-foot blocks of snow into intricate shapes that are judged by an international panel.
Many teams, such as the one from Belize that will be competing in January, are accomplished woodcarvers.
Mexico, Morocco, Wales, Finland, Canada, Italy and France have confirmed they are sending one or more teams, said a spokesman for the championships.


U.N. Panel Rebukes Burmese Military Rulers
A United Nations committee has unanimously voted to rebuke Myanmar, formerly Burma, over the refusal of its military rulers to surrender power to a democratically elected Parliament.
The organization also called Friday night for the unconditional release of Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, an opposition figure and Nobel peace laureate who is now in her fourth year of detention, and of her supporters.
Mrs.
Aung San Suu Kyi's National League for Democracy won 80 percent of the vote in parliamentary elections in May 1990, but was never allowed to take power.


Tucking In for a Long Winter's Nap
THE word mulch or the practice of mulching is quite often the brunt of jokes.
But those who are serious gardeners know how important mulching is.
Gardeners shouldn't mind the jokes because they may have the last laugh.
For those who have not learned about mulching, some advice: A mulch is a layer of organic material (preferably) that is placed over the ground several inches deep.
A mulch accomplishes many things.
During the growing season it will keep the soil cool and moist, and it will also prevent weeds from growing.


Business Diary/November 29 - December 4
THE ECONOMY Insurers Change Their Minds on Universal Health Coverage


Aid for the Aging
Burden Center salutes an executive, Nov. 30.


Bahr Caught in Giant Shuffle
In a series of roster moves, some surprising, the Giants today ended the seasons of Matt Bahr and Steve DeOssie, placing them on injured reserve, and apparently ended the New York career of John Washington by waiving him.
As expected, the Giants activated strong safety Myron Guyton and wide receiver Mark Ingram for Sunday's game against the Washington Redskins.
Both had been on injured reserve, Guyton for 12 weeks after back surgery and Ingram for four weeks after arthroscopic knee surgery.
In addition, the Giants claimed John Brandes, a tight end and long snapper, who had been put on waivers by the Redskins.


Former N.Y.U. Official Admits $4.1 Million Theft
A retired New York University financial aid administrator has pleaded guilty to stealing $4.1 million from the university by collecting on tuition-assistance checks she issued to nonexistent students over a period of 10 years.
The administrator, Dora Malfrici, 53 years old, admitted stealing the money beginning in 1982 in a plea entered on Thursday evening before Judge Robert P. Patterson Jr. in Federal District Court in Manhattan.


Ann-Louise Hittle, T. C. Constable
Ann-Louise Hittle, the senior oil and gas analyst at Lehman Brothers, and Timothy Cheston Constable, a partner in Sweet Capital Management, a money-management concern, both in New York, were married yesterday in Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
Robert Hundley performed the ceremony at the Second Congregational Church.
Ms.
Hittle, who is keeping her name, graduated cum laude from St.
Lawrence University and received a master's degree in Middle East studies from Harvard University.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard H. Hittle of Old Greenwich, Conn.
Her father, the former vice president of international government affairs for Conoco Inc., an oil company in Wilmington, Del., is an oil consultant in Old Greenwich.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
VICTORIAN CHRISTMAS
A Victorian-style Christmas will be celebrated today from 11 A.M. to 4 P.M. at Nook Farm, where visitors may explore the elegantly restored home of Mark Twain and the more modest residence of his neighbor, Harriet Beecher Stowe.
Victorian sweets and beverages will be available in the Twain kitchen and a selection of gifts and crafts are for sale in the carriage house.
In addition, five 20th-century West Hartford homes decorated for the holidays are included in an annual tour that benefits restoration projects of the buildings at Nook Farm.


Corrections
A report in Styles of The Times last Sunday about the wedding of Elisa Scholnick referred incorrectly to the bridegroom.
He is Daniel Ansell.


RAGE IN A TENURED POSITION
It would take a very long letter to correct the wildly distorted picture of the Columbia English department presented in Matthews's article.
I'll comment on only one matter.
Lionel Trilling is described as Heilbrun's "professional nemesis," and other remarks about him could give the impression that he was opposed to the appointment of women to the faculty.


The World According to Steinberg
THE DISCOVERY OF AMERICA By Saul Steinberg.
Introduction by Arthur C. Danto.
Illustrated. 208 pp.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $50.


At Work; AIDS Awareness Goes to the Office
The Federal Government last week used the occasion of World AIDS Day to launch "Business Responds to AIDS," a workplace awareness and education program.
Several officials, including Health and Human Services Secretary Louis W. Sullivan, encouraged employers to provide education on AIDS for all employees and support for employees who have AIDS or are infected with the human immunodeficiency virus.
"Our goal is to prevent new infections of H.I.V., the AIDS virus, among employees, families and the communities in which they live," Mr.
Sullivan told a national teleconference based in Atlanta.


Muppet Madness
Tiffany welcomes Miss Piggy, Dec. 2.


Good Tidings


China and Politics
To the Editor: The freedom-loving American people certainly have short memories.
Just as they cheered the destruction of the Berlin Wall and the breakup of the "evil empire," they rooted fiercely for the people of China to overthrow their government warlords in 1989.
Now we find a new sentiment in the words of Mary Abbot of Knoxville, Tenn. ("Tourists Return to a Changed China," Sept. 6): "I'm sure China does violate human rights, but I'm not sure it would be a big help if we didn't come." In other words, when people were being executed in public, we stood up for them by diverting our tourist dollars elsewhere, but now that the executions, torture, forced abortions and sterilizations are done in private, it's O.K. to go.
The article said the Chinese Government was delighted by the surge in travelers.
Perhaps the delight is increased by China's knowledge that ignoring repeated pleas for humanitarianism and liberalization, made them go away.


Need Tires? The Writing's on the Wall
FOR the average driver -- and even for a driver who is avidly interested -- tires are the most boring part of an automobile.
As long as they are round and not too flat on the bottom, they don't get a second look.
But they should.
Air bags and antilock brakes and side-impact protection in the doors are all well and good, but it is those tiny patches of tread that connect a car to the road and that often mean the difference between an accident and a safe trip.


Don't Wait to Reform Congress
With 110 new members in the House and 12 so far in the Senate, Congress has a rare opportunity for reform.
Impatient voters want change.
Quick action to eliminate members' unnecessary perks might be the best public relations move.
Eliminating incumbents' overwhelming advantage in raising campaign funds would do much more for democracy.


The New Blood Culture
ON a Sunday night in 1938, Orson Welles caused a national panic by broadcasting an hourlong adaptation of "The War of the Worlds." Despite repeated announcements that the radio show was only fiction, terrified Americans took to the streets, convinced that Martians were invading and destroying the country.
Why?
With perfect timing, a month after the Nazis got their claws into Czechoslovakia, Welles had tapped right into the proliferating, if still subliminal, American fear that war was on its way.
In November 1992, a Wellesian director of our own time, Francis Ford Coppola, tapped into a similarly rampant, and no less lethal, real-life terror running through the public consciousness.
"Bram Stoker's 'Dracula,' " a movie that was ridiculed in advance by much of Hollywood and the press as a certain flop, a "Bonfire of the Vampires," was an unexpected sensation in its opening weekend, selling $32 million worth of tickets.


Lacking Depth of Focus
To the Editor:
Vicki Goldberg's essay on celebrity portraits by Herb Ritts and others  [ "Fixated on Famous People," Nov. 22 ]  makes the mistake of assuming that because a thing exists and is highly visible it must be of great significance.
The photographs she cites do deal exclusively with surface and extravagant posturing, but
not
because the photographers who make them have no other legitimate choice, coming along as they do at this point in photographic history.
Rather, the photographs confine themselves to superficial appearance because that is the ambition, the intention and the job of their makers.


Bookshelf
Additional titles of interest:
ANOTHER CHRISTMAS.
Written and illustrated by Susan L. Roth.
Morrow. $15. (Ages 5 to 9) The year after Grandpa died, Dad takes the family to Puerto Rico for Christmas.
It's all very different, but Grandma makes important things the same for Ben -- a tree, the right angel, gingerbread men.
Ebullient collage illustrations.


Carrie Goodman, Michael Pianin
Carolyn L. Goodman, a daughter of Dr.
Richard Goodman of Stony Brook, L.I., and the late Florence L. Goodman, was married last evening to Michael J. Pianin, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Albert Pianin of West Hartford, Conn.
Rabbi Robert Marcus officiated at the Muttontown Club in Brookville, L.I.
Ms.
Pianin, who is 29 years old and known as Carrie, is an asset manager for American International Group Real Estate Investment and Management Company in New York.
She graduated from Wellesley College and received an M.B.A. from Cornell University and a master's degree in real estate development from New York University.
Her father is an orthopedic surgeon and a lawyer in Smithtown, L.I.
Her stepmother, Jemmy Goodman, is the president of Medical Risk Management Advisory Corporation, a medical-risk consulting company there.


NOV. 28-DEC. 5: American Politics; Tsongas, Battling Cancer, Admits Candor Is Needed
As he sought the Democratic Presidential nomination, former Senator Paul E. Tsongas made an issue of his nine-year battle against cancer, saying he had been disease-free since a bone marrow transplant in 1986.
His doctors at Dana-Farber Cancer Institute in Boston concurred, minimizing the chances for a recurrence of his lymphoma, a cancer of the immune system.
In fact, the lymphoma had recurred in 1987, making it unlikely that he had been cured.
Last week, Mr.
Tsongas confirmed that he was facing a new fight.
A growth in his abdomen turned out to be lymphoma; the cell type had changed from small cell to large cell, a not-unusual turn of events in the disease.
The news was good and bad, he said at a press conference.
Bad because the cancer had returned, apparently in a more aggressive cell type.
Good because the lymphoma seemed confined to his abdomen and seemed likely to respond to chemotherapy and radiation.


A Cousin For Nessie?
Some years ago a French zoologist, Bernard Heuvelmans, coined the term "cryptozoology" to describe the activity of those who apply scientific methods to the study of hidden animals, or "cryptids." Now two Canadian marine researchers, Dr.
Edward L. Bousfield and Dr.
Paul K. LeBlond, suggest in a paper that large serpentine creatures comprising "a distinct vertebrate species of presently indeterminate class" are swimming lakes and coastal waters of British Columbia and may even be related to the Loch Ness monster.


Who Influenced Whom?
To the Editor:
In his essay "In an Ugly Century, a Place for the 'Merely' Beautiful"  [ Nov. 22 ] , David Schiff is correct in drawing attention to the "bias of music history" and demonstrates that bias by assuming that if Ravel used chords that Ellington, Gershwin and Strayhorn used, it must have been Ravel who influenced jazz and not the reverse.


Thoroughly Modern Victoriana
A FANFARE is a loud flourish of trumpets, a noisy or showy display.
So the organizers of the New York Philharmonic's Victorian Ball, next May 26, decided that "fanfare" would be a great name for an event connected with the ball.
The event, the Fanfare Auction, on April 20 at Tiffany's, will feature 100 or so fans made by designers, artists and other celebrities to increase interest in the ball, which is part of the orchestra's 150th-anniversary celebration.
The idea is to encourage women to buy the fans and carry them to the ball, as Victorians did.


New York Jews' Fears Amid Racial Anguish
They spoke solemnly of the racial conflict in Crown Heights and in various degrees were critical of the role of Mayor David N. Dinkins.
But in contrast to strident cries of "Jew hater" from bitter opponents of the Mayor in recent days, there was less anger and more disappointment in the Jewish voices.
At the close of a week dominated by racial hostility in their midst, Jews across New York City -- outside Sabbath services and in other settings -- spoke of larger themes as well: of the deeply troubled relations between blacks and Jews in New York, of encounters with anti-Semitism and memories of the Holocaust and of a need to find a way out of the anguish.


Holiday Revelers Singing Sotto Voce
WHEN it comes to holiday parties, planners are choosing less this season.
Bruce J. Gorelick, president of the 15-member Westchester Hotel Association and general manager of the Marriott Hotel in Tarrytown, said hotels are reporting that holiday bookings are flat -- on a par with last year.
"The trend is toward scaling down everything -- guest lists, menus and bar service," Mr.
Gorelick said.
"Low key is the order of the day. For instance, companies that formerly held evening events with spouses invited are now substituting luncheons with simpler menus for employees only. The open bar has given way to either a partially open bar or a cash bar. And in some instances, employees are paying for their own parties."


For the Government, Contractors Have Special Rates
THE Environmental Protection Agency hired American Coastal Resources in 1991 for help in buying computers and office equipment.
But only after the North Carolina company had submitted months of excessive bills did an auditor discover that the E.P.A. was paying four times the market price and wasting millions of dollars.
The Department of Energy spent $20 million from 1986 to 1989 for contractors to test soil and water at its nuclear weapons plants across the country.
The department's Inspector General later found that although the tests were similar to those conducted for other Government agencies, the Energy Department had paid twice as much for them.


In Support of Buyouts, Not Flood Tunnel
The article "Passaic Flood Tunnel: A Turning Point" (Nov. 8) identified several important points that should be evaluated carefully by the decision makers dealing with flood control within the Passaic River Basin.
The article stated that property damage from the 1984 storm "topped $330 million." The first phase of the Passaic River Coalition's buyout with relocation and demolition expenses and in lieu of tax payments to the municipalities will not reach more than $150 million.


Names to Note in Rome
UNKNOWN hands have long since defaced the inscription praising Prince Girolamo Napoleone on a 2-by-4-foot marble tablet outside an office of the Italian state broadcasting network RAI in Rome.
In a quick private poll I asked 10 residents of the city: "Who was Girolamo Napoleone?" None knew.
Posthumous fame is fickle.
Jerome Napoleon, also known as "Plon-Plon" in France, was a nephew of Emperor Napoleon I who married a Savoy princess, and commanded French troops who helped Italy win independence.
He died in Rome in 1891 in what was then the elegant Hotel de Russie, 9 Via del Babuino, now the RAI building.


Byrd Gets Movement In His Legs
For the first time since the accident that left him paralyzed from the waist down, the Jets' Dennis Byrd was able to voluntarily move some muscles in his lower legs yesterday, the team said.
"This is a very positive sign, but the overall level of improvement is unknown at this time," said the team's director of public relations, Frank Ramos.


At Goodspeed, a Revival of Nuttiness From 1928
HANG on to your wits.
Groucho, Chico, Harpo and Zeppo are on the loose at the Goodspeed Opera House.
Which is to say that Frank Ferrante (as Capt. Jeffrey T. Spalding, "the noted African explorer"), Robert Michael Baker (Signor Emanuel Ravelli, a shifty musician), Les Marsden (the silent Professor, of what no one knows) and Craig Rubano (Horatio Jamison, Spalding's straight man secretary) are recreating, with dead-on audacity, the inspired pandemonium of "Animal Crackers," the 1928 free-for-all that was the Marx brothers's farewell to the Broadway stage.
In their new guises, the wild and crazy funny men are unrestrainably skewing a wild and crazy book that accommodates their vaudeville-based, verbally anarchic routines.
For the Goodspeed restoration, sections cut from the original script by George S. Kaufman and Morrie Ryskind and excerpts from the 1930 mostly non-musical film version have been added.


In the Region: Westchester; Recent Sales
Cortlandt Manor, N.Y.  $173,000
68 Trolley Road  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 34-year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, deck, living room, workroom, family room, bar; taxes $4,108.
Katonah, N.Y.  $325,000
Todd Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 27-year-old colonial; foyer, living room, dining room, family room, stone fireplace, 3.4 acres; taxes $6,548.
Ossining, N.Y.  $202,000
57 Park Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 34-year-old Cape Cod; fireplace, formal dining room, den, deck, hobby room, family room; taxes $5,287.
New Canaan, Conn.  $1,325,000
110 Greeley Road  5-bedroom, 4 1/2-bath, 4-year-old custom colonial; french doors, brick terrace, invisible fence, 2 acres; taxes $11,671.
Ridgefield Conn.  $220,000
94 Mamanasco Road  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 30-year-old split level; lakefront property, cathedral ceilings, 2 fireplaces, 0.25 acre; taxes $3,510.
Westport, Conn.  $620,000
35 Minute Man Hill  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 37-year-old colonial; swimming pool, walk to beach, new deck and porch, 1 acre; taxes $5,770.
OTHER AREAS Glen Rock, N.J.  $245,000
14 Grandview Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 92-year-old colonial; new roof, siding and heating; taxes $4,665.
Livingston, N.J.  $170,000
1 Claremont Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 38-year-old split level; family room, 1-car garage, fireplace in living room; taxes $3,853.
Bayville, L.I.  $214,000  5 Hilltop Drive  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 68-year-old Tudor; dining room, fireplace, finished basement, carport; taxes $3,200.


Being Fat Is as American as, Well, Apple Pie; Underlying Depression
To the Editor:
As a psychiatrist and researcher who specializes in working with overweight patients, I applaud your series "Fat in America" (front page, Nov. 22-24).
One oversight, however, deserves consideration.
Patients who are both overweight and depressed often attribute their depressive symptoms to their obesity.
Biological depression is a treatable condition that can cause low self-esteem, anhedonia, weight gain, hopelessness, and in severe cases, suicide.


OTB Remains A Good Bet
To the Sports Editor:
The 2,000 OTB employees and the neighborhoods they serve would disagree with your assessment that the New York Racing Association proposal to take over the state's six OTB operations sounds reasonable ("N.Y.R.A. Confronts a Political Forum," The Times, Nov. 12).
OTB was created to provide revenue through a network that would include local branch offices.
Money is diverted from local bookies and organized crime to the government, and jobs are provided for local residents.


U.N. Says Somalis Must Disarm Before Peace
Highlighting an ambiguous feature of the Security Council resolution this week authorizing armed intervention in Somalia, Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali of the United Nations has warned that he cannot start serious peacemaking in the country until the American-led force has pacified it and disarmed its warring factions.
The Secretary General's call for the disarming of Somali factions is in keeping with the strong recommendation he made in the report on Somalia he sent to the Council before it voted, calling for gunmen of rival sub-clans to be compelled to give up their weapons by the American-led force.


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
Bayville  $214,000  5 Hilltop Drive  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 68-year-old Tudor; dining room, fireplace, finished basement, carport; taxes $3,200.
Bayport  $127,000
352 3d Street  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 40-year- old ranch; eat-in kitchen, family room, fireplace, inground pool, covered porch; taxes $5,200.
East Hills  $320,000
18 Magnolia Lane  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 43-year-old colonial; fireplace, 1-car attached garage, 110- by 120-foot lot; taxes $6,700.
Levittown  $126,000
41 Spring Lane  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 44- year-old Cape Cod; aluminum siding; taxes $2,800.
Mineola  $170,000
236 Arlington Street  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 40- year-old Cape Cod; dining room, eat-in kitchen, basement, 1-car garage; taxes $2,800.
Williston Park  $210,000
274 Park Avenue  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 13-year-old high ranch; eat-in kitchen, basement, 1-car garage; taxes $4,900.
OTHER AREAS Ossining, N.Y.  $202,000
57 Park Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 34-year-old Cape Cod; fireplace, formal dining room, den, deck, hobby room, family room; taxes $5,287.
New Canaan, Conn.  $1,325,000
110 Greeley Road  5-bedroom, 4 1/2-bath, 4-year-old custom colonial; french doors, brick terrace, invisible fence, 2 acres; taxes $11,671.
Glen Rock, N.J.  $245,000
14 Grandview Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 92-year-old colonial; new roof, siding and heating system, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $4,665.


C.E.O. of Public Education Inc.
Bundled in a camel's-hair coat behind the wheel of his Lincoln Town Car, Dr.
Philip E. Geiger looks more like a Fortune 500 C.E.O. than a school superintendent.
He sounds like one, too, as he enthusiastically talks about "zero-based budgets," "strategic planning" and "electronic spreadsheets." And the 45-year-old school superintendent is as proud of his master's degree in business administration from the University of Pennsylvania's Wharton School of Finance as he is of his doctorate in education from Columbia University.


Commonwealth, Heal Thyself
A YEAR ago, Aleksandra Yakovleva had to stop publicizing her new-age magazine, Inward Path, on Soviet television.
It was too expensive to advertise, she said.
Now, a year after the collapse of the Soviet Union, a commonwealth television channel has asked Miss Yakovleva to produce a series about the spiritual approach to life that she advances in her popular monthly.
"Now that nothing in our country is under control economically or politically, people want to know how they can at least solve their personal problems," Miss Yakovleva, said last week in a telephone interview from Moscow.
"And that is what we do in my magazine. We find ways that Russian people can change their lives by changing their consciousness. We are the first magazine to write about these questions."


Mason Is Dazzling for Knicks With 25 Points, 10 Rebounds
This one was right out of Pat Riley's recipe for success: dominant play at center; mismatches at forward; steady play in the backcourt.
Mix it together, shake well and out pops a methodically impressive 111-98 Knicks' victory over the Milwaukee Bucks.
Make it another victory with an asterisk, as the game was played yesterday at Madison Square Garden, where the Knicks are 8-0 this season and have been blowing away the best the National Basketball Association has to offer.
While it may be too early to include the 10-5 Bucks in the company of Chicago, Portland and, yes, the Knicks (10-6), they are not exactly Sacramento.


Giants Make Investment: $43 Million in Bonds
On the day last month that Barry Bonds was named the National League's most valuable player for the second time in three years, he was asked if it was important to him to be the highest-paid player.
"No," he said simply.
But Dennis Gilbert, his agent, quickly said: "It's important to me. I want to do the best job I can for my client. The best should be paid the best."


Duke Puts Michigan In Its Place
After all the predictions, all the back and forth trash-talking tactics, Duke, the two-time defending national champion, won its Battle of December with Michigan tonight.
Thomas Hill, wrecking Michigan's interior defense with an assortment of smooth inside moves and short jumpers, scored a game-high 21 points, and Bobby Hurley scored 20 as the Blue Devils defeated Michigan, 79-68, in front of a typically raucous and partisan Duke crowd at Cameron Indoor Stadium.


The Executive Computer; Weary of Price Cuts, Companies Try to Sell Value
A new front appears to be opening in the price war that has sundered the personal computer industry for the last six months: the nebulous area of value.
Price is certainly still important, but when every PC is a bargain, buyers look at other factors -- service and length of warranty, for example -- in making their decisions.


Children's Artist With a Special Voice
WHEN Ed Young first read "Lon Po Po: A Red Riding Hood Story From China," pictures immediately began forming in his head.
The first character the artist and illustrator struggled with was the wolf.
Mr.
Young studied how a wolf moves, how he uses his tail and how he appears when he is frightened or sad.
He even listened to tapes of wolves communicating with one another.
"I needed to get to know the wolf so I could express it from the inside," Mr.
Young said the other day.
Few would expect such detailed study and rendering for a children's book, but it is precisely that insistence on accuracy and eye for detail that give Mr.
Young's illustrations their power.
In the case of "Lon Po Po," his painstaking work garnered him the Caldecott Medal in 1990 for the most distinguished American picture book for children.


Foreign Affairs; Not Set in Stone
As President Bush on Friday explained his dispatch of U.S. forces to Somalia, he sounded eerily similar to President Truman justifying massive new American aid to Greece and Turkey more than 45 years ago.
Within days, Mr.
Truman's carefully crafted language became raw meat for ideologues casting about for something to worship or hate and for journalists eager to make government policies far clearer and more momentous than their authors intended.
Over time, they elevated his address into the Truman Doctrine and stripped away its distinctions and qualifications.
If economic aid went to Greece and Turkey to stop Communism, they came to ask, why not military aid to Vietnam, Nicaragua, or anywhere else for that same noble purpose?


Jennifer C. Slack, Erik A. Gans
Dr. and Mrs.
Warner V. Slack of Newton Centre, Mass., have announced the engagement of their daughter Jennifer Cora Slack to Erik Anthony Gans, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Walter G. Gans of Scarsdale, N.Y.
A March wedding is planned.
Ms.
Slack, 26 years old, teaches the third grade at St.
David's School in New York.
She graduated from the University of Wisconsin and received a master's degree in education from Wheelock College.
Her father is an associate professor of medicine and psychiatry at Harvard University.


LOOTING BRAZIL
As Fernando Collor de Mello's spokesman, I want to express my profound indignation over James Brooke's article "Looting Brazil (Nov. 8). It showed a total lack of respect for the Brazilian President and the people who elected him.
It is surprising that you published as fact a series of accusations that are still being studied in court, when American democracy guarantees every citizen the right to a defense and considers people innocent until proved guilty.


So Get It Off Your Chest
Christopher Janney, an artist, has turned a high-tech gadget into a fashion accessory.
His invention, the Litesign, is one of those familiar LED signs with scrolling red letters that litter the commercial landscape.
What's novel about Litesign is its size: Just 2 1/4 inches long and 1 1/4 inches high.
It clips onto the breast pocket of any jacket.
Program in a message of up to 96 characters, put it on and you've got a sure-fire way of getting attention.


Out of the Limo and Back to the Gym
BRUCE WEBSTER, the veteran basketball coach at the University of Bridgeport, has a standard reply when anyone asks him what it's like working for the Professors World Peace Academy, an arm of the Rev.
Sun Myung Moon's Unification Church.
"It's a lot better than driving a limo at 3 o'clock in the morning," Mr.
Webster replies.
The question comesfrequently these days.


Love Connections


Col. Alva Harvey, 91, Military Flight Pioneer
Col.
Alva L. Harvey, a pioneer military aviator who survived 10 days in Alaska's wilderness after crashing on an around-the-world flight attempt in 1924, died on Monday at Mount Vernon Hospital in Arlington, Va.
He was 92 years old and lived in Arlington.
He died of heart failure, his family said.


NOV. 28-DEC. 5: Guam Abortion Law; High Court Reaffirms Right To Regulate, but Not to Ban
The Supreme Court said nothing about abortion last week, but its silence spoke volumes.
It refused to hear an appeal by Guam, which was seeking to resurrect a law it passed in 1990 to prohibit nearly all abortions.
A Federal appeals court declared the law unconstitutional last April, two months before the Justices reaffirmed the constitutional right to abortion in a Pennsylvania case.


AIDS and Art
Town &amp; Country's Generous American, Dec. 2


U.S. Role Is Not to Disarm, Aide to a Top Somali Insists
Taking a tough stance as the arrival of United States troops appro aches, a key backer of the most powerful Somali warlord said today that any disarming of fighters should be carried out by the Somali police and not by Americans.
The supporter, Osman Ato, who helped persuade the Somali political figure, Gen.
Mohammed Farah Aidid, to accept American intervention to prevent gunmen from blocking food shipments, said in an interview that he expected the United States military to consult with "institutions" of this famine-stricken country.


Symbol, Songs, Food, Traffic
LAST Monday night, Allan Gurganus, the author of the best-selling "Oldest Living Confederate Widow Tells All," was in the basement of the Museum of Modern Art's bookstore, looking for slides to illustrate a lecture on narrative in painting, which he would give the following week in Boston.
He was flushed and in a bit of a rush, because he was expected upstairs to give a reading as part of MOMA's ceremony to mark A Day Without Art, in memory of people who have died of AIDS.
The 45-year-old Mr.
Gurganus, whose plain face and kind blue eyes are offset by a thick blond drooping mustache tinged with white, was in his trademark reading outfit: Converse high tops, a formal shirt with black studs and bow-tie, beneath a ratty old sport coat.
A mess, but a considered one.


The Two Faces of Christmas
In supermarkets and department stores and malls and small shops all across the country, the sound is the same.
It's of Bing Crosby singing "I'm dreaming of a White Christmas," while millions of hearts melt in unison.
Hearts melt as well when the little drummer boy taps out his lugubrious rum-ta-ta-tum, and when the little kids line up to sit on Santa's lap.
Eyes that haven't shed a tear all year go misty when the Rockefeller Center tree is lighted, and dreams that one thought dead and buried show sudden life.


Say Swiss Cheese
To the Editor: After reading Israel Shenker's article "In Switzerland, the Many Ways to Say Cheese" (Oct. 4), I recalled the times last summer in Europe when every day for lunch I ate an Emmental sandwich on French bread with tomatoes and the occasional cucumber.


It's Hot Stuff, And It's Sure To Turn Heads
Forget fashion.
This firefighter's coat is the real five-alarm thing -- if you don't mind carrying around an extra 15 pounds to achieve the look.
The coat, made of Nomex, a canvas-like fireproof fabric, has shiny aluminum buckles and wide bands of lime-colored reflective tape.


An Appeal to Help Change Lives
The recession in the New York region has thrown once-comfortable lives into crisis.
As hard times affect more people, compassion seems to be spreading; charitable organizations report increases in the numbers of volunteers as well as requests.
Through charities supported by The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund, aid come in many forms.
For a single mother quick to strike her child, an unemployed clerical worker facing eviction, and young men and women in need of clothes for job interviews, the Neediest fund offers help and hope.


BENEFITS
Party for Museum Costumes
MONDAY -- The Metropolitan Museum of Art will hold its annual Costume Institute benefit to celebrate the opening of new galleries where it will exhibit selections from its collection of more than 60,000 costumes and accessories from throughout the ages.
The black-tie evening opens with cocktails at 7:30 in the American wing followed by dinner in the museum's restaurant and dancing at the Temple of Dendur.
Tickets, $900, from (212) 570-3956, or $125 for the dance and cocktails only, from 9:30 P.M. to 1 A.M., at the museum.


Wall Street; Will the Good Times Roll Again for Tiffany?
THE 1990's have not been good so far to Tiffany &amp; Company.
A domestic recession that caused Americans to cut back on luxury purchases was bad enough.
But Japan's economic troubles, reflected in the Tokyo stock market's tumble, have also hurt.
Indeed, Japanese customers, many of whom make their purchases of robin's-egg-blue Tiffany packages through Mitsukoshi Ltd., a department store, account for about a quarter of the company's sales -- meaning crimps in Japanese spending have hit Tiffany's bottom line.


Profile/Michael and Marian Ilitch; He's Marketing, She's Finance: A $2 Billion Mom-and-Pop Shop
IN 33 years they've grown their business from a single pizzeria into a diversified conglomerate with more than $2 billion in annual sales.
But Michael and Marian Ilitch, chairman and secretary-treasurer, respectively, of Little Caesar Enterprises, still seem to act like the proprietors of a fledgling mom-and-pop business.
Mr.
Ilitch -- Mr.
I to most of his employees -- still frequently dons an apron to cook up new recipes in "my sanctuary," the company's test kitchen where he slurps pizza so hot that his lips and mouth are rumored to be lined with asbestos.


A Living, Barely, Behind the Wheel; Low Pay and Long Hours Cut Through Taxi World Stratum
On the rivers of hurtling steel that New Yorkers call streets, Majeed Salhab, Tharwat Bekheit, Tony Smith and Majeed Moughal are a beleaguered breed of gondolier.
All drive taxis, but they represent different species within a vast and varied industry.
While Mr.
Moughal ferries tourists around Manhattan in his sparkling yellow medallion cab, Mr.
Smith uses his rattling Chrysler as a gypsy cab to illegally shuttle Queens residents from subways to their homes.
Mr.
Salhab makes six trips daily in his black car, a climate-controlled Lincoln, but Mr.
Bekheit makes as many each hour as a car service driver in a road-worn Cadillac, taking orders over the radio from a dispatcher in Brooklyn.


Celia Slom, Greg Vimont
Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley Slom of New York have announced April wedding plans for their daughter, Celia Slom, and William Gregory Vimont, a son of Shirley Vimont of San Antonio and the late Lieut.
Col.
William Vimont of the United States Army.


Sports of The Times; When the Wheels Become Your Legs
LIFE in a wheelchair.
It's never easy for anybody.
But it requires even more acceptance for those whose life styles depended on their legs.
Whose living depended on their legs.
"Use your legs, use your legs," you always hear football coaches telling their players in practice.
"Use your legs."


Mutual Exchange
To the Editor:
David Richards showed an uncanny ability to touch the nerve of those working with stroke victims in his review of the musical adaptation of Arthur Kopit's play "Wings" at the Goodman Studio Theater in Chicago  [ "A Haunting New Musical Illuminates a Gallant Soul," Nov. 22 ] .


Amy Fisher Locales Shunned by Producers
Three production companies are racing to complete television movies of the Amy Fisher story, but none of the filming is being done on Long Island, where the drama played itself out.
The contradiction has not been lost on officials of Nassau and Suffolk counties assigned to attract film makers to the island.
But they say that few movies set on the island have been filmed here lately and that things have been especially difficult since a labor dispute led many production companies to boycott the New York City area.


In an Often Violent City, A Not-So-Simple Beating
The discovery of a homeless man, lying beaten in a Brooklyn alley on a Tuesday shortly after midnight, would not normally be a sensation in a city in which shootings and stabbings occur daily.
But Ralph Nimmons was a black man who said he had been beaten by a gang of Hasidic Jews.
He was found in Crown Heights, a racially polarized community whose very name has become code for New York's black-Jewish tensions.
Mention Crown Heights, and the two words resonate through the nascent mayoral campaign and rattle the psyches of two of the city's prominent minority groups.


Report Card on Pioneering Effort To Combat Inner-City Drug Trade
AROUND the corner from the Rivera Elementary School one recent evening, a small group of teen-agers gathered in a parking lot, where they took turns smashing glass bottles against the pavement.
Inside the school, 100 youngsters were playing basketball, swimming and poring over their homework.
Earlier in the day, in this same Battle Monument area, a pair of police officers on foot patrol had moved past the boarded-up buildings and empty, trash-filled lots, looking for signs of trouble.
They spent a good part of their patrol talking with residents, seeking tips that could lead to drug arrests.


No. 1 Home Port Is San Juan
San Juan has become the No. 1 home port for cruise ships in the world, according to Puerto Rico tourism officials.
Twenty vessels will be based in San Juan during the 1992-93 winter season, including the megaship Monarch of the Seas, the Windward and the Radisson Diamond.
At this time, 18 ships operate out of the Port of Miami.
Miami, however, with 1.5 million cruise passengers arriving during the last fiscal year, ending last June, remains the world's busiest cruise port, according to a port spokesman.
Miami has more passengers because it is a year-round cruise port while San Juan is busy mainly in winter.
In addition, Miami has more visits from ships that do not use it as their home port.
Cruise passengers account for almost a third of all visitors to Puerto Rico, the Puerto Rico Tourism Bureau says.
During the last fiscal year, approximately a million passengers arrived in San Juan, a 19.3 percent increase over the previous year.
Cruise visitors have increased by 15 percent annually since 1985.
One reason for the rapid growth, says the Tourism Bureau, is that Puerto Rico is closer than Miami to the Caribbean's ports-of- call.
Ships out of San Juan can stop at five or six Caribbean ports in seven days, while ships departing from Miami must sail for two days before reaching a Carribean destination.


British Sought to Find Citizenship Files on Clinton
British officials said today that the Home Office was responding to numerous press inquiries when it sought last October to learn whether President-elect Bill Clinton had ever made an application for British citizenship.
But they said that such an application was not listed in the appropriate index in immigration and naturalization files, and hence no search was conducted.
Mr.
Clinton was a Rhodes scholar at Oxford University in the late 1960's.


Liora Shir, Stephen Yalof
April wedding plans have been announced for Liora Shir and Stephen Justin Yalof, by the bride's parents, Menachem Shir and Miriam Ruzow, and by Stephen L. Ruzow, the bride's stepfather.
Ms.
Shir, 26 years old, is an account executive in New York for Gottex Industries, a swimwear manufacturer, where her mother is the president.
The bride graduated from Syracuse University.
Her father is the vice president of Waterclub Inc., a swimwear company in New York.
Her stepfather is the president and chief executive of the Donna Karan Company, the clothing manufacturer in New York.


Alabama's No. 1 Bid Now Rests With Poll
Their national championship hopes jeopardized by a shocking fourth-quarter tie, Alabama's Crimson Tide relied on Antonio Langham's 27-yard touchdown return of an interception with 3 minutes 16 seconds to play for a 28-21 victory over Florida today in the inaugural Southeastern Conference championship game.
Langham's touchdown, his third in as many games, gave Alabama (12-0) its 20th conference championship and a spot in the Sugar Bowl on Jan. 1.


Cocksure Bombay, India's Pacemaker
Nelson Wang is an Indian success story.
More precisely, Nelson Wang is a Bombay success story.
"I came to Bombay in 1974," recalled Mr.
Wang, as he slowly swirled a toddy of cognac and hot water inside a cut crystal goblet.
"I had exactly 27 rupees in my pocket," then about $3.38, "when I put my foot down in VT station." VT is shorthand for Victoria Terminus, the city's central rail station, where Indians from across the country descend on Bombay.


POSTINGS: Art School Buys Building; TriBeCa Apres-Garde
Pardon the abstract expression, but trendy TriBeCa just got a little bit less avant-garde.
Arriving on the landscape, in a building and on a block with a reputation for the cutting edge, is the New York Academy of Art, a 10-year-old conservatory that specializes in graduate-level and continuing-education programs in figurative and traditional art.
The academy has bought a five-story loft building at 107 Franklin Street, between West Broadway and Church Street, as its permanent home.


Hospital Director Accused of Sexual Harassment
The executive director of the Kings County Hospital Center has taken a one-month leave of absence after an accusation of sexual harassment was made by a female worker, officials said yesterday.
Bernard Rose, who has served as the head of the city's largest municipal hospital for 20 months, took the leave effective Friday, said Norman Katz, a spokesman for the Health and Hospital Corporation.


Polly Eastman, Eugene L. Scott
Mary Van Liew Eastman, the senior advertising director of Polo/Ralph Lauren, and Eugene Lytton Scott, the founder and publisher of Tennis Week magazine, both in New York, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Hugh Hildesley performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Church of the Heavenly Rest in New York.
Mrs.
Scott, who is 33 years old and known as Polly, graduated from Ohio Wesleyan University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John M. Eastman of Rye, N.Y.
Her father is an advertising and marketing consultant in New York.


About Those White-Collar Jobs . . .
To the Editor:
Regarding "Executives the Economy Left Behind" (Nov. 22), the question I have is when will people stop calling our economic troubles a recession and start calling this period of time what I think it really is -- another Depression?


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
124.95
124.50
127.95
per Dollar
German Mark
1.5930
1.6005
1.5670
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.2774
1.2864
1.1364
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.5595
1.5100
1.8165
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$335.60
$334.50
$368.75
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


All-Consuming Art
THORSTEIN VEBLEN, meet Wendy Wasserstein.
Conspicuous consumption may be as passe as the power suit, but conspicuous references to status symbols -- from Louis Vuitton handbags to Asprey candlesticks to Manolo Blahnik mules -- are bringing down the house at Miss Wasserstein's new play, "The Sisters Rosensweig."


Butch Reynolds Says He's Back in the Race
The world record-holder at 400 meters,BUTCH REYNOLDS, who was awarded $27.3 million in damages against the International Amateur Athletic Federation by a Federal court in Ohio, said he would return to competition despite federation threats to countersue or take further disciplinary action against him.
"They can do what they want to do, but after their vindictive suspension ends Jan. 1, I'm running," Reynolds said in a telephone interview Friday from Louisville, Ky., where he is attending The Athletics Congress national convention.


Costas Wants a Change
NBC's BOB COSTAS said he will not return as host of "NFL Live" next season.
Costas spoke at a Litchfield, Conn., sports booster club dinner Friday night, which he attended with the president of NBC Sports, DICK EBERSOL, a Litchfield native and resident.
Costas said the decision to step down was a mutual one between him and NBC executives.
He said he was looking for more challenges in his career and would like to do something beyond "reading the scores in three minutes during the halftime."


Being Fat Is as American as, Well, Apple Pie; Slim Doesn't Equal Sex
To the Editor:
Your series on weight reduction combined soft science with useful information (front page, Nov. 22-24).
Unfortunately, most people will take from the articles whatever they need to rationalize unhealthy eating habits.


THE TRANSITION: Change in the Senate; Moynihan Preparing for Wider Stage
Daniel Patrick Moynihan, expected to be the next chairman of the Senate Finance Committee, is the Senator who looks and sounds most like an academic and least like a politician.
But he also has a reputation within the Senate for looking out for New York interests.
Last year's surface transportation bill, for example, not only changed national policy in important ways to encourage mass transit; it also brought New York State $12 billion over six years though the Bush Administration had recommended just $7 billion.


NOV. 28-DEC. 5: Amy Fisher; The Case Is Closed, But Stay Tuned
With the guilty plea recorded and the teen-age convict in prison, the three major television networks are now racing to complete films on the case of Amy Fisher, who pled guilty to committing a lurid crime of passion.
Miss Fisher, an 18-year-old Long Islander, has been the center of a media frenzy since her arrest in May for shooting Mary Jo Buttafuoco, the wife of 37-year-old Joseph Buttafuoco, who Miss Fisher said had been her lover.
A Nassau County Court judge sentenced her last week to 5 to 15 years in jail, the maximum on the first degree assault charge she pled to.


A Century, And Counting
A birthday girl leading the singing, Dec. 2.


Neil Young: Heart of Grunge?
To the Editor:
I was sorry that Rick Marin, in "Grunge: A Success Story"  [ "Her Majesty's Lonely Service," Nov. 15 ] , made no mention of singer-songwriter Neil Young.
Although partial to button-downs and loafers, for years I've vicariously lived a life of grunge through Mr.
Young's offbeat music (now not so offbeat) and distinctly grungy coiffure and attire.
My school desk, I recall, was every inch Neil Young's desk, filled with my sketches of his plaid shirts, his workboots, his matted "I only cut it to keep it out of my eyes" hair, his "garage band," Crazy Horse, and song lines like "It's better to burn out than it is to rust." Extreme grunge for a parochial school student.


Run Knocks Rowan Out Of Playoffs
Washington and Jefferson 18, Rowan 13
Running back Chris Babirad raced 81 yards for a touchdown with 7 minutes 37 seconds remaining in the game as Washington and Jefferson defeated Rowan, 18-13, yesterday afternoon at John Page Field in Glassboro, N.J.


Giants Hope the Past Repeats in Their Favor
History usually means little in football.
For example, if history counts, the Giants (5-7) should be heavy favorites over the Washington Redskins (7-5) Sunday because they have won five of their last seven games against the Redskins and routed them five weeks ago on the road, 24-7.
Since then, the Redskins have straightened themselves out.
They have key players back from injuries and they are strong contenders for a wild-card berth in the National Football League playoffs.
Since then, the Giants have won one game and lost the last three.
Their playoff hopes are alive mathematically but not realistically.


Holly Anderson, James H. Dentzer
Holly Renee Anderson, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Rodney C. Anderson of Amelia, Va., was married yesterday to James Hill Dentzer, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William T. Dentzer Jr. of Larchmont, N.Y.
The Rev.
Dr.
Robert Craig performed the ceremony at the New York Avenue Presbyterian Church in Washington.
Mrs.
Dentzer, 28 years old, is a meetings coordinator at Smith Bucklin &amp; Associates, a management-consulting company in Washington.
She graduated from Mary Baldwin College.
Her father is a retired sergeant for the Virginia Air National Guard in Highland Springs, Va.


Islanders' Woeful Week Ends. Finally.
Which one hurt the worst?
It is a question for the Islanders to ponder after losing three difficult games.
It ended tonight when the Washington Capitals broke a 3-3 tie with 5 minutes 21 seconds remaining and went on to a 5-3 victory before 10,549 at Nassau Coliseum.
Early in the week, it was embarrassing to lose meekly to Pittsburgh, 7-3.
Friday night, it was disappointing to squander a two-goal lead in the final two minutes and settle for a 5-5 tie in Buffalo.


Martina Gorski, Keith Strong
Martina Reine Gorski, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas W. Gorski of Webster, Mass., was married yesterday to Keith Raymond Strong, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Elliot W. Strong of Pelham Manor, N.Y.
The Rev.
Leo Hoar, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at the Helen Hills Hills Chapel at Smith College.
The Rev.
Bill Saum, a Presbyterian minister, took part in the ceremony.


NORTHEAST NOTEBOOK: Philadelphia; A New Dorm For Temple
THE first new dormitory in 25 years on Temple University's North Philadelphia main campus is being built on North Broad Street.
The school plans to open it in time for fall 1993 classes.
The $19 million hall, not yet named, is part of a 19-project capital improvement program whose cost is estimated at $347 million.
It will house 562 students and 15 staff members in two-bedroom suites arranged in units having a kitchenette and study lounge.
Laundry, exercise and recreation facilities and a convenience store are included.
The building will have a computer link to Wise Owl, Temple's data communications network, letting students communicate with each other and look up telephone numbers for campus personnel and other information.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
A JOHN JAY CHRISTMAS
Festive holiday weekends re-creating the Federal period will begin at the John Jay Homestead Historic Site in Katonah on Saturday.
Candlelight tours of the almost 200-year-old house, filled with Christmas decorations, will be conducted from noon to 5 P.M.
A Christmas feast will be on view in the dining room, and a tea table with elegant desserts will grace the parlor.
The food and decorations follow early 19th-century research and notes left by John Jay, his son William and other family members.
The Jays and their descendants occupied the house from 1801 to 1953, when it became a museum.


LOOTING BRAZIL
Thank you for clearly illustrating that Fernando Collor is truly a politician in the most traditional form.
Greedy, egotistical, deceitful, stealing from the hand that feeds him and, worst of all, sitting smugly on the cover of The New York Times Magazine, as if he had just won the Nobel Prize for economics.


RAGE IN A TENURED POSITION
Carolyn Heilbrun sends a powerful message in her choice to retire early from her position at Columbia ("Rage in a Tenured Position," by Anne Matthews, Nov. 8).
Her warning is to younger scholars of the treacherous road ahead and the amount of work that still must be done in order to make the changes she and others like her have begun.
KAREN DEAVER
Brooklyn


Q and A
Round-the-World Air Fare
Q.
Do airlines still offer round-the-world fares that allow a traveler to stop at several destinations for one flat price? -- L. Masone, New York, N.Y.


Installing Insulation, at Least in Theory, Is Not Difficult
INSULATING the floor above an unheated basement or crawl space can save on heating bills and increase comfort in the winter.
In theory, the job is not difficult.
It usually consists of fastening strips of fiberglass or mineral-wool insulation between the floor joists.
But in practice the task can be dirty, awkward and time-consuming unless the basement is in a new house and there is plenty of headroom.
In an older house with unevenly spaced joists and a maze of electrical wiring and plumbing or in a house with a crawl space, consider having a professional carry out the installation.
As when hiring any contractor, obtain bids from at least three companies, have them show proof of insurance coverage and ask for the names of previous customers to be called as references.


'True Crime' Cards Thriving Despite Outrage
They may never be worth as much as a Pete Rose rookie card or a 1952 Mickey Mantle, but trading cards that feature the grim visages of Jeffrey Dahmer, Ted Bundy and other notorious murderers are selling apace after months of action by parents and victims' rights groups to ban them.
In at least eight states and in Canada, efforts to boycott the cards or to make their sale illegal have largely failed.
But the publicity has introduced the cards to more people, the card manufacturers say, and has increased sales beyond the companies' ability to supply them.


Folie a Deux


Joely P. Sabin and Steven R. Halper
Joely Pamela Sabin, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Herbert Sabin of Short Hills, N.J., was married last evening to Steven Ross Halper, a son of Barry Halper of Livingston, N.J., and Carole Klein of Watchung, N.J.
Rabbi Steven Bayar officiated at the Tamcrest Country Club in Alpine, N.J., assisted by Cantor Samuel Glatt, a grandfather of the bride.
Mrs.
Halper, 24 years old, is a brand media manager at Grey Advertising in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from George Washington University.
Her father is a dentist in Millburn, N.J.


Savimbi Rebels Said to Quit 2 Cities in Northern Angola
Troops of the rebel Unita movement have withdrawn from two key northern Angolan cities that were occupied this week but are advancing toward the central coastal city of Benguela, a state-run newspaper said today.


Topics of The Times; Desegregating Judiciary
To the four women who owe their Senate seats in part to the all-male Judiciary Committee's hostile treatment of Anita Hill: Welcome to the club.
Of the four, however, only one -- Dianne Feinstein of California -- has shown any interest in joining that committee, which holds hearings on nominations for the Supreme Court and the lower Federal courts.
The new Senators -- Ms.
Feinstein and Barbara Boxer of California, Patty Murray of Washington and Carol Moseley Braun of Illinois -- complained during their campaigns that the Judiciary Committee was out of step with the country.
Even one woman on the committee might have made a difference, they said.


Byrd Gets Movement In His Legs
For the first time since the accident that left him paralyzed from the waist down, the Jets' Dennis Byrd was able to voluntarily move some muscles in his lower legs yesterday, the team said.
"This is a very positive sign, but the overall level of improvement is unknown at this time," said the team's director of public relations, Frank Ramos.


Robert Lepage: Multicultural and Multifaceted
Robert Lepage stepped forward at the Royal National Theater's Lyttelton auditorium for his third curtain call following "Needles and Opium" one recent evening and, suddenly, this most assured of performers seemed uncertain how to respond.
The Quebecois actor-writer-director turned up his palms and gave a slight, very Gallic shrug, as if to ask, "Who's all this attention for -- moi?"
The question by now is largely rhetorical in England.
Mr.
Lepage has built a sizable following there since his 1987 debut with his solo performance piece "Vinci" and "The Dragons' Trilogy," his six-hour multicultural epic.
Other Lepage pieces have come here -- "Polygraph" (1989), a disturbing film noir pastiche, and the dense, imagistic "Tectonic Plates" (1990).
This year there is "Needles and Opium," which arrives on Tuesday for five performances at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, and his controversial staging of "A Midsummer Night's Dream," set in a mud bath, now at the Royal National Theater.


Meeting a Challenge On Bioethics
Concerning the Oct. 25 article on Paul Armstrong and bioethics in New Jersey (New Jersey Q &amp; A, "A Search for Standards in Bioethics Law"): mention should be made of the organization that picked up the challenge of public education on these vital issues after the Quinlan case had ceased to be news.
I am speaking, of course, of the Citizens' Committee on Biomedical Ethics Inc., whose work in presenting these matters to the public in understandable form and gathering significant citizen opinion on ethical questions played such a major role in the enabling legislation passed by the Legislature.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-25  YELTSIN BEATS BACK CHALLENGE


Hospital Bills and Paying Them
By court order, New Jersey had to change the way it compensated hospitals for unpaid care.
But last week the state went far beyond that task, not only adopting a controversial alternative on paying for indigent care, but making momentous changes in the rules governing health insurance and hospital charges.
An odd alliance of a Republican majority and a Democratic Governor churned out a bewildering group of new laws with effects that will not be known for years.
News of the far-reaching changes in the insurance market was almost lost amid the drama of the close vote on the hospital compensation plan, which will draw on money from the state unemployment fund.
Gov.
Jim Florio, for his part, claimed that the state had entered a new era: "These reforms will help make sure no one in our state has to lie awake at night wondering how to pay the bills if someone in the family gets sick." Falls Short of Clinton's Goal
Hyperbole aside, the new insurance measures should make health coverage more widely available.
They put New Jersey in the forefront of a handful of states that are making major changes in health care and are also consistent with changes that President-elect Bill Clinton is expected to seek for the whole country.


U.S. Bomb Labs, Waging Peace, Shift Their Targets
A wiry, chain-smoking, Sanskrit-quoting genius by the name of J. Robert Oppenheimer traipsed through the snow atop a densely forested mesa in northern New Mexico to found the Los Alamos lab, the birthplace of the atomic bomb and spiritual home of what grew into a maze of 20 or so nuclear sites around the country.
That complex, which today, some 50 years later, has some 100,000 employees and an annual budget of $11 billion, is scrambling to reinvent itself amid celebrations marking the birth of the nuclear era.
The soul-searching, which began at the cold war's end, is accelerating because of Bill Clinton, who has pledged his presidency to domestic renewal.
The question of the moment is how far, and how fast, the nuclear complex can move beyond the bomb.
"It's the most radical change we've ever faced," Dr.
Siegfried S. Hecker, director of Los Alamos, said Thursday.
"There still are defense jobs we need to do, but we have to be more responsive to helping solve the nation's economic problems."


Kelly McCaffrey, Stephen Chase
Mr. and Mrs.
James P. McCaffrey of West Norwalk, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Kelly Anne McCaffrey, to Stephen Bartlett Chase, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harold A. Chase of Greenwich, Conn.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss McCaffrey, 25 years old, is an assistant media buyer at Rotando, Lerch &amp; Iafeliece, an advertising agency in Stamford, Conn.
She graduated from Rollins College.
Her father is the president and chief executive of Romanoff International, a caviar and specialty food company in Charlotte, N.C.
Her mother, Ellie McCaffrey, is an owner of Perfect Partners, a women's clothing store in Westport, Conn.


Gift Books: Bulldogs, Beatles, Bullfinches, Bananafish; Getting In Deep
David Doubilet is the E. B. White of underwater photography: his work is so fine, so direct and so unadorned that it looks easy.
Would-be emulators find themselves seized by admiration, envy, despair and, finally, outright awe.
In articles for National Geographic and other magazines, and in two previous books, Mr.
Doubilet has established himself as one of the world's most eloquent celebrators of the marine environment.
In PACIFIC: An Undersea Journey (Bulfinch/ Little, Brown, $50), Mr.
Doubilet describes the Pacific Ocean, which covers almost half the globe, as "a great blue belly of our world . . . an ocean so vast that it makes islands out of continents."


Ballroom Dancing Is Back in the Swing Again
BALLROOM dancing, which flourished during the Depression, World War II and, briefly, the 1970's oil crisis and then went into eclipse, is on the rise again, and thousands of New Jerseyans are dressing up and going out to waltz, fox-trot and rumba.
Baby boomers, weary of the solitary gyrations of the 80's, have joined their jitterbugging elders on the dance floor.
Men and women in their 20's and 30's, who never suffered through the white-gloved misery of formal dance classes, are learning for the fun of it.
And couples of all ages are flocking to join the first New Jersey chapter of the United States Amateur Ballroom Dancing Association.


Tucking In for a Long Winter's Nap
THE word mulch or the practice of mulching is quite often the brunt of jokes.
But those who are serious gardeners know how important mulching is.
Gardeners shouldn't mind the jokes because they may have the last laugh.
For those who have not learned about mulching, some advice: A mulch is a layer of organic material (preferably) that is placed over the ground several inches deep.
A mulch accomplishes many things.
During the growing season it will keep the soil cool and moist, and it will also prevent weeds from growing.


Serbs Shell Sarajevo After a Lull and Step Up Attack on a Suburb
Serbian forces shelled the center of Sarajevo for the first time in days today and stepped up an armored attack on a nearby suburb to tighten their stranglehold on the Bosnian capital, local news reports said.
A pall of smoke hung over Otes, a suburb six miles west of Sarajevo's center, as Serbian nationalists fought for the fifth day to dislodge Muslim and Croatian defenders from positions controlling key approaches to the Sarajevo airport.


Phone Cards In Germany
As the number of coin-operated pay phones in Germany dwindles, visitors should consider buying an advance-payment telephone card from Telekom, the Government telephone monopoly.
By 1995 over half of the country's 140,000 pay phones will be operable only with these cards, according to Telekom's plans.
There are already 35,000 such phones in service.
At airports and train stations card phones outnumber coin-operated ones three to one, causing long lines at the few coin phones.
In many communities there are no coin phones at all.


Of Nicknames And Stereotypes
To the Sports Editor:
Jack Kent Cooke, chairman of the Washington Redskins, refuses to believe that "redskins" is racist, derogatory and demeaning to American Indians.
The news media could show leadership and responsibility by eliminating culturally offensive slang terms.
Atlanta, instead of the Braves.
Instead of Indians, call them Cleveland.


The Jets, the Sharks and the Ashanti
DANCING
The Pleasure, Power, and Art of Movement.
By Gerald Jonas.
Preface by Rhoda Grauer.
Illustrated. 256 pp.
New York: Harry N. Abrams in association with Thirteen/WNET. $45.


Mark Morris Gives 'The Nutcracker' a Twist
Once upon a time, in the land of dreams and sweets called The Ballet, there lived a princess who was beautiful, forlorn but no longer young.
At her birth, you see, she had been given the gift of eternal youth -- conditional on her being in love.
It had been a long time since the last suitor who had pleased her.
Now the annual pilgrimage to the Shrine of the Nutcracker was about to begin.
From far and wide, men, women and children would come to pay homage to the princess, though many of them had never even heard of Ballet.
It was a tough time to be alone.
Yet as she gazed from her casement window, she saw a raw youth striding up the hill to the castle carrying a large, gaudily wrapped package.
He had traveled the world.
His boots were dusty.
But his long curls swung as he climbed, a cigarette hung jauntily in his free hand, and his eyes seemed filled as much with affection as with amusement as he glanced her way.
Could this be the prince she was waiting for?


Installing Insulation, at Least in Theory, Is Not Difficult
INSULATING the floor above an unheated basement or crawl space can save on heating bills and increase comfort in the winter.
In theory, the job is not difficult.
It usually consists of fastening strips of fiberglass or mineral-wool insulation between the floor joists.
But in practice the task can be dirty, awkward and time-consuming unless the basement is in a new house and there is plenty of headroom.
In an older house with unevenly spaced joists and a maze of electrical wiring and plumbing or in a house with a crawl space, consider having a professional carry out the installation.
As when hiring any contractor, obtain bids from at least three companies, have them show proof of insurance coverage and ask for the names of previous customers to be called as references.


Q and A
Flip Tax on an Inheritance  Question: A co-op apartment was left to me and my sister by my mother, who died two years ago.
The apartment passed into my mother's estate, to which my sister and I are sole heirs.


Outsiders for Drug Testing?
To the Editor:
The table accompanying the article about contract research organizations in drug development ("Speeding New Drugs to Market," Nov. 22) compares the development of two compounds: Merck's Proscar and Ciba-Geigy's Lotensin.
It is of interest that the longer time to market actually was for the contracted-out compound, Lotensin.
A comparison of the two time lines indicates no apparent benefit from the use of an outside contractor.


Church Weighs Its Response To Ruling on Lesbian Pastor
Members of a Presbyterian church here are debating whether to press for change or disobey a national church ruling barring them from hiring a co-pastor who is a lesbian.
"There is too much action around the country for nothing to happen," said the Rev.
Rosemary Mitchell, co-pastor of the downtown United Presbyterian Church.
"People are just not going to let it drop."


POSTINGS: 3 Lincoln Center; Japanese Take Title to 312 Condos
The apartment tower called 3 Lincoln Center is certainly in the right place, overlooking the complex from which it takes it name.
But just as certainly, it came at the wrong time.
Sales began in 1989, as demand for luxury condominium apartments was plummeting.
Only 23 dwellings were sold.


Corrections
An article and headline on June 21 about the restoration of Dwight Chapel at Yale University in the memory of Gad Gross, a photojournalist killed in Iraq, misstated his relationship to the restorer, Joseph Murphy.
Although the two men were close friends, Mr.
Gross was the son of Paul Schuster, not Mr.
Murphy.
Mr.
Murphy and Mr.
Gross's mother, Edith Gross, informed The Times of the error late last month.


Small Wonders
The Canape Conceit is a little like believing in Santa Claus. Just as most children
want
to believe that a red-suited being presses himself through the chimney with a bag full of good will, most adults want to believe that the basic canape is a polite little prelude to dinner.
Especially when the holiday entertaining season swells to a fever pitch.


The Master's Voice Restored
At long last RCA/BMG has repaid its debt to Arturo Toscanini, reissuing its stock of recordings of the maestro in 71 volumes comprising 82 CD's.
The volumes are available individually and, in an edition of 5,000, in a "deluxe box set." A display case with a gold-embossed glass door is also available separately for those who acquire the CD's individually.
So your own personal ton of Toscani niana can sit self-contained in your living room, right next to your big-horned phonograph and your quizzical dog, still loyally attending to his master's voice.
One wonders what Toscanini would have thought of the hype.
One knows what the curmudgeonly cultural critic Joseph Horowitz thinks, since he wrote a book about it.


Conversations/James Garbarino; Attending to the Children Of All the World's War Zones
SHE is only 6 years old, but her most important family responsibility is to find her 2-year-old sister and hide with her in the bathtub whenever she sees someone with a gun or hears shooting.
She has had to do this only twice in the last few months, but it is always on her mind -- showing up in nightmares, nervousness and a constant vigilance.
Such a troubling duty might be understandable in Sarajevo or Belfast.
But this 6-year-old lives in a housing project in Richmond, Calif., just north of Berkeley.


BEST SELLERS: December 6, 1992
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
DOLORES CLAIBORNE, by Stephen King. (Viking, $23.50.) After being accused of murdering her employer, a woman tells of killing her husband almost 30 years earlier and of her life ever since.
2
1
3
MIXED BLESSINGS, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.50.) Three couples' lives are strained by the problems of having children.
3
2
7
THE TALE OF THE BODY THIEF, by Anne Rice. (Knopf, $24.) Lestat embarks on a dangerous enterprise; "The Vampire Chronicles," continued.
4
3
5
MEXICO, by James A. Michener. (Random House, $25.) An American journalist learns about the history of the land south of the border. (LP)
5
9
3
THE GENERAL'S DAUGHTER, by Nelson DeMille. (Warner, $21.95.) The investigation of the murder of a woman officer, a general's daughter, unearths scandals in the military.
6
4
8
THE STARS SHINE DOWN, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $23.) The fortunes of a businesswoman are imperiled by secrets from her past. (LP)
7
5
6
MOSTLY HARMLESS, by Douglas Adams. (Harmony, $20.) In the fifth volume of the "Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy" series, a survivor tries to cope with new predicaments.
8
7
8
SABINE'S NOTEBOOK, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.) Continuing the epistolary romance begun in "Griffin &amp; Sabine."
9
8
17
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $14.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.
10
10
39
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $22.50.) A woman law student probes the murder of two Supreme Court justices.
11
6
6
DRIVING FORCE, by Dick Francis. (Putnam, $21.95.) An ex-jockey's horse-transport business is besieged by a series of mysterious deaths.
12
11
14
GRIFFIN &amp; SABINE, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.) The romance of an artist and a secret admirer, told through cards and letters.
13
14
2
DOMES OF FIRE, by David Eddings. (Del Rey/ Ballantine, $22.) The veterans of the fantasy series "The Elenium" contend with new dangers in the first volume of another series, "The Tamuli."
14
13
21
GERALD'S GAME, by Stephen King. (Viking, $23.50.) Twenty-eight hours of horror suffered by a woman handcuffed to a bedpost.
15
12
3
RED SQUARE, by Martin Cruz Smith. (Random House, $23.) Investigator Arkady Renko, returning to Moscow and Berlin after the collapse of Communism, still faces a perdurable mafia.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
12
THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush H. Limbaugh 3d. (Pocket, $22.) Anecdotes and opinions offered by the talk show host.
2
3
9
IT DOESN'T TAKE A HERO, by H. Norman Schwarzkopf with Peter Petre. (Linda Grey/ Bantam, $25.) The autobiography of the general who commanded the allied forces in the gulf war.
3
2
5
SEX, by Madonna. (Warner, $49.95.) Erotic photographs of the pop star by Steven Meisel, and her reflections on them.
4
5
14
EVERY LIVING THING, by James Herriot. (St. Martin's, $22.95.) Continuing the memoirs of the Yorkshire veterinarian.
5
9
3
MY LIFE, by Earvin (Magic) Johnson with William Novak. (Random House, $22.) The autobiography of the retired Los Angeles Lakers basketball player.
6
4
7
I CAN'T BELIEVE I SAID THAT! by Kathie Lee Gifford with Jim Jerome. (Pocket, $22.) The autobiography of the co-host of the television show "Live With Regis and Kathie Lee."
7
13
25
TRUMAN, by David McCullough. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) A biography of the 33d President.
8
7
6
BANKRUPTCY 1995, by Harry E. Figgie Jr. with Gerald J. Swanson. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) The authors predict the collapse of America under Government debt and suggest ways to cope with it.
9
8
17
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $20.) A Jungian analyst reinterprets myths and folk tales to enable women to understand their psyches.
10
6
26
EARTH IN THE BALANCE, by Al Gore. (Houghton Mifflin, $22.95.) The Vice President-elect discusses factors affecting the environment.
11
11
28
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Random House, $16.) The psychological and social significance of menopause for today's women.
12
10
11
THE TE OF PIGLET, by Benjamin Hoff. (Dutton, $16.) Aspects of Taoist philosophy explained through the actions of an A. A. Milne character.
13
12
5
GENIUS, by James Gleick. (Pantheon, $27.50.) The life and achievements of Richard Feynman, the Nobel Prize-winning physicist.
14
1
DAVE BARRY DOES JAPAN, by Dave Barry. (Random House, $18.) The life and culture of the Land of the Rising Sun, as observed by the syndicated humorist.
15
15
14
YOUNG MEN &amp; FIRE, by Norman Maclean. (University of Chicago, $19.95.) An account of a disastrous fire in a Montana forest in 1949.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
21
HARVEY PENICK'S LITTLE RED BOOK, by Harvey Penick with Bud Shrake. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $19.) Anecdotes and tips about golf.
2
2
YOUR MONEY OR YOUR LIFE, by Joe Dominguez and Vicki Robin. (Viking, $20.) Ways to adapt your financial situation to a more frugal, satisfying style of living.
3
2
11
THE MEASURE OF OUR SUCCESS, by Marian Wright Edelman. (Beacon, $15.) The head of the Children's Defense Fund offers rules to live by for her own children and others'.
4
3
10
THE AMERICAN HERITAGE DICTIONARY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE. (Houghton Mifflin, $39.95.) The third edition.
5
6
11
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $12.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,050 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
And Bear in Mind
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
A HISTORY OF FOOD, by Maguelonne Toussaint-Samat. (Blackwell, $39.95.) An opinionated, omnivorous French journalist and sociologist examines the stuffing of humanity, from prehistory to now and from France to the antipodes, in 800 pages.
MAGRITTE: The Silence of the World, by David Sylvester. (Menil Foundation/Abrams, $75.) This authoritative, deliberate, insightful overview of Magritte's life and art, by an English art historian, is beautifully illustrated as well.
THE TRUTH ABOUT THE SAVOLTA CASE, by Eduardo Mendoza. (Pantheon, $25.) Anarchists and labor activists square off against the bosses in this cheerfully subversive detective novel (its protagonist rarely has a clue), set in World War I Barcelona.
MAQROLL.
Three Novellas: "The Snow of the Admiral," "Ilona Comes With the Rain," "Un Bel Morir," by Alvaro Mutis. (HarperCollins, $20.) These interconnected tales share a rootless protagonist, a philosophical tough guy and dreamer whose enterprises always fail and who never has fun but survives.
A RUSSIAN DOLL: And Other Stories, by Adolfo Bioy Casares. (New Directions, cloth, $22.95; paper, $10.95.) Understated, unsettling works of fiction by an Argentine fantast who distorts reality with grotesque details and catastrophic events.
MAZURKA FOR TWO DEAD MEN, by Camilo Jose Cela. (New Directions, $21.95.) Life in the early 20th century is nasty, brutish and scornful for the Galician peasants who inhabit this powerful, poetic novel by the 1989 Nobel laureate in literature.
HOROWITZ: His Life and Music, by Harold C. Schonberg. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $27.50.) A splendid contribution to the great pianist's legacy, by a former chief music critic of The New York Times.


A la Carte; A New Life Looms for Wings Point Restaurant
WINGS POINT on Three Mile Harbor in East Hampton has a magnificent setting.
In the late 1980's, when the waterfront restaurant was at its peak, diners watched sailboats skimming over the blue water, nautical flags gusting in the wind, sea birds gliding by and spectacular golden sunsets.
But in recent years Wings Point came upon bad times.
As its financial problems accelerated, the quality of food declined, and the restaurant fell into disrepair.


To a Drumbeat of Losses to AIDS, A Rethinking of Traditional Grief
When Bill Ceyrolles visits New York, he says, he feels like a Jew returning to Berlin after the Holocaust.
"The world I knew is gone," says Mr.
Ceyrolles, a social worker in Washington.
"I walk down the streets and I think that's where so-and-so lived, and there's where another friend lived, and another. It's overwhelming, so many have died."
Mr.
Ceyrolles, who is gay and is himself infected with H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS, estimated that he has "known well" 100 people who have died of AIDS in the last five years and that well over half of his close friends are sick or dead.
He has also watched others disappear: a waiter at his favorite restaurant and a man who cut his hair.


Corrections
The Art View column on page 31 of the Arts and Leisure section today, about the Dachau drawings of Zoran Music, includes an outdated closing date.
The exhibition will remain open until Jan. 30.


Satisfying a Craving for Sushi or Sashimi
CONSIDERING the proliferation of Japanese restaurants in New York City over the last 20 years, it is surprising that there are still so few Japanese restaurants in Connecticut.
The number in the state has held fairly constant for years.
Thus when a new one appears, fans of Japanese cuisine (and as one-time brief residents of Japan we are among them) are quick to pay a visit.
Mannen, just off Route 35 in Ridgefield, is tucked into a small shopping complex in a free-standing building previously occupied by an Italian restaurant.
A clue to finding Mannen (its name means 10,000 years, the ultimate) is the large white globe lantern glowing in the entrance window.
The interior decor has echoes of the previous occupant, with dark wainscoting, a long brick wall and wooden booths opposite, and a cast-iron stove in the rear.
An attempt has been made to establish a new identity, with oversize gilded paper fans on the walls.
Admirers of sushi and sashimi will be pleased to find both specialties on the menu.
But it is disappointing to discover that there is no sushi bar.
This means that the pleasure of inspecting the various fish available and watching the sushi chef at work is missing.
It requires a giant leap of faith to order raw fish unseen.
We took the plunge anyhow, with a deluxe sushi.
Although the price was reasonable, the selection was mundane for such a label.
There were nine pieces of norimaki-zushi and six nigiri-zushi, or hand rolls, all served on a traditional wooden platter.
Included were maguro (tuna), ebi (shrimp), ikura (salmon roe) and flying fish roe.
Missing were uni (sea urchin), mirugai (giant clam), anago (sea eel), tako (octopus) or ika (squid), which make a deluxe assortment special.
Despite the lack of a visible sushi bar, the individual pieces tasted fresh, and a generous amount of wasabe and gare (pickled ginger slices) accompanied the platter.
Mannen offers a sizable number of appetizers, which were among the menu highpoints.
Tako su (sliced octopus in a light vinegar dressing) was tender and flavorful as was hijiki (cooked seaweed).
Age tofu (deep-fried tofu) was another success; the fresh bean curd square was light and supple, the batter sheer and minimal, and the shavings of katsuobushi (dried bonito) atop added a briny flavor.
Yakitori (broiled pieces of chicken breast on tiny skewers) was piping hot, tender and well-seasoned.
Nasushigi (fried eggplant with sweet miso sauce) might have frightened off the unitiated, it was so lacking in the usual elegant Japanese style of presentation.
It was a large, unrecognizable slab covered with a brownish sludge that oozed like a swamp thing over the plate.
Despite its looks, the eggplant with its slathering of miso and sprinkle of sesame seeds on top was surprisingly tasty.
Among the entrees, the most intriguing choice was shoga yaki, consisting of several fingers of chicken or pork in a mild ginger sauce.
Beef negimaki was also competently prepared: slices of tender beef wrapped around scallions, which provided a sharp taste and textural contrast.
Our biggest disappointment was shrimp tempura (all-vegetable or a vegetable-shrimp mixture were also options).
The portion was generous but the flabby, doughy batter surrounding each shrimp bore no resemblance to a traditional wispy, crispy tempura batter, and the tempura sauce lacked the zap of grated ginger.
Desserts are limited.
Green tea ice cream was bland but refreshing, while the ginger ice cream needed more of a ginger snap.
An unusual dish called kan-ten was described as seaweed jello with apple juice.
It was an apple-flavor mixture with the consistency of soupy applesauce, decidedly an acquired taste.
Dinner for two -- three courses each -- was $33 before tax, tip and drinks.
There is a full bar, and two brands of Japanese beer (as well as other beers) are available.
Mannen
Satisfactory
11 Danbury Road (Girolmetti Court, Route 35), Ridgefield. 438-8727.
Atmosphere: A rectangular dining room, with a brick wall, wood booths, paper globe lantern, oversize paper fans and other Japanese motifs.
Service: Cheerful, obliging and quick.
Recommended dishes: Age tofu, nasushigi, yakitori, tako su, hijiki, shoga yaki, beef negimaki.
Price range: Lunch entrees $4.75 to $7, dinner entrees $7 to $13.
Credit cards: American Express, Mastercard and Visa.
Hours: 11:45 A.M. to 2:30 P.M.
Monday through Friday, 5:30 to 10 P.M.
Monday through Thursday, 5:30 to 10:30 P.M.
Saturday and Sunday, 5 to 9:30 P.M.
Sunday.
Reservations: Accepted.
Wheelchair accessibility: Ground-level access.
Ratings: Poor Satisfactory Good Very Good Excellent Extraordinary
Ratings are based on the reviewer's reaction to food and price in relation to comparable establishments.
The Times Restaurant Line offers capsule reviews by cuisine, price and location (in New York City and suburbs), published in the last 18 months.
Touch-line telephones only: 1-900-988-0101 (75 cents a minute).


Running a B &amp; B
To the Editor: Suzanne Berne's article "Minding P's and Q's at a B &amp; B" (Sept. 20) was amusing, descriptive, somewhat arch -- and rather annoying to someone who ran a small B &amp; B for almost 10 years.
Many articles promoting B &amp; Bs are misleading and a disservice to many B &amp; B hosts I have known.
Guests at a B &amp; B share the host's home to a degree at a modest price, and are given a comfortable bed, usually and traditionally (as all who have B &amp; B's abroad expect) a shared bath, a hearty breakfast; sometimes, but not always, guests share a host family's living-room, TV and other hospitality, and last, but not least, friendly fellow-guests.


Latin Democracy Lives In Rockets' Red Glare
WITH a violent military coup attempt fresh in their minds, Venezuelans are to vote today for mayors, state governors and city councils.
Advocates of democratic rule hope that a big turnout will help tame Venezuelans' authoritarian temptation, a yearning that took a toll of more than 300 lives just nine days ago.
Since 1989, when South America's last military dictator was toppled, the continent has been characterized as democratic throughout.
But this political-science label papers over deep strains in a region where democracy is often new and far from consolidated.


Juliette D. White, Jeffrey N. Hyson
Mr. and Mrs.
George C. White of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter, Juliette Darling White, to Jeffrey Nugent Hyson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John Hyson of Berwyn, Pa.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss White, 24 years old, was until recently the education coordinator and executive assistant to the managing director of the Manhattan Theater Club, a theater company in New York.
She and her fiance graduated from Yale University.


U.S. Champion Gains 3d Place at Interpolis
THE player who upheld the honor of the United States in the elite Interpolis International Tournament in Tilburg, the Netherlands, last month, was Gata Kamsky, the 18-year-old United States champion from Brooklyn.
Kamsky, a Russian emigre who is ranked 11th by the International Chess Federation, got as far as the semifinals before being eliminated by Boris Gelfand of Russia, the eventual runner-up to Michael Adams of England in the tournament, played from Oct 9-28.


Senator Who Wouldn't Run Has Won
The nation's 1992 election season sputtered to an end with a special election for the United States Senate on Friday, amid snow flurries, bitter cold and unusual voter apathy for this civic-minded Great Plains state.
Only about 25 percent of the voters went to polls, but they sent Kent Conrad back to the Senate by an overwhelming margin.
In winning the election, Mr.
Conrad became the first Senator to have decided not to seek re-election and then to have won another seat, all within eight months and without affecting his seniority, Senate historians said.


NOTES
Matthew Sweet, the rock singer, is obsessed with the title characters in "The Ren and Stimpy Show," a cartoon series on the Nickelodeon channel.
In February, Mr.
Sweet got a tattoo on his right arm of Ren, a high-strung Chihuahua.
He also got two of the animators to draw scenes from the show on four of his guitars.
"When I first saw them, I became an instant, massive fan," he said.
"I've tried any way I could to get close to and acquire things associated with them."


On Sunday; Family Livers: A Transplant, 2d One Needed
THE Sussex County vocational school auditorium was nearly full at the Saturday night benefit concert for the Deacon sisters' liver transplants.
Most everyone in this rural area knows about Melissa, 10 years old, and Shayna, 4, "the liver sisters." Their mother is always being stopped -- "Aren't you the mother of the liver sisters?" Folks have attended cake sales, pancake breakfasts, steak dinners to pay for those livers.
The local bank, grocery, newspaper and American Legion all pitched in.
The car dealership, Condit Ford, has run benefit concerts -- Willie Nelson, Barbara Mandrell -- for the livers, plus a new heart and lungs for Allison McCartney of Sparta.
"We work hard for the community," says John Matthews, Condit president.
"And when people want cars, they remember us."


Holocaust Museum Gains in Communist Fall
The collapse of Communism in Eastern Europe will make the United States Holocaust Museum, which is scheduled to open in Washington next April, a treasure trove for scholars of the destruction of European Jewry by Nazi Germany and its allies.
Brewster S. Chamberlin, the director of the archives that are planned as a major component of the museum, said that the institution will make available to scholars more than one million pages of documents on microfilm from the state archives of Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union.
The museum will open to the public on April 26.


A Mission of Mercy for Travnik
The world continues its pretense of protecting Bosnia and punishing Serbia.
The United Nations imposed a no-fly zone over Bosnia on Oct. 9, but Serbian planes and helicopters by the hundreds have violated that ban.
The U.N. voted to tighten the trade embargo on Serbia by imposing a naval blockade, but ships still carry contraband down the Danube to Serbia.
Washington now says it is prepared to seek U.N. authority to enforce the no-fly zone -- a worthwhile step to show that the world means what it says about halting Serbian flights.


Sound Bytes; Taking a Hands-On Approach at Aldus
Aldus Manutius, a 15th-century Venetian scholar, developed a printing system to make books widely accessible.
Paul Brainerd started the Seattle-based Aldus Corporation in 1984 with a similar goal.
His Aldus PageMaker software, used with Apple's Macintosh and LaserWriter printer, allowed the average PC user to produce professional-looking documents.
Mr.
Brainerd had entered the newspaper business while in school and later worked for the Minneapolis Star and Tribune Company.
His interest in publishing technology then took him to Atex Inc., a maker of newspaper editing and composition systems.
Aldus is now the ninth-largest PC software company.
Question: You're known as the father of desktop publishing. Are you a proud parent?


Joan M. Barry, Daniel D'Aquila
Joan Marie Barry, a daughter of Judge and Mrs.
David M. Barry of Manchester, Conn., was married there yesterday to Daniel Louis D'Aquila, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Louis C. D'Aquila of Darien, Conn.
The Rev.
Francis J. Krukowski performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
James Church.
Ms.
Barry, 30 years old, is keeping her name.
She is a history and social studies teacher in Ellington (Conn.) High School.
She graduated from Trinity College in Hartford.
Her father serves on the Superior Court in Hartford.


Giuliani Lining Up His Team For Race
When he ran for Mayor of New York City in 1989, about the biggest criticism professional politicians made of Rudolph W. Giuliani was that he did not have enough political professionals helping him.
Sure, his media adviser was Roger Ailes, the Peck's Bad Boy of the 1988 Republican Presidential race, and Mr.
Giuliani came within 2 percentage points of winning, after a tough campaign.
But Mr.
Ailes has more or less retired from politics, and Mr.
Giuliani is trying to cast his net wider for his planned rematch against Mayor David N. Dinkins next year.
Now comes word that he has been talking with Ed Rollins, the political consultant who was an architect of Ronald Reagan's 1984 landslide and who briefly defected from his party to work for Ross Perot this year, before quitting in irritation that his advice wasn't taken.


Keeping It Together, Nets Win 6th in a Row
The beat goes on.
For the Nets, no hole they dig for themselves seems to be too deep to crawl out of.
And on.
New Jersey 111, Miami 104.
The Nets have now won six straight, and the last time a Nets team won more than five straight was the 1983-84 season.
And on, and on, and on.
What exactly is going on here?
Only last season, players were refusing to go into a game.
Now, the Nets are The Unified Team.
Their rugged victory over the Heat wasn't pretty basketball, but it was impressive, since they hung on to beat a team of desperate men, losers of five straight.
And they again did so without forward Derrick Coleman, who stayed home with a strained right knee.
Tough Home Games Ahead
New Jersey increased its record to 10-7, and a quick peek into the future shows they have two tough home games next against Phoenix on Tuesday and the Los Angeles Clippers on Thursday.
Tough but ones they can win.
So conceivably they could soon be looking at eight straight victories.
Not a bad Christmas present, if they could pull it off.


On AIDS, Let's Keep the Issue Clear
To the Editor:
I was disappointed in the attempt to plead the case for an increase in funding for AIDS research based on economic considerations ("Financing to Meet AIDS's True Costs," Viewpoints, Nov. 22).
AIDS research should be expanded for a host of reasons, the strongest among them that immune system technology should be the core of all disease research, with predictable benefits in the form of clues to virtually every other antigen, including those that would fight cancer.


Smoking Ban on All Flights Near
THE world's nonsmokers should find flying less bothersome in the years ahead as a result of action by the International Civil Aviation Organization.
In an action taken by consensus, that is, agreement without a vote, it decided to bring about an end to all smoking aboard airplanes by July 1, 1996.
The Assembly of the organization, a United Nations affiliate, adopted the resolution in October at a meeting at its headquarters in Montreal, with 153 out of the organization's 174 member nations present.
The group has no enforcement power, but airlines not adhering to the ban will be responsible to world opinion.
The Montreal group makes international rules and sets standards for many issues in civil aviation: That passengers should be able to clear immigration procedures in 45 minutes, for example; what level of security is appropriate for an airport with international traffic, or who has jurisdiction in investigating sabotage.


Susan Landau, Richard Glasser
Susan Landau, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael Landau of Hartsdale, N.Y., was married last evening to Dr.
Richard M. Glasser, a son of Frieda Glasser of Naples, Fla., and the late Jack Glasser.
Rabbi Stephen D. Franklin performed the ceremony at the Ridgeway Country Club in White Plains.
Mrs.
Glasser, 34 years old, graduated from the University of Rochester.
She was until recently the director of makeup and fragrance marketing in the international division of Estee Lauder Inc. in New York.
Her father is the executive director of Etna Home Care in the Bronx.
Her mother, Elayne Landau, retired as the executive director of the Heights Center for Senior Citizens in the Bronx.


Annette Bremer, Noah M. Osnos
Annette Lucienne Bremer, the daughter of June B. Bremer of Locust Valley, L.I., and the late William F. Bremer, was married yesterday to Noah M. Osnos, a son of Berna Osnos and Ronald Osnos, both of Washington.
The Rev.
Richard Leonard performed the ceremony at the Unitarian Church of All Souls in New York.
Mrs.
Osnos, 35 years old, is an advertising account manager at Macworld magazine in Rochelle Park, N.J.
She graduated from Syracuse University.
Her father was an advertising salesman for Sports Illustrated in New York.


'SO HOW DID I GET HERE?'
The question raised in the title of Rosemary L. Bray's article " 'So How Did I Get Here?' " (Nov. 8) is given a clear answer in her piece.
She had a strong mother, with vision -- a supportive parent so concerned with the education of her child that she recruited a neighbor to help her teach her daughter to read when she was 3 years old.
A mother like this is not available to all children.
Bray makes a powerful case for programs that combine the educational content of Head Start with the longer day and the emphasis on health and nurturing that child-care centers provide.
Just as important, she makes a strong case for a welfare system that offers not only sufficient funds to insure decent housing, food and clothing, but a "kinder and gentler" attitude.
Punishing people for being poor is the single most effective way to prevent them from developing the self-esteem needed to become self-sufficient.


Wall Street; Gabelli Discovers an Escape Route
MARIO GABELLI, the high-profile money manager with a penchant for media stocks, is emerging from more than three months of tedious negotiations with Federal broadcasting regulators.
But for his extravagant legal bills, he is apparently unbruised.
An order issued to Mr.
Gabelli Friday by the Federal Communications Commission could have a big impact on several of the media companies in which Mr.
Gabelli's various businesses hold an interest, possibly resulting in the sale of his 22 percent stake in Hector Communications.
The unprecedented negotiations between the commission and a money manager will no doubt have media stock players watching Mr.
Gabelli's moves carefully in the months ahead, since the F.C.C. has said he may not "acquire or increase any media holdings" of certain companies without the commission's review.


When Games Become Acts Of Heroism
The Irish playwright Frank McGuinness has definitely made things hard for himself in "Someone Who'll Watch Over Me," although his play is so splendidly acted at the Booth Theater that you may not realize how hard at first.
After all, any drama that features Alec McCowen in the cast has already taken a major step toward minimizing its potential trouble spots.
As we've known for some time now, Mr.
McCowen is a superlative character actor.
What is amazing here is how little maneuvering room he requires to do the job.
A few square feet is all, illuminated by a single hanging light bulb.


NOV. 28-DEC. 5: South Africa; It Takes More Than 2 To Make Peace
Often lost in the erratic reconciliation between South Africa's white Government and the African National Congress is the fact that there are other players at the table.
Some play according to Hoyle, others according to Hobbes.
Last week, as the two main parties tried to speed up movement toward the country's first nonracial elections, two other factions reminded everyone that they exist.
One was the military wing of the Pan Africanist Congress, a militant black nationalist group, which claimed responsibility for a raid with machine guns and grenades that left four people dead and 17 seriously wounded at a wine-tasting party of the white gentry in King William's Town.
The group warned of more attacks on whites, and someone bombed a restaurant 60 miles away in Queenstown, injuring 18 whites.


THE TRANSITION: The Interviews; Job Interviews With Clinton: Mostly a Friendly Little Chat
After making his way through an elaborate maze of unmarked vans, side entrances and roadblocks, a prospective Cabinet Secretary sat face to face with President-elect Bill Clinton for the most important job interview of his life.
After all the buildup, there was no interrogation.
It was more of a chat.
"It was as if he had a friend over for dinner," the interviewee said.


Technology; The Network of All Networks
Next spring, Will Steger, an explorer and the author of a textbook about the environment, will lead elementary- and high-school students from 100 schools and 10 countries on a hike through the Canadian Arctic.
Along the way, they will conduct experiments and, Mr.
Steger hopes, have fun too.
But the students will not really be in the Arctic.
Instead, they will be participating from their classrooms, using personal computers linked to a worldwide network called the Internet, to keep in touch with Mr.
Steger as he leads a team of scientists across the frozen tundra.


A Sorter-Out of Ideas That Clog the Imagination
Until his obituary came in over the fax two weeks ago, I had no idea what Sir John Summerson looked like, knew almost nothing about the personal life of this great architectural historian.
But for years his words have been marching around in my brain, and his death (at 87) won't halt the march.
Many of those words were written before I was born, including one sentence that for me sums up a critic's marching orders.
"The most a critic can do," Summerson wrote in 1947, "is to sort out those aging ideas that get encrusted round past creative achievement and clog the proper working of the imagination in changing times."
Summerson was some sorter.
His critic's credo appears in "The Mischievous Analogy," a 1947 essay that anticipated by two decades the post-modern critique of modern architecture.
The "analogy" of Summerson's title was the historicist fallacy to which modern architects often appealed.
The Egyptians, the Greeks, the medieval Europeans had their architecture, so the analogy went.
Therefore, we should have ours.
And it should all look more or less the same.


You Think You Know This Woman
Nina Totenberg, the National Public Radio correspondent who was one of the first to report Anita Hill's sexual harassment charges, is going Hollywood.
She plays herself in cameos in two political comedies, "The Distinguished Gentleman," Eddie Murphy's new movie, and "Dave," a film starring Kevin Kline and Sigourney Weaver that is due out next year from Warner Brothers.
Marty Kaplan, who wrote "The Distinguished Gentleman" and was a commentator on public radio in the early 1980's, recruited Ms.
Totenberg for his movie.
He dispensed with Hollywood ego-stroking.


Injury Slows Brown
SIMON BROWN's career is on hold while the former World Boxing Council welterweight champion recuperates from surgery for a detached retina of his left eye.


Being Fat Is as American as, Well, Apple Pie; Efficacy of Drugs
To the Editor:
Your series on obesity and weight control gave short shrift to the burgeoning literature concerning the pharmacological treatment of obesity ("Fat in America," front page, Nov. 22-24).
While you have outlined the landmark studies of Dr.
Michael Weintraub and others defining major conceptual and clinical advances of drug treatment (news article, July 5), inclusion of this modality in the current series was notably absent.


Results Plus
SKIING  Austrian Takes Slalom  Anita Wachter of Austria, capitalizing on a fall by first-run leader Pernilla Wiberg, captured a women's World Cup giant slalom yesterday by six-tenths of a second over surprising Italian Sabina Panzanini at Steamboat Springs, Colo.
Another Italian, Deborah Compagnoni, placed third in her first World Cup since tearing knee ligaments last February at the Winter Olympics.


Park Service Raising Fees
The National Park Service is raising single-visit entrance fees at 126 parks, monuments, wildlife refuges and other areas from Jan. 1.
At most affected areas, the vehicle fee will rise by $1, to $4, and the individual fee by $1, to $2.
Parks and monuments with fee increases include Canyonlands, Utah; Craters of the Moon, Idaho; Custer Battlefield, S.D.; Devils Tower, Wyo., and Valley Forge, Pa.


LOOTING BRAZIL
The massive outpouring of public protest was crucial in pushing Brazil's Congress to vote for Collor's impeachment.
Rosane Collor's contemptuous remark about 500,000 in the streets grossly underestimated the extent of public outrage and ignored its nonviolent, good-natured expression in marches, demonstrations, vigils and other actions.


Reluctant Heroes; Getting In Is the Easy Part of the Mission
SHORTLY after President Bush proposed sending troops to deliver food to Somalia last week, the American Embassy in Benin cabled back local reaction.
The country's leaders not only welcomed the aid mission, the cable to the State Department said, but had an even better idea: As long as the Marines were invading Somalia in order to save it, could they end the civil strife in Togo and Liberia as well?
The opinion of an obscure, geopolitically insignificant West African country is hardly crucial to American decision-making on how to carry out a major military mission.
But Benin's thinking reflects both a much larger foreign policy conundrum and an important reversal in the way the developing world wants to relate to the bigger, richer powers.


Election Brought a Catharsis on Vietnam War
To the Editor:
Some have suggested that the election of Bill Clinton has finally put an end to the Vietnam War.
While his election may show that Americans did not let this one issue stop Governor Clinton, it certainly doesn't say that the issues of the war itself and of draft evasion are dead.


Algeria Begins a Crackdown on Fundamentalists
Cracking down on the militant Muslim fundamentalists who have battled the Government over the last year, Algeria today began a major sweep involving 30,000 army and police troops and imposed all-night curfews in Algiers, and several provinces, the Interior Ministry said.
The move, unparalleled in scale since the fierce street and mountain battles of the war against French troops in the late 1950's and early 60's, is the most ambitious effort yet by the military-backed Government.


Kristine Dahm, Peter Kenez Jr.
Kristine Elizabeth Dahm, a daughter of Capt. and Mrs.
J.
Herbert Dahm of West Nyack, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Peter Kenez Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Kenez of Dunaujvaros, Hungary.
The Rev.
Donald Peet performed the Dutch Reformed ceremony at the Clarkstown Reformed Church.
Mrs.
Kenez, 26 years old, is a computer systems analyst in the unit-investment trust division of the United States Trust Company in New York.
She graduated from Brown University.
Her father is a reserve captain with the United States Navy stationed at the aviation supply office in Philadelphia.
He also owns the Opticom Corporation in Nanuet, N.Y., a designer and installer of fiber-optic and satellite communications systems.


Martha Beyer, Albert Lovett Jr.
Martha Alice Beyer, a daughter of Beryl and Daniel Beyer of Ho-Ho-Kus, N.J., was married yesterday to Albert Burbank Lovett Jr., the son of Eleanor Lovett of Ridgewood, N.J., and the late Mr.
Lovett.
The Rev.
Timothy Graff performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of St.
Gabriel the Archangel in Saddle River, N.J.
Mrs.
Lovett is the executive assistant to the director of business operations at Ballantine, Del Rey, Fawcett, Ivy, publishers in New York.
She and her husband graduated from Fairleigh Dickinson University.
Her father, who is retired, was the president of P. R. Dreyer, a flavor and fragrance maker in New York.


In Recording Industry, Harmony Is Everything
Ed Germano, owner of the Hit Factory, likes to say his business is making people happy.
"I entertain," he says.
Not that the recording-studio owner doesn't charge people like Madonna, Bruce Springsteen and Michael Jackson plenty for the use of equipment reminiscent of the starship Enterprise.
But he delights in throwing in some extras.


Treasury to Auction Only Bills This Week
Treasury financings this week are confined to today's regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills normally held each Monday.
Traders said that by late in the day Friday, the rate on the three-month bill outstanding was at 3.25 percent and on a six-month bill, 3.38 percent.


Vacated Corporate Headquarters Scatter the Suburban Landscape
After more than 20 years as a magnet for large corporations, the lush suburban landscape of Fairfield County, Conn., has become home to hundreds of vacant executive offices that analysts say are among the worst white elephants of American business.
It was places like Stamford, Greenwich, Westport, Fairfield and Danbury that provided new and spacious homes for the first large wave of corporations that moved from Manhattan in the late 1960's and the 1970's, beginning a trend that permanently decentralized big business in the New York region.


BRIEFS
Debt *
Amoco Canada Petro Co., Calgary, Alberta, a unit of Amoco Corp., is offering $300 million of 7 1/4 percent guaranteed notes due 2002 at 99.646 to yield 7.3 percent through Goldman, Sachs.
The noncallable notes are rated triple-A by both Moody's and S.&amp; P. *
Central Power &amp; Light Corp., a Corpus Christi, Tex., unit of Central and South West Corp., is offering $115 million of noncallable first-mortgage bonds due 2002 at 99.89 to yield 7.515 percent and $25 million of 7 1/8 percent first-mortgage bonds due 1999 at 99.7 to yield 7.18 percent.
Both issues are rated A-2 by Moody's and A by S.&amp; P. and Duff &amp; Phelps.
Morgan Stanley leads the underwriters.
*
Household Finance Corp., Prospect Heights, Ill., a unit of Household International is offering $184.6 million of 8.45 percent certificates backed by home-equity loans at 99.93 to yield 8.461 percent through Merrill Lynch.
The issue is rated triple-A by Moody's, S.&amp; P. and Duff &amp; Phelps.
*
Kansas Gas &amp; Electric Co., Wichita, a unit of Western Resources, is offering $135 million of 7.6 percent first-mortgage bonds due 2003 at 99.888 to yield 7.615 percent through Dillon, Read.
The noncallable bonds are rated A-3 by Moody's and A- by S.&amp; P. and Duff &amp; Phelps.


After a Jets Upset, Thoughts Turn to an Injured Colleague


Review/Theater: Once Removed; Homesick for Cuba In a Tacky America
For the bourgeois Cuban-Americans in Eduardo Machado's plays, the old adage that you can't go home again is not a sentimental cliche but the overriding fact of life.
Exiled to a vulgar country where Spam can pass for food, "Father Knows Best" for culture and Bermuda shorts for fashion, they dream of a return to a Havana that, more than three decades after Fidel Castro's revolution, still remains a mesmerizing 90 miles out of reach.
Mr.
Machado, himself a childhood refugee from Cuba, has made a vibrant playwriting career out of dramatizing the displacement of Cubans in the United States, with alternating forays into the Cuban history that propelled his characters out of their homeland in the first place.
"Once Removed," his new and typically rueful comedy at the Long Wharf Theater here, is set in 1960 in Hialeah ("a dirty little town next to Miami, known for its dog races," as one Cuban dismisses it) and then in Dallas a few months later, as a newly relocated young couple, Olga and Fernando, and their extended family balance new American dreams against the fantasy of a liberated Cuba that is not to be.


What the U.S. Isn't Besides 'Christian'
To the Editor:
Gov.
Kirk Fordice's statement that this is "a Christian nation" (news article, Nov. 18) is not only disturbing to religious Jews.
If he had changed it to "Judeo-Christian" it would still have remained equally disturbing to Muslims, Native Americans, atheists and agnostics, and those who believe in the republican Constitution.
The separation of church and state does not mean that the state remains neutral in religious matters.
It means that religion is
never
to enter politics.


If Only Barry Bonds Were Too Expensive
IF only a snag in the Barry Bonds deal with the as yet unapproved new owners of the Giants had developed earlier.
If only the Giants' new owners had done what the Yankees and the Red Sox did: spurned the sixth year in the contract sought by Bonds and Dennis Gilbert, the 28-year-old outfielder's agent.


THE TRANSITION: The Inauguration; Inaugural Elbowing Aside Big Tractors and Games
To Washington politicians, the inaugural events will be the hottest tickets in town, but don't tell that to people who prefer to watch jump shots and tractor pulls.
The "Presidential Gala," to be held at the Capital Center on the eve of the inauguration, will displace two basketball games and a three-day truck-and-tractor pull.
President-elect Bill Clinton's inaugural planners will take over the 20,000-seat arena for five days, including four to prepare for the extravaganza on Jan. 19.


For Seoul Ex-Firebrand, A New, Maybe Final Run
The last time South Korea's most famous dissident and opposition leader, Kim Dae Jung, ran for president, a million and a half Koreans poured into a plaza for one of his famed rallies, a cloud of tear gas drifted over the city, and a few more extreme supporters periodically bit off the tips of their fingers to write his name in blood.
But this month, the biggest throngs on the streets are Christmas shoppers.
Mr.
Kim, although as eloquent as ever, quite deliberately sounds far more conciliatory and less like the firebrand he was during three decades that he spent in jail, in exile, under a death sentence and finally under house arrest.


METRO DIGEST
WHITE ELEPHANTS IN CONNECTICUT
The lush suburban landscape of Fairfield County, Conn., has become home to hundreds of vacant executive offices that analysts say are among the worst white elephants of American business.
It was places like Stamford, Greenwich, Westport, Fairfield and Danbury that provided new and spacious homes for the first large wave of corporations that moved from Manhattan in the late 1960's and the 1970's.
But the takeovers, leveraged buyouts and reorganizations of the 1980's -- compounded by the recession -- have wiped out or drastically shrunk many of those companies, which can no longer use all the suburban space they created for themselves.
And experts say that because of bad judgments in the design and location of the offices, many have been unable to attract new tenants.
A1.
RESOLUTION OF AN INSURANCE FAILURE
The insurance commissioners of New York and New Jersey have agreed on how to resolve the largest insurance company failure in history, increasing the interest that will be paid on the savings of hundreds of thousands of customers of the failed Mutual Benefit Life Insurance Company.
But most customers may still have to wait up to seven years before they have access to all their money.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY


ABC's Extra Careful Look At 'Jackie Thomas Show'
ABC executives were so concerned about the performance of the network's new comedy, "The Jackie Thomas Show," that they commissioned a special minute-by-minute ratings report on the show's premiere episode last week.
In a twist on real life, the comedy stars Tom Arnold, husband of ABC's biggest star, Roseanne Arnold, as an abrasive, abusive star of a network comedy show.
The series is extremely important to ABC because it occupies the most favorable time period on ABC's schedule for a new show, immediately after "Roseanne," the No. 1 show in television.
ABC's goal with the period is to capitalize on the enormous audience -- and revenue -- "Roseanne" generates.
A Strong Success
The main fear for ABC, and any network with a hit show, is that a following show will suffer from what the networks call the falloff factor, a steep decline in viewers from a hit to the show immediately following it.


Moscow Journal; Voices of the New Russia's Congress
The debates of Russia's Congress of Peoples' Deputies, the country's highest legislative body, can range from the vituperative to the petulant, from the cogent to the perverse.
But among the deputies who have come from all over the vast Russian Federation, many are sensible and relatively businesslike, eager to influence the Government, not undermine it, and to represent the hopes and fears of their constituents.
Discussions with deputies this week, as the television cameras have focused on speeches by President Boris N. Yeltsin and his acting Prime Minister, Yegor T. Gaidar, reveal a general sobermindedness about Russia's problems and a distaste, as Deputy Nikolai A. Cherepkov of Chelyabinsk put it, "for the clowns who live only for the microphone and the television camera."


Dance in Review
Ruth Fuglistaller  Bessie Schonberg Theater
On the evidence of "Arrancame la vida! (Rip out my life!)," Ruth Fuglistaller belongs to the tiresome "cuchifrita" school of performance art, whose female practitioners seem to believe that Spanish accents, broken English and gaudy dresses are automatically funny.


New Rules For Rating Insurers
Insurance regulators from all 50 states approved a new standard yesterday for measuring the financial strength of life and health insurance companies.
The new yardstick, similar to the one used for commercial banks, is intended to make it easier for policyholders and investors to evaluate insurers.
Regulators also hope it will help reduce the number of failures, which has been rising in recent years.
Among those that have collapsed were the Mutual Benefit Life Insurance Company of Newark and the insurance units of the First Executive Corporation in Los Angeles.


For Giants, the More Things Change, the More They Remain the Same
New starters on offense and defense, new kicker, new punter, same old Giants.
All the changes did nothing for the Giants today as the Washington Redskins played better offense and sounder defense and won going away, 28-10.
The loss was the fourth straight for the Giants, who fell to 5-8.
After the game, Coach Ray Handley, who had been saying the Giants still had a chance to make the National Football League playoffs, conceded they no longer did.


Dance in Review
Jane Goldberg  Cooper Union East Village
Jane Goldberg has studied and performed with many of the greatest old tap dancers, among them Honi Coles, Charles Cook and John Bubbles.
And Ms.
Goldberg talked lovingly and informatively of her many "tap daddies," as well as suggesting something of their individual dance styles, in "Rhythm and Schmooze," presented on Thursday night.


REGULATORS AGREE ON REVAMPED PLAN FOR FAILED INSURER
The insurance regulators of New York and New Jersey agreed yesterday on how to resolve the largest insurance company failure in history, increasing the interest that will be paid on the savings of hundreds of thousands of customers of the failed Mutual Benefit Life Insurance Company.
But most customers may still have to wait up to seven years before they have access to all their money.
Under revisions to the plan, which must still be approved by a New Jersey court and some other states, the minimum interest paid to many pension and life insurance customers on their savings will be 5 percent.
The original plan announced by representatives of the insurance industry and New Jersey officials in August promised them no more than a minimum of 3.5 percent.


New Questions on a Company's Past
In December 1989, the Comptronix Corporation's board dismissed Harvey L. Pegram, one of the company's founders, contending that he had traded stock on inside information, court records here show.
But the fast-growing electronics manufacturer, currently at the center of a new board room scandal, did not publicly disclose the reason for the key executive's ouster or report the incident to stock market regulators.
The company's concealment of why it dismissed Mr.
Pegram and of the estrangement among its founding management team that predated the company's initial sale of stock to the public in May 1989 raises serious new questions about how candid Comptronix has been throughout its life as a publicly held corporation.


Wagner Gets an Emotional Lift to Title
Even though both teams were away from home and playing at Columbia's Wien Stadium in upper Manhattan yesterday, it was Susan Wagner, not Lincoln, that got the most inspiration from a glimpse of the landscape before the Public Schools Athletic League Class A championship football game.
"When we got here we looked over and got a glimpse of the place where we lost our last game," said Tom Reali, Wagner's 6-foot, 200-pound senior quarterback and co-captain.
"We remembered how we felt and knew we didn't ever want to feel that way again."


Cord Pullers With No Emergency; Vandals (or Pickpockets) Posing Challenge to Transit Police
It is a crime invariably committed amid a crowd, but the transit police are frankly baffled.
Some investigators speculate that "cord pulls," as they call them, are a new form of teen-age vandalism.
Others think it may be the work of pickpockets, laying the groundwork for a hit.
But the transit officers most involved in investigating the incidents say they just don't know.


Duke's Consistency Dominates in an Early Showdown
Is Duke capable of winning a third consecutive national title this season?
Is Michigan capable of replacing the Blue Devils as champion?
The college basketball season is barely under way but the national focus is on the Blue Devils and Wolverines: Duke is generally regarded as the most consistent college team, Michigan the one with the most talent.


Crown Hts. Drives Contest For Mayor
The scalding racial tensions of Crown Heights have unfolded against the backdrop of next year's New York City mayoral race, and while none of the three announced candidates would put it this way, all are trying to turn the undercurrents of anger and recrimination to their political advantage.
Mayor David N. Dinkins is hoping his reputation for dignity and conciliation can continue to serve him in the face of the bitter taunts of "Jew-hater" that a handful of hecklers spat at him last week, though he has found it hard to resist responding in a defensive tone of personal grievance.


Conde Nast? Rumor Quashed
The magazine business, if it does nothing else, loves a good rumor.
People in the industry even start rumors that this penchant for rumors has at times led to leaks from within the industry that -- if you can believe this -- do not always turn out to be true.
One rumor that has persisted for more than a year has been that Bernard Leser, 67-year-old president of Conde Nast, was about to retire.
That rumor led to a rash of rumors about the jockeying for position among some Conde Nast publishers anxious to succeed Mr.
Leser.


15 Businesses Damaged in a Fire in Queens


Gore Says Clinton Will Try to Halt Waste Incinerator
Vice President-elect Al Gore says the Clinton Administration will seek to halt operations at the nation's newest hazardous-waste incinerator until Congress investigates the plant's safety and how it got its state and Federal operating permits.
The move is the first environmental policy decision of the Administration that takes office next month, and it sends two clear signals: that Mr.
Gore will have a leading role in setting environmental priorities and that the new Administration plans an aggressive approach to enforcing environmental laws.


Sports of The Times: Pro Football; In Wind and Cold, Jets Bare Their Emotions
'Oh, my God," exclaimed Bruce Coslet, the Jets' coach, smiling broadly and blowing on his hands in the bitter, windy cold at Rich Stadium yesterday. "Oh, my God; oh, my God!"
As the day darkened, he moved along the sideline near game's end, with the Jets, 17-point underdogs, about to beat the Bills, 24-17.
Coslet, in black jacket and black knit cap, couldn't contain his pleasure or his emotions.
His players yelled and yelped and slapped and pummeled one another.


Homicidal Litterbugs
To the Editor:
I'm not thrilled that people use Pelham Bay Park to dump dead bodies ("In Isolated Bronx Park, Death Visits Frequently," news article, Nov. 28), but I do hope everyone understands these aren't crimes against park visitors.
Bodies are brought to the city's largest park for convenient disposal, and knowing how New Yorkers respect their parks I can't help suspecting the culprits are out-of-towners.
BETSY GOTBAUM  Commissioner of Parks &amp; Recreation New York, Dec. 3, 1992


Riverside South's Goal Is to Keep Park in Touch With River


Rice Has Record Touchdown As 49ers Manhandle Dolphins
49ers 27, Dolphins 3
SAN FRANCISCO, Dec. 6 (AP) -- Jerry Rice set a record as he helped the San Francisco 49ers rout the Miami Dolphins, 27-3, today.
Rice, who tied Steve Largent with his 100th scoring reception last week, caught a 12-yard pass from Steve Young for the record-setter with 8 minutes 56 seconds remaining in today's game.
Rice set the record in his eighth season; it took Largent 14.


Anna Pascual, David M. Felig
Anna Marie Pascual, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ernesto Pascual of Quezon City, the Philippines, was married yesterday to Dr.
David Marshall Felig, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Philip Felig of New York.
Rabbi Haskel Lookstein performed the ceremony at the New York Palace Hotel in Manhattan.
Mrs.
Felig, 27 years old, is a nurse at Mount Sinai Medical Center in New York.
She graduated from Manila Central University.
Her father, now retired, was an engineer for the Arab American Oil Company, an oil-development concern in Dahran, Saudi Arabia.
Her mother, Leonila Pascual, retired as an executive secretary at the Philippines Department of Justice in Manila.


A Yugoslav Macedonia Threatens Greece
To the Editor:
The Greek Government has acted irrationally vis-a-vis the Macedonia question, according to your editorial ("Wise Counsel on Macedonia," Nov. 23).
Consistent with your earlier editorial ("The Two Macedonias," April 5), you dismiss Greece's opposition to recognition of the southernmost former Yugoslav republic under that name as "unjustified."


Mogadishu Port Opens to Allow Some Food Deliveries
Food backed up at the port here began to roll today as a 400-ton shipment of United Nations wheat and sorghum reached the northern sector of the capital.
Behind it came a second convoy with 800 tons.
The cargo, part of a 12,000-ton shipment stranded at the harbor since early last month, was delayed again on Saturday when rival clans failed to honor their agreements to insure the food safe passage.


Toasting the Philharmonic's 150th: Count the Ways
It was 150 years ago tonight that a few hundred subscribers to the new Philharmonic Society of New York took their seats at the Apollo Rooms, on lower Broadway, and heard Ureli Corelli Hill lead the society's new orchestra in its first concert.
After the Beethoven Fifth Symphony, Mr.
Hill yielded that baton to Henry C. Hill, who led opera arias and duets by Weber, Beethoven, Mozart and Rossini and overtures by Weber and Kalliwoda.
There was even some chamber music, a quintet by Hummel.
Although the New York Philharmonic is looking back at its history all season, with special concerts, publications and exhibitions planned through May, this week is special, with commemorative events planned for each day, many of them open to the public and free of charge.


Baseball's Giants Play Let's Not Make a Deal
Deal?
What deal?
Biggest contract ever?
Not at the moment.
Next week?
Next month?
Who knows?
Not Barry Bonds, among everyone else.
Bonds, who Saturday night agreed to a six-year contract worth a record $43.75 million and a record $7,291,667 per year, flew across the country today and walked into the Galt House Hotel for a 7:30 P.M. news conference.
Bobby Bonds, his father; Dennis Gilbert, his agent, and assorted associates of Gilbert accompanied him.


Lloyd Bentsen: Insider at Treasury
By choosing Senator Lloyd Bentsen to be his Treasury Secretary, President-elect Bill Clinton would gain instant clout in Congress for his legislative package.
Mr.
Bentsen, who has run the Finance Committee with an iron first, won't need any road maps to guide him through the corridors of Capitol Hill.
Mr.
Bentsen will also be well received on Wall Street and Main Street.
The Texan has been a pragmatic legislator whose generally conservative views on tax and budget policies won't threaten business investors or foreign leaders.


Classical Music in Review
The Chung Trio Violinist, Cellist, Pianist Carnegie Hall
The Chung Trio offers concertgoers another chance to consider the effect of shared genes on musical performance.
Judging from their joint appearance on Wednesday night, Kyung-Wha, Myung-Wha and Myung-Whun Chung may derive their tight ensemble style from years spent in the same household.
But the musical personalities (and sometimes the levels of skill) tend to vary from brother to sister to sister.
The evening was two-thirds Beethoven trios: the early B-flat and the "Archduke." Brahms's B-major Trio came after intermission.


Classical Music in Review
Soldier String Quartet  New York String Trio Merkin Concert Hall
Music continues to appropriate the old means-versus-ends arguments common to political ethics.
Indeed, so much of Thursday night's concert by the Soldier String Quartet and the New York String Trio concentrated on musical conveyances that musical destinations seemed almost beside the point.


Texas View of Its Senator Is Quite Rosy, Of Course
Not surprisingly, the news that President-elect Bill Clinton had settled on Senator Lloyd Bentsen as his Treasury Secretary was welcomed by the Texas business community.
"He has been in the business world, and he understands the necessity of jobs and economic growth," Norman Brinker, chairman and chief executive of Brinker International Inc., said.
"I don't think he will do anything short-sighted that would compromise that."


Dance in Review
'The Nutcracker'  New York City Ballet New York State Theater
Kathleen Tracey, a New York City Ballet corps member, made an unscheduled debut in the ballerina role of George Balanchine's "Nutcracker" on Sunday afternoon and carried the whole thing off in a refreshing, straightforward manner.


Argentina Signs Debt Accord With Banks
In another important step toward resolving the Latin American debt crisis, Argentina and its creditor banks signed a final agreement today that will effectively reduce its commercial bank debt by 35 percent.
With the signing, Argentina joins a growing number of Latin American countries that have worked out restructurings of billions of dollars of debt with foreign banks.
During the 1980's, several of the countries defaulted on their debt payments.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Press Notes; A Publisher's Observations About His 'Vanity Paper'
ARTHUR L. CARTER, who may be worth $100 million, definitely did not make his money in newspaper publishing.
That, he has learned, takes more patience than the businesses in which he did amass his fortune: finance, real estate and water utilities.
But he is willing to wait.
Hence, tonight, he claims, he will be in a happy mood as he (along with celebrities like Mike Wallace of CBS and Tina Brown of The New Yorker, according to his public-relations man) toasts the fifth anniversary of his salmon-colored weekly, The New York Observer.


Pressmen Ratify Contract With The Times
The pressmen's union approved a new contract with The New York Times yesterday, which the paper called an important step toward full operation of its $450 million printing plant in Edison, N.J.
The contract was approved by a vote of rank-and-file members of the union, formally called the New York Newspaper Printing Pressmen's Union No. 2.


Cab Hurts 2 Women at Bus Terminal Curb
Two New Jersey women were injured yesterday morning when a taxicab jumped the curb and hit them in front of the Port Authority bus terminal in midtown Manhattan, the police said.
The purse belonging to one woman flew from her hands when she was hit and could not be accounted for, said Lieut.
Michael Tobia of the Port Authority Police, the tour commander at the time of the incident.


Divorced, Middle-Aged and Happy: Women, Especially, Adjust to the 90's
When Lynn Steinhauer divorced a few years ago, after more than two decades of marriage, she expected to feel lost and lonely.
Instead, she delighted in the peaceful pleasures of an empty house and a table set for one.
Now Ms.
Steinhauer comes and goes as she pleases and spends the money she earns without reproach.
She flings herself into work with the energy once spent nurturing and negotiating.
And she prefers a weekend relationship to a full-time mate.


Signal on Toxic Waste
In its first environmental policy decision, the Clinton Administration will seek to halt operations at the nation's newest hazardous-waste incinerator until Congress investigates the plant's safety and the way it got its operating permits, Vice President-elect Al Gore says.
Article, page D9.


Watts Postpones Recital
The pianist Andre Watts, who has suffered a back injury, has postponed his Friday evening recital at Avery Fisher Hall to March 7 at 3 P.M.
The original tickets will be honored.
Information: (212) 721-6500.


A Few in Congress Advising Caution, or Vote, on Somalia
In the chorus of Congressional support for military intervention in Somalia, a few dissident voices are urging caution and, in some cases, suggesting that the mission be formally put to a vote under the War Powers Act.
Many Democrats and some Republicans in Congress had been urging the Bush Administration for months to step up its efforts to get food to starving people in Somalia.
But now that President Bush has acted, some lawmakers are troubled that Congress, which is not in session now, is exerting so little influence as the Administration begins a military operation.


Injunction for Small Shops: Agency, Market Thyself
MORE than a year after two of New York's more promising young agencies merged, the new shop they formed is proving that sometimes one plus one can equal three.
But in an intensely competitive environment, in which one plus one needs to equal five or six, that ambitious goal is still tantalizingly elusive.
The agency is Weiss, Whitten, Carroll, Stagliano, created in June 1991 by the merger of Weiss, Whitten and Carroll Raj Stagliano, each founded by former employees of larger shops like Chiat/Day.


MISSION TO SOMALIA: Reporter's Notebook; Guns, Greed and Khat Define A Once-Graceful Somali City
In a lawless capital that has lost its banks, its national airline and its everyday comforts, hardheaded residents have learned to make do.
American dollars flow in through the new bankers, Somali merchants who return from the Middle East with suitcases of dollars and charge a fee for the service.


Review/Television; Peddling Sugar and Spice and Everything Hyped
Although "Buy Me That 3! A Kid's Guide to Food Advertising" delivers a bah-humbug message, the half-hour of anticommercials about junk food is anything but Scroogelike.
As the awkward title indicates, this is the third special from Consumer Reports and HBO that attempts, wishfully, to protect youngsters from the flood of television advertising that crests during December and drowns any inhibitions that still exist about laying out good money for dubious products.
As one of the likable children who pop up now and then to describe the effects of the commercials confesses, "You think you absolutely need it."
The first and funniest of the put-downs is a blind taste test for avowed fans of Coca-Cola ("You can't beat the real thing!") and Pepsi-Cola ("You gotta have it!"), conducted like a wine tasting, complete with water to clear the palate.
It turns out that without the familiar bottle, most of the 72 boys and girls could not tell which was their proclaimed favorite; some even chose R.C.
Cola!


300,000 IN MUNICH PROTEST VIOLENCE
More than 300,000 Germans marched peacefully through Munich today in one of the country's largest demonstrations against intolerance, anti-Semitism and rightist violence.
The march began at dusk with a 10-minute chorus of bells pealing from all the city's major churches.
After that, marchers bearing candles or lanterns walked silently through the historic city center for half an hour, forming a line that stretched nearly nine miles.
When the silent vigil ended, they broke into songs and greetings.


Dividend Meetings


3 WOMEN ARE SAID TO BE CANDIDATES FOR CABINET POSTS
Concerned that his first Cabinet appointments might signal the wrong intentions for his Adminstration, President-elect Bill Clinton plans to expand this week's announcements to include posts that would be filled by female and minority appointees.
Aides to the President-elect said that Madeleine M. Kunin, the former Governor of Vermont; Donna E. Shalala, the chancellor of the University of Wisconsin, and Jill L. Long, a Congresswoman from Indiana, are leading candidates for major positions.
May Head the E.P.A.
Mrs.
Kunin, who is serving on the transition board and helped Mr.
Clinton select Senator Al Gore of Tennessee as his running mate, is the likely nominee to be Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, a sub-Cabinet post.
Mrs.
Kunin is credited with rewriting Vermont's environmental laws, including new rules for toxic waste and garbage dumping, and she favors greatly increased regulation of businesses and industries.


THE TRANSITION: The President's Church; Pastors Want Clinton in Their Flocks
In Washington these days, overtures for a place in the next Presidential Administration are coming not only from potential Cabinet members and White House advisers, but also from churches.
The Southern Baptist President-elect and his Methodist wife and daughter are getting warm invitations -- and sometimes a little lobbying -- from any number of congregations.


Review/Cabaret; The Theater's Songwriters In 'The Jule Styne Revue'
"Make Someone Happy! The Jule Styne Revue," the newest in a series of musical salutes to great theatrical songwriters at Rainbow and Stars, was to have had its official opening on Nov. 24.
Then at the last minute, its best-known performer, Dolores Gray, left the cast, and the show's 35 songs were redistributed among its four principal singers.
At the press opening on Tuesday evening, the turmoil could be felt in the tense, mechanical performances of Broadway and cabaret professionals who have all sounded more at ease in other settings.
Except for strong, heartfelt performances of "Who Are You Now" and "Don't Rain on My Parade" (both from "Funny Girl") by Ann Hampton Callaway, the revue is a sad example of talented performers mismatched both to their material and to one another.
Neither David Garrison, who starred on Broadway in "A Day in Hollywood/A Night in the Ukraine," nor Gregg Edelman (from "City of Angels") has a voice that could be described as lyrical.
Yet each is given at least one major Styne ballad that demands a degree of sweetness and vulnerability.


Jane Levenstein, Paul Trager
Jane Mara Levenstein, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Seymour Levenstein of Woodmere, L.I., was married yesterday to Paul Trager, a son of Lawrence Trager of New York and the late Jacqueline Trager.
Rabbi Ben Pernod performed the ceremony at Temple Israel in Lawrence, L.I.
Mrs.
Trager is a senior marketing associate at Equitable Capital Management Corporation, an investment-management company in New York.
She graduated from Brandeis University and received an M.B.A. from New York University.
Her father is the chairman of Kofler, Levenstein, Romanotto &amp; Company, an accounting concern in New York.


A Fresh Start for the Homeless
Smarting under contempt of court orders, New York City officials propose to shift a failing homeless policy from the Human Resources Administration to a new agency.
The announcement invites skepticism: Why should a bureaucratic shuffle make any difference?
This shuffle might; it's certainly worth a try.
A mayoral commission chaired by Andrew Cuomo proposed last February that the city should contract out most services for the homeless to nonprofit groups.
It also recommended a new agency, independent of the often chaotic H.R.A., to become a "general contractor" for the new system.


The Jets Defy All the Odds and Win One for Byrd
A powerful feeling swept over Jets cornerback James Hasty before his team stepped onto the frozen field today to play the Bills here at Rich Stadium.
He reflected on the anguish and helplessness that the team had felt during the last week with Dennis Byrd lying in a bed at Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan, his legs paralyzed after he broke his neck in the game against Kansas City last Sunday.
Hasty thought about the Jets' recent history against Buffalo -- 10 straight losses dating to 1987 -- and the fact that the Jets had lost four starters and were considerable underdogs this afternoon.
And the feeling got stronger.


Nancy Phillips, Thomas Dunne
Nancy Jean Phillips, the business manager of Life magazine in New York, was married yesterday to Thomas Aquinas Dunne, a commissioner at the New York State Workers' Compensation Board in Brooklyn.
The Rev.
Thomas F. Pike performed the ceremony at the Chapel of St.
George's Episcopal Church on Stuyvesant Square in New York.
Ms.
Phillips, who is keeping her name, graduated from Hunter College and received a master's degree in public and private management from Yale University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James E. Phillips of Largo, Fla.


A Yugoslav Macedonia Threatens Greece; A Case for Recognition
To the Editor:
Your editorial "Wise Counsel on Macedonia" was most appropriately titled.
The great tragedy, as history indicates, is that political leaders act only when it is too late.


Devils Surge Past Sabres
Devils 7, Sabres 3
BUFFALO, Dec. 6 (AP) -- Valery Zelepukin and Aleksandr Semak each had a goal and two assists as the New Jersey Devils scored five goals in the second period tonight in a 7-3 victory over the Buffalo Sabres.
New Jersey was without leading scorers Claude Lemieux and Stephane Richer, both of whom did not dress for the game.
It didn't matter, as the Devils broke open a 1-1 deadlock with goals by Semak and Troy Mallette 59 seconds apart early in the second period to take a 3-1 lead just 3:02 into the period.


INSIDE
New Turn on Nixon Tapes
White House tapes show Richard Nixon tried to link George McGovern to George Wallace's assailant, The New Yorker magazine says.
Page A16.
Progress on Latin Debt
Argentina and its creditor banks signed a final agreement that will effectively reduce its commercial bank debt by 35 percent.
Page D1. 300,000 Join German March
Germans marched peacefully through Munich in a demonstration against intolerance.
Page A8.
Churches Go to Clinton
Congregations in Washington are sending warm invitations to the President-elect and his family.
Page B9.
U.S.
Wins Davis Cup
Jim Courier beat Jakob Hlasek to clinch a tennis victory over the Swiss.
SportsMonday, page C3.


Food Is Delivered to Somalis
Trucks carrying U.N. wheat and sorghum left the port in Mogadishu for feeding centers, impeded by only minor looting.
Page A12.


Fighting in Sarajevo Suburbs Cuts Off Access and Power
Heavy shelling and infantry clashes spread across the western suburbs of Sarajevo today, shutting down the Bosnian capital's telephone, water and electricity systems and preventing United Nations workers from reaching hundreds of civilians still trapped by fighting in the suburb of Otes, local news reports said.
United Nations officials and troops returning from Otes said Serbian forces had overrun and destroyed most of the town.
Otes lies six miles from Sarajevo's center, on the approach to the airport and near the main supply road into the city.


U.S. Cancels Tax on Wine
Carla A. Hills, the United States trade representative, announced at the last possible moment the formal cancellation of 200 percent import taxes on white wine from the European Community that had been scheduled to take effect on Saturday.
Mrs.
Hills had promised on Nov. 19 to cancel the taxes when she and Agriculture Secretary Edward R. Madigan struck a comprehensive deal with European officials to limit farm subsidies.


Landmarks Panel to Hear TriBeCa Plan
After years of veering between conflicting impulses -- to preserve its architectural heritage (about five stories high) or exploit its development potential (more like 50) -- the TriBeCa area of lower Manhattan is nearing a decisive moment.
Tomorrow, the New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission is to consider a plan to create three new historic districts there, a move that would bring all or part of 34 blocks northwest of City Hall under its regulation.


Computer Agreement
Apple Computer Inc. and America Online Inc., a supplier of electronic information services based in Vienna, Va., have announced that Apple will manage and market services developed by America Online.
The two companies also announced on Friday that they planned to work together to develop enhancements to America Online.


28 Suspects in Suffolk Drug Ring Arrested
A Long Island man who the police said bragged that for $5,000 he could make people disappear was arrested early this morning and identified as the leader of a major narcotics ring in western Suffolk County.
The suspect, Raymond Kaisen, and 27 other suspected members of the drug-distribution ring, were seized in several simultaneous raids on the Island by Federal, state and county drug-enforcement agents.
The police also seized 12 luxury cars, a 33-foot speedboat, numerous weapons, explosives, anabolic steroids, marijuana plants and about two pounds of cocaine.


Streak Does Wonders for the Nets
Nets Coach Chuck Daly was asked about his team's six-game winning streak.
"That's all I hear about," he said, laughing.
"Streaks, streaks, streaks. It's all fun and nice, but let's not get ahead of ourselves."


Rev. James C. Finlay, 70, Dies; A Former President of Fordham
The Rev.
James C. Finlay, a Jesuit priest who was president of Fordham University from 1972 until his retirement in 1984, died on Saturday in Murray-Weigel Hall, an infirmary for retired Jesuits on the university's Rose Hill campus in the Bronx.
He was 70 years old.
He died of a heart attack, said a university spokeswoman, Carolyn Farrar.


Great Bowl Experiment or Great Injustice?
Week by week throughout the season, the members of the college football bowl coalition searched for the next problem that could complicate their effort to reshape an increasingly bitter and clandestine selection process into one of order, understanding and trust.
But by this morning, after the surprises of the season had placed the nation's top six teams within their grasp, the coalition members discovered that the final problem of their initial season -- the one that wouldn't go away -- came from within.


Virginia Gets Title In Shutout
Coach Bruce Arena of Virginia didn't have to keep his promise of jumping into nearby Lake Norman if his team failed to score against the University of San Diego today in the collegiate soccer championship game.
Arena sweated it out at intermsission, when the game was scoreless, but his Cavaliers bailed him out in the second half with a strong performance for a 2-0 triumph over the Toreros before a standing-room crowd of 8,150 fans at Richardson Field.


Home Health Care Policies Need to Be Refined
To the Editor:
"Home Care in New York, a Model Plan, Awaits Cuts" (front-page article, Nov. 20) presents a picture of home care issues that is both incomplete and simplistic.
First, presenting New York's system of allocating Medicaid-funded home attendant service as a "model plan" would seem to imply endorsement of a system that is both very expensive and wholly unsophisticated in the allocation of these monies.


Gibson Danes, Dean, 81, and Ilse Getz, Artist, 75
Gibson A. Danes, a former dean of the Yale School of Art and Architecture, and his wife, Ilse Getz, an artist, were found dead on Friday at their home in Litchfield, Conn., a Connecticut State Police official said yesterday.
Mr.
Danes was 81 years old, Ms.
Getz 75.
The official, J. A. Thulin, a civilian dispatcher at the headquarters of Connecticut State Police Troop L in Litchfield, said that the State Police Major Crime Squad was investigating the deaths and that the couple's bodies had been found in their car, which was parked in their garage.


Clint Eastwood, Back on the Side Of the Law, Protecting a President
The hotel ballroom in downtown Los Angeles explodes with applause as hundreds of couples in fancy outfits welcome the arrival of a fictional President of the United States.
The reporters at the scene (who seem uncharacteristically neat and well-dressed) and the television crews start to move in.
Watching the audience with darting eyes are a handful of men and women with receivers in their ears and transmitters on their lapels.


Abroad at Home; What We Should Do In Bosnia
When Secretary of Defense Dick Cheney briefed the press on the Somalia operation, he was asked whether it was a precedent for U.S. intervention in Bosnia.
No, he said, the situation there was "dramatically different" -- the history, the terrain, the armies involved.
"If we had 200,000 troops on the ground in Bosnia," he said, "I'm not sure what I would tell them to do."


Byrd's Roommate Isn't Alone in His Joy
Jets defensive end Marvin Washington had been Dennis Byrd's roommate on the road.
On Saturday night, Washington had a room to himself in downtown Buffalo, but there was no peace in the solitude.
That was because Washington was thinking about Byrd, who was in a hospital room several hundred miles away after being partly paralyzed by a broken neck suffered in last week's game.


U.S. Warns Somali Gunmen Against Efforts to Block Aid
Administration officials warned today that United States troops would try to disarm Somali gunmen who interfered with food deliveries.
The officials also refused to set a deadline for completion of the mission in Somalia.


A Big Ranger Shakeup Followed by a Shutout
Roger Neilson was tired of waiting for his bench full of talent to play like the Stanely Cup contenders they are supposed to be.
Neil Smith was sick of watching dismal defensive breakdowns and sloppy goaltending and forwards who wouldn't backcheck.
Yesterday, Neilson and Smith decided to take action.
In what was clearly intended to be a harsh message to the current players on the Rangers' roster, the organization called up four players from the Binghamton farm team and dressed all of them for last night's game against the Toronto Maple Leafs at Madison Square Garden.


Who's Stirring the Pot?
Many Wall Street executives fear the new Administration's economic stew may have too many cooks.
Page D1.


Advertisers Less Skittish About Explicit Programs
Fewer advertisers are pulling their commercials from television shows this season because of sexually oriented content, network executives say.
And one reason appears to be that the more popular shows can easily replace any skittish advertiser with another willing to take the risk.
Two recent and prominent examples are cited.
NBC's comedy "Seinfeld" had 9 of its 10 scheduled advertisers drop out of an episode last month that dealt obliquely with the subject of masturbation.
And television's most popular weekly show, ABC's "Roseanne," saw one advertiser withdraw a commercial from an episode in which a regular character announced she was a lesbian.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Bill Clinton's economic team is likely to take a tougher stand on the deficit than what the President-elect spelled out in the campaign.
Recent upbeat economic news makes it less likely that the new Administration will push the deficit up to give the economy a jolt, Clinton advisers say.  [ Page A1. ] .
Concerned that his first cabinet appointments might be entirely white and male, Clinton plans to expand this week's announcements to include posts to be filled by women and members of minority groups.  [ A1. ]
The news that Lloyd Bentsen is expected to be nominated as Treasury Secretary was well received on Wall Street.  [ D1. ]  Not surprisingly, Texas business people welcomed the news.  [ D3. ]


CHRONICLE
MORTON L. JANKLOW has his name on a literary agency, Janklow &amp; Nesbit Associates, and a law firm, Janklow Newborn &amp; Ashley, so where, one wonders, can it be found next?
Given Mr.
Janklow's interest in the connections between law and the arts, an academic chair seems appropriate.
He has established the Morton L. Janklow Professorship of Literary and Artistic Property Law at the Columbia University School of Law.
JANE C. GINSBURG, an expert in the field and a member of the faculty, has been named to the professorship.


Bond Mood Supports Clinton
The sharp rally in the bond market after the release of employment data on Friday seems to show a surprising comfort among market players with President-elect Bill Clinton, a Democrat who will govern with a Democratic-controlled Congress.
The bond market is peopled by investors, traders, speculators and analysts who have had little confidence in Democrats in the past and a real fear of rising deficits.
Yet, the avid buyers of Treasury bills, notes and bonds on Friday appeared to be giving Mr.
Clinton every benefit of the doubt.
Shift in Investor Mood
"The shift in mood in the last six to eight weeks is phenomenal," said Maureen Allyn, chief economist at Scudder, Stevens &amp; Clark.
"They thought the economy was going down the drain and he was evil incarnate. Now they think the economy is growing at a 4 percent rate and that Clinton is smart, practical and will do the right thing."


Joyner Makes All-Star Catch And Trots Home for Key Run
There were 4 minutes 22 seconds left and the Minnesota Vikings trailed the Philadelphia Eagles by 21-17.
The Vikings had just scored a touchdown on a 70-yard, 14-play drive that required a little more than seven minutes.
Their defense had forced an Eagles punt, and now the Vikings had the ball again at their 30, primed for another long march to swipe the lead and maybe the game.
The first play of the drive began innocently enough.


On Sundays, Bergen Shoppers Rest
A SUNDAY at the shopping malls in Bergen County, N.J., is like a scene from a low-budget doomsday film.
Mammoth concrete stores and acres of parking spaces are abandoned, as if nuclear winter has driven tens of thousands of die-hard bargain hunters underground, or at least to the relative comfort of the vast Willowbrook Mall in neighboring Passaic County.
In Passaic, customers can shop all week.
But Bergen enforces blue laws; it is the only one of the 21 New Jersey counties to maintain them since the Legislature permitted their establishment, county by county, 33 years ago.
And even though it's Christmastime in one of the nation's largest and richest shopping hubs, and even though every other county in the state permits shopping, and even though Herald Square and Fifth Avenue in Manhattan are packed, Sunday is still the merchants' day of rest in Bergen.
So is Sunday of Washington's Birthday weekend, Memorial Day weekend and Labor Day weekend.
No exceptions.


Raiders Are Too Much for Chiefs
Raiders 28, Chiefs 7
LOS ANGELES, Dec. 6 (AP) -- The on-again, off-again Los Angeles Raiders were on today.
Jay Schroeder threw three touchdown passes and Elvis Patterson blocked a punt and recovered it for another score as the Raiders easily defeated the Kansas City Chiefs, 28-7.
That snapped the Raiders' six-game losing streak to the Chiefs, dating back to 1989.


Patents; Substituting A Finger For a Mouse
FOR many people who buy personal computers, the biggest question is not horsepower but ease of use.
Are the instructions daunting or simple?
Can a person issue commands using a hand-held "mouse" to move the cursor to easy-to-understand pictures on the screen?
Can the computer read one's handwriting?


Miller High Life To Y.&amp; R. Chicago
The Miller Brewing Company unexpectedly disclosed Friday that it would move its Miller High Life account to Young &amp; Rubicam Chicago from Leo Burnett U.S.A. in Chicago, effective early next year.
Estimates are that High Life spending has been reduced to well under $10 million as the brand's sales continue to decline, compared with the estimated $110 million Miller Lite account that Burnett retains.
Miller insisted the switch was unrelated to Burnett's performance on the Lite account, Miller's largest, which it was awarded last year from Backer Spielvogel Bates Inc. in New York.
Speculation continues in trade publications that Burnett's hold on Lite is weakening because its initial campaign for the brand, since changed, was widely derided as bland and unfocused.


Review/Theater; Woyzeck, Antihero, Cannot Outrun His Destiny
The title character in "Woyzeck" is, we are told, "running around like an open razor blade." The image, in common with the play itself, is as precise as it is terrifying.
Woyzeck, a military barber and the most ordinary of common men, is overcome by dementia.
He hears strange sounds, sees visions and is driven to a desperate act of murder.
Along with "Danton's Death," the play certified Georg Buchner's reputation as the first modern playwright.
Written in the 1830's and discovered as fragments after the author's death, the work foreshadowed explorations by Kafka, Brecht and Beckett.
The modernism of Buchner is basic to JoAnne Akalaitis's compelling production at the Joseph Papp Public Theater.
Because of the nonlinear style and the focus on an irrational antihero, the play is open to free-handed interpretation.
In search of "Woyzeck," Ms.
Akalaitis uses alternate scenes and extracts from early drafts of the play, filtering Henry J. Schmidt's translation through her fervid theatrical imagination.
The difficulty this director has had in dealing with Shakespeare is not in evidence in her treatment of Buchner.


Market Place; A New Outlook On Oil and Gas
ANALYSTS say that a new market psychology, a result of weak oil and gas prices in recent months, may be setting the stage for large-scale sales of oil and gas properties from major international oil companies to large independent producers in the United States.
This could be good news for investors because it would improve the efficiency of the major oil companies while raising millions of dollars for their high-priority exploration and production prospects.
For the independents, it should provide sizable additions to existing reserves without significantly raising operating costs.


Col. Alva Harvey, 91, Military Flight Pioneer
Col.
Alva L. Harvey, a pioneer military aviator who survived 10 days in Alaska's wilderness after crashing on an around-the-world flight attempt in 1924, died Monday at Mount Vernon Hospital in Arlington, Va.
He was 92 years old and lived in Arlington.
He died of heart failure, his family said.


Classical Music in Review
Sacred Music in a Sacred Space  Church of St.
Ignatius Loyola Park Avenue at 84th Street
There was a kind of controlled disarray at the Church of St.
Ignatius Loyola on Wednesday evening.
Because the church began installing a new organ a few weeks ago -- a process that is expected to be completed just before Easter -- its organ loft has been torn up and a few of the back pews have been removed and stacked along the south wall.


Review/Opera; Ozawa's Met Conducting Debut In a Frankly Romantic 'Onegin'
Tchaikovsky would have expected that any viewer of "Eugene Onegin" -- which he called a series of "lyric scenes," not an opera -- would have known the characters inside out from Pushkin's classic poem.
This story of wealthy Onegin, a sampler of sensation, jaded before his time, and the passionate and innocent love he awakens in the young Tatiana, was almost part of Russian folk culture.
Even the language of the libretto would have been recognized, since so much of it is drawn directly from the 14-line stanzas of Pushkin.
Today the reverse is true: we know the poem primarily through the opera, which has itself, deservedly, become one of the composer's best-loved works.
Yet this means that we are also missing something that Tchaikovsky would have assumed: the irony and light mockery that accompanied the tale, and that still appear, here and there, in the libretto and score.
This opera can be treated so literally that there is a risk of bluntness.
This tendency was aggravated on Friday night at the Metropolitan Opera as Seiji Ozawa made his conducting debut with the company, leading this season's first "Onegin."


Bridge
Would you care to play opponents who pass cards under the table, to insure that your play will fail?
"No" is the wrong answer -- you should be willing to pay $49.95 for the privilege ($10 more after Christmas).
The money should be sent to Fred Gitelman, 15 Lillian Street, Toronto, Canada M4S2H7.
In return you will receive Gitelman's "Bridge Master," which is the best computer software ever created for teaching dummy play on an I.B.M.-compatible computer.
Specify disk size, graphics card (EGA or VGA), and either basic-intermediate hands or intermediate-expert.


Venezuelans, Some of Them at Least, Go to Polls in Local Elections
Venezuelans, who saw an unpopular Government put down two attempted coups this year, went to the polls today to elect state and local officials.
The races included 22 state governorships, 282 mayors' seats and 2,116 city council positions.
And for the first time, voters chose 3,000 members of a new political body, the parish boards, which will operate at a level just below the city councils.


The Senate's Ethical House of Cards
Acting expeditiously, the Senate Ethics Committee has started a preliminary inquiry into allegations of sexual harassment lodged against Senator Bob Packwood, Republican of Oregon.
But the committee still owes a better response on another unpleasant matter: the strange case of Senator Phil Gramm's vacation home.
The home-building bargain afforded Mr.
Gramm, a Texas Republican who is a leading member of the Senate Banking Committee, was disclosed last week by The Times's Jeff Gerth and Dean Baquet.
Under a highly unusual arrangement -- there was no written estimate or contract -- Mr.
Gramm paid a builder who also operated three troubled savings and loans only $63,433 of the $117,000 it cost to complete a two-story waterfront house in rural Maryland.


CHRONICLE
MICHELE GRIGSBY, 20 years old, was supposed to marry BERNARD BARBER in Los Angeles on Dec. 26.
But when Mr.
Barber, a 25-year-old specialist in the Army 10th Mountain Division based at Fort Drum, N.Y., learned last week that he would soon be heading to Somalia, the couple hastily scheduled a Saturday afternoon ceremony.
They weren't alone.


Article Says Nixon Schemed To Tie Foe to Wallace Attack
Secret White House tapes show that in an effort to embarrass the Democrats President Richard M. Nixon tried to have George McGovern's Presidential campaign literature planted in the apartment of the man who shot George Wallace in 1972, according to an article in The New Yorker magazine.
The article, written by Seymour M. Hersh, says the tapes also suggest that Mr.
Nixon did not know about the Watergate break-in before it occurred, that he encouraged the cartoonist Al Capp, the creator of Li'l Abner and other outrageous residents of Dogpatch, to run against Senator Edward M. Kennedy of Massachusetts, and that he and his aide H. R. Haldeman openly discussed the "sale" of ambassadorships to political contributors.


Huge Ships Carry Supplies to the Marines
When the first wave of 1,800 marines stage their daytime landing into Mogadishu early this week, they will rely on food, water, fuel and equipment aboard this huge supply ship to sustain the initial operation.
Marine commanders said today that the Lummus, sailing from Mombasa, Kenya, will meet with a Marine flotilla now off the Somali capital on Tuesday morning.
Sometime after that, the marines will go ashore to begin carrying out the United Nations mandate to secure the delivery of food to famine-stricken Somalia.


For the Real Potholes, See Moynihan
"ISN'T it about time
we
had a Senator" rivals George Wallace's "send them a message" as a campaign slogan that resoundingly struck a responsive chord. The time was 1970. The would-be Senator was James L. Buckley. The "we" were New Yorkers who for one reason or another felt disenfranchised.
Mr.
Buckley, the Conservative Party candidate, won a three-way race.
But a political power shortage that left New York State less franchised for nearly half a century has finally been rectified by Mr.
Buckley's successor.
This fall, after the death of Senator Quentin N. Burdick of North Dakota, Daniel Patrick Moynihan took over the Environment and Public Works Committee, becoming the first full-fledged Senate committee chairman from New York since Robert F. Wagner Sr.
The father of the former Mayor of New York City and the grandfather of the former Board of Education president headed the Banking and Currency Committee until the Democrats lost control of the Senate in 1946.


Hindu Militants Destroy Mosque, Setting Off a New Crisis in India
A screaming mob of thousands of Hindu militants stormed a 16th-century mosque here today and demolished it with sledgehammers and their bare hands, plunging India into a political and religious crisis.
The destruction of the mosque, which has been a focus of tensions between Hindus and Muslims for several years, raised the danger of a renewal of the conflicts between the groups that have claimed tens of thousands of lives in the last four decades.


Diverse Talents in a Rhodes New Yorker
Nnenna Jean Lynch is a senior at Villanova University, an eight-time All-America distance runner and a sometime model whose face has graced the pages of Vogue and Sports Illustrated, not to mention bus shelter billboards across New York City.
But now that Ms.
Lynch has been named a Rhodes Scholar, the modeling, at least, may have to take a back seat.


No Headline
"Dennis told me: 'Play hard on Sunday, Mark. Hang in there. Don't worry about me, I'll be all right."' -- MARK GUNN, who played left end in place of Dennis Byrd for the Jets yesterday.  [ C7:1. ]


Top-Level Changes At Riney &amp; Partners
Hal Riney &amp; Partners will make top-level personnel changes, effective Jan. 1, aimed at helping develop its next cadre of leaders.
Tony Houghton, 54 years old, who has been chairman, chief executive and chief creative officer at Leo Burnett Toronto, will become president at Riney's San Francisco headquarters, assuming a title previously held by Jim Travis at Riney's New York office.


Use of Undercover Officers Sets New York Unit Apart
Many police forces across the country have internal affairs units, but unlike New York City's, almost all must split their time between both corruption and brutality complaints.
In New York City, allegations of brutality are referred to the Civilian Complaint Review Board.
Internal affairs units elsewhere work differently in many other ways, mostly because the sprawling size of New York City's department makes it singular, said Douglas Perez, a criminologist at Champlain College in Vermont who has studied police departments in Chicago, Los Angeles and several other cities.
The New York Police Department is the only one with a unit of undercover officers for corruption investigations, Mr.
Perez said.


Courier Perks Up in Time for Title
Two weeks ago, Jim Courier suggested that he might be too tired to play singles in the Davis Cup final this weekend against Switzerland.
Two days ago, after Courier, the world's No. 1-ranked player, was upset in five sets by Olympic champion Marc Rosset, the American confessed that Davis Cup is not "his favorite way" to play.


Wall St. on Bentsen: Will He Stir Pot?
The news that Senator Lloyd Bentsen of Texas is expected to be nominated as the next Secretary of the Treasury was generally well received on Wall Street.
But many executives said they feared that the economic stew in a new Administration may have too many cooks for any one to be decisive.
"He will be a fine Treasury Secretary, but how much power will a Treasury Secretary have in this Administration with all the new jobs they're discussing," a senior Wall Street executive said.
Like many people interviewed, he was unwilling to offer even the lightest criticism of the new Administration without the cloak of anonymity.


2 Top Officials Start Firms
Two vice chairmen at two large agencies have resigned to start their own businesses.
Alvin A. Achenbaum, vice chairman of professional services at Backer Spielvogel Bates Worldwide in New York, will leave to open a marketing-management counseling company in New York similar to one he co-founded nearly 20 years ago.
Before joining Backer Spielvogel, Mr.
Achenbaum was chairman at Canter, Achenbaum Associates.


RESULTS PLUS
SKIING  Tomba Irked on Slopes
Tomas Fogdoe of Sweden had nothing to complain about.
Alberto Tomba did.
Fogdoe came from far behind to win a men's World Cup slalom race in Val d'Isere, France, yesterday, taking advantage of a fall by local favorite Patrice Bianchi of France and a cameraman who bothered Tomba.
Fogdoe, 12th after the morning run, had the best time in the afternoon by more than a half-second, 45.72 seconds.
He had a total time of 1:34.76 for the two runs.
Tomba, winner of three Olympic gold medals, finished seventh in 1:35.70.
After a first run of 48.47, putting him fourth, he had trouble on the upper part of the course.
He complained that the cameraman, making an independent video with an accreditation, was skiing alongside of him outside the course, breaking his concentration.
Fogdoe wasn't bothered by much on the second run after trailing Bianchi by more than a second on the first run. (AP) Wiberg First in Slalom: Pernilla Wiberg of Sweden blistered the second run of a women's World Cup slalom yesterday in Steamboat Springs, Colo., overtaking Annelise Coberger of New Zealand to claim her fifth career World Cup triumph.
Wiberg, the 1992 Olympic gold medalist in giant slalom who now has placed fourth, second and first in four races this season, moved into the lead in the overall standing. (AP) GOLF  Frost Wins the Million
David Frost fired a three-under-par 69 yesterday to win the Million Dollar Challenge in Sun City, South Africa, and become the tournament's first three-time champion.
Frost, a South African, finished at 12-under-par 276, four shots ahead of John Cook and earned golf's richest prize: $1 million.
Frost also won in 1989 and 1990.
The victory put him near the $2 million mark in winnings this year after a 1991 slump.
Cook also finished with a 69 for second place at 280, four shots ahead of Fred Couples, the Masters champion, who fired a 67, the lowest round of the tournament, and the South African Ernie Els, who shot a 68.
Defending champion Bernhard Langer finished fifth after a closing 70. (AP) Forsman and Mochrie Prevail: The team of Dan Forsman and Dottie Mochrie combined for a two-under-par 69 yesterday to win the $1.1 million J. C. Penney Classic and set a course record at Tarpon Springs, Fla.
Forsman-Mochrie finished with a record 20-under-par 264 at the Innisbrook Resort Copperhead Course.
Their total was two strokes better than the lowest recorded since the tournament began in 1990.
Beth Daniel and Davis Love 3d, who finished first in 1990 and third last year, came in second at 268.
Four teams tied for third at 270.
"All along I felt like we would gel," Forsman said.
"I had so much confidence in Dottie all week." (AP) SPEED SKATING  Jansen Stakes a Claim
Dan Jansen of the United States and Igor Zhelezovsky of Belarus won the men's races and Seiko Hashimoto of Japan and Ye Qiaobo of China were the women's winners yesterday in the World Cup competition in Karuizawa, Japan.
Jansen prevented Zhelezovsky from sweeping the men's 500-meter events, beating him by 0.12 seconds in 37.12.
Zhelezovsky won the 500 on Saturday.
Zhelezovsky, the 1991 and 1992 world sprint overall champion, took the 1,000-meter race for the second straight day in 1:15.42.
In the women's competition, American Bonnie Blair finished second in the 500 in 41.42, .82 seconds behind Ye. (AP) BOBSLEDDING  U.S.
Team Rides On
Brian Shimer piloted his USA-1 four-man bobsled to victory yesterday in Altenberg, Germany, to remain unbeaten after three World Cup events.
Shimer, with teammates Bryan Leturgez and Karlos Kirby and brakeman Randy Jones, posted a combined winning time of 1 minute 52.01 seconds for the two runs.
The Americans set a course record of 55.97 seconds in the first run.
After sweeping the first three events of the six-race season, Shimer's team leads the World Cup standing with 102 points. (AP)


Police Officer Is Charged With Bribery
A Port Authority police officer who was the target of a six-month "sting" operation by his force and the Queens District Attorney's office was arraigned yesterday on charges of taking a $300 bribe to escort an undercover agent posing as a cocaine dealer past drug-detection security systems at La Guardia Airport.
Officials said the suspect, Roosevelt D. Joyner of East Elmhurst, Queens, who had been assigned to patrol duties at La Guardia for five of his seven years with the Port Authority police, was the first officer in the 65-year history of his force to be charged with a felony of the highest level, carrying a maximum penalty of 25 years to life in prison.


TRANSACTIONS
WEEKEND Baseball  American League
MINNESOTA TWINS -- Traded David West, pitcher, to the Philadelphia Phillies for Mike Hartley, pitcher.
SEATTLE MARINERS -- Signed Andy Nezelek, pitcher, and added him to their 40-man roster.
Signed Aubrey Waggoner, outfielder, and assigned him to Calgary of the Pacific Coast League.
National League  CINCINNATI REDS -- Named Greg Lynn head trainer.
LOS ANGELES DODGERS -- Agreed to terms with Cory Snyder, outfielder, and Roger McDowell, pitcher, on two-year contracts.
Named Rick Dempsey manager for Bakersfield of the California League.
Promoted Bakersfield manager Tom Beyers to third base coach at Albuquerque of the Pacific Coast League, and Bakersfield pitching coach Glenn Gregson to pitching coach at Albuquerque.
PHILADELPHIA PHILLIES -- Agreed to terms with Jose DeJesus, pitcher, on a one-year contract and Dale Murphy, outfielder, and Ken Howell, pitcher, on minor-league contracts.
Invited Murphy and Howell to spring training.
SAN FRANCISCO GIANTS -- Agreed to terms with Barry Bonds, outfielder, on a six-year contract.
Basketball  National Basketball Association
DALLAS MAVERICKS -- Agreed to terms with Terry Davis, forward, on a five-year contract extension.
Football  National Football League
MIAMI DOLPHINS -- Waived Alfred Jackson, cornerback.
Activated Darrell Malone, cornerback, from the practice squad.
NEW YORK GIANTS -- Placed Matt Bahr, placekicker, and Steve DeOssie, linebacker, on injured reserve.
Activated Myron Guyton, safety, and Mark Ingram, wide receiver, from injured reserve.
Signed John Brandes, tight end.
Waived John Washington, defensive lineman.
NEW YORK JETS -- Activated Bill Pickel, defensive lineman, from the practice squad.


Fighting Police Department Corruption Amid Distrust
Lieut.
Philip M. Druss has hunted down so many crooked colleagues in the New York City Police Department that he's earned the nickname "Destruction," and he says he has never doubted his mission for a minute.
When involved in an absorbing corruption inquiry, Lieutenant Druss may work hundreds of hours of overtime in a matter of weeks.
His zeal did not even flag, he says, when an officer he once identified as a drug dealer committed suicide before colleagues could arrest him.


Dance in Review
Margaret Beals  Loft Theater 228 West Broadway (between Franklin and North Moore Streets) TriBeCa
Margaret Beals, who made a name for herself in the 1960's and 70's as a solo dancer who specialized in improvisation and collaboration with musicians, has performed only sporadically in New York City since 1985.


A Religious Zeal Turns Into Abuse
This morning's sun, a dollop of deep orange, rose over processions of young men, their heads swathed in saffron headbands, their necks wrapped in saffron scarves, marching, some in lockstep, toward this sacred city.
Dawn brought with it, as well, the ceaseless call and response: "Jai Sri Ram, Jai Sri Ram!" -- "Hail Lord Ram, Hail Lord Ram!"
This was the day decreed by India's Hindu fundamentalist leaders -- men who want to create a Hindu state -- when the faithful from around the country should assemble here to begin work on a massive temple to the god Ram.


Byrd Receives Some Special Deliveries
It was too good to wait, too good to hold on to, too good not to bring straight to Dennis Byrd.
So the Jets president, Steve Gutman, accompanied by Dr.
James Nicholas, chairman of the Jets' medical department, quietly entered Lenox Hill Hospital Sunday night with the game ball from the Jets' big upset of the Bills in Buffalo.
They delivered it to Byrd in the hospital's orthopedic section, where the defensive end continues rehabilitation from the football collision that paralyzed him from the waist down.


Thud! Economic Report Lands on Baseball's Desk
A long-awaited study committee report on baseball's economics recommends that players be eligible for free agency after three years instead of six, a move that would eliminate salary arbitration.
The committee also recommends that clubs increase the amount of revenue they would share among themselves in order to protect financially weaker teams and that clubs and players enter into a partnership for the future financial benefit of the industry.
The report, which was supposed to have been completed by Sept. 1, 1991, was distributed to the clubs last week.
A copy of it was obtained today by The New York Times from a member of management.


Essay; Iraqgate Deadline Day
Tomorrow, Dec. 8, is the day that the Attorney General of the U.S. has set for receipt of a report that will force a decision to obey the law or to continue to break the law.
The law, set to expire in one week, is the Ethics in Government Act.
It upholds the ancient principle that no person shall be the judge in his own case.


Washington Pays Tribute To Performing Artists
They survived that fall, after all.
There were Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid, a k a Paul Newman and Robert Redford, one paying tribute to the other as President Bush looked on this evening at the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts.
As Mr.
Redford told jokes about his friend, Mr.
Newman sat in a box with President Bush and his wife, Barbara, along with the five other recipients of the 15th annual Kennedy Center Honors for lifetime achievement: the jazz musician Lionel Hampton, the actress Joanne Woodward, the dancer and actress Ginger Rogers, the cellist and conductor Mstislav Rostropovich and the choreographer Paul Taylor.
Paying Tribute in Kind
Acknowledging delight in the nation's performing artists is part of the impetus behind the Kennedy Center Honors.


Books of The Times; On Becoming a Writer and a Man
The Certificate  By Isaac Bashevis Singer  Translated by Leonard Wolf. 231 pages.
Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $22.
Things would be desperate for David Bendinger, the protagonist of Isaac Bashevis Singer's new-old novel, "The Certificate," if they were not so extremely amusing.
Eighteen and a half years old, hungry and practically penniless, without a place to spend the night, David arrives in Warsaw in the fall of 1922, searching for the start of his life.


Home Health Care Policies Need to Be Refined; Cost-Effective Choice
To the Editor:
Your article on New York State's efforts to cut the costs of home health care is an important contribution to a key issue.
In order to evaluate New York State's bold home-care model, it is important to understand the broad benefits it offers to patients, their families and society, some of which you did not fully present.


Diamandis Resurges in Cable Effort
In a long-expected comeback, Peter G. Diamandis, a dominant figure in the magazine industry until he was abruptly dismissed from Hachette Magazines in 1990, will resurface as a publisher of cable television guides.
TVSM Inc., publisher of The Cable Guide and Total TV, said that on Jan. 15 it would split into two companies.
One of them, called TVSM, will continue to publish the monthly Cable Guide, which has a circulation of six million.
A new company, Total TV Inc., will publish the weekly Total TV.
Mr.
Diamandis, 61 years old, will be chairman of both companies.


A Corporate Storm Blows In at American Express
Call it a coup or call it a nudge, now it's the American Express Company's directors who are looking for a new leader after some grew uneasy with James D. Robinson 3d, the chief executive for 15 years.
At a September board meeting, Mr.
Robinson agreed to lead a board committee to search for his successor.
In a statement yesterday, he described Harvey Golub, the company's president, as "the obvious internal candidate and a very good one, given his record and extensive knowledge of all our businesses." But he said the committee would consider outside candidates as well.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity offerings are expected this week:
ACS Enterprises Inc., Bensalem, Pa., 1 million common shares. Gerard Klauer Mattison.
Bell Sports Corp., 2 million common shares. William Blair.


Broncos Still Can't Pass Muster
Cowboys 31, Broncos 27
DENVER, Dec. 6 (AP) -- The Denver Broncos threw tag-team quarterbacks and a passing wide receiver at Dallas today, but the Cowboys still left town with a 31-27 victory.
Emmitt Smith's 3-yard touchdown run with 2 minutes 47 seconds left in the game was the winning score for the Cowboys (11-2), who clinched at least a wild-card playoff berth.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  CONFLAGRATION IN INDIA
Thousands of Hindu militants intent on building a temple to their god Ram stormed a 16th-century mosque in northern India, demolishing it with hammers and their bare hands.
The attack set off a new political and religious crisis in a land that has suffered through more than a few since independence.
A1  The fundamentalists want to create a Hindu state.
A10


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  None  Tuesday  None  Wednesday  None  Thursday  Producer Price Index . . .
Nov.
Weekly Jobless Claims  Friday  Consumer Price Index . . .
Nov.
Retail Sales . . .
Nov.


SWISS REJECT TIE TO WIDER EUROPE
Choosing the security of their traditional isolation and neutrality over the risks and opportunities offered by Europe, Swiss voters today vetoed a Government-backed plan for Switzerland to move toward economic integration with the European Community.
The result of the referendum specifically blocks Switzerland from joining a new customs-free European Economic Area embracing the 12 nations in the community and the 7 nations of the European Free Trade Association, of which Switzerland is a member.


Yanks Are Winners In the Abbott Derby
The Yankees, who have emphatically said that quality starting pitching is their central off-season aim, hit their first major target tonight when they traded for California's Jim Abbott.
The much-discussed, long-negotiated, endlessly speculated-on trade for the 25-year-old Abbott came at a significant price in young talent: the Yankees sent the Angels first base prospect J. T. Snow, right-handed starter Russ Springer and left-handed reliever Jerry Nielsen.


Alpine Journal; Cultural Frictions of a Border Town
For nearly a year, employees of the grocery store in this quiet town near the Mexican border kept a yellow ledger titled Mexican Incident Book, which chronicled their complaints about the migrant workers who camp across the road.
"Record all Drunks, Shoplifters, Customer Complaints, Stabbings (Ha, Ha)," read the instructions on the book's cover.


No Sleighs For Santas Trudging Sidewalks
The night-sky sleigh riding, the last-minute list checking and the down-the-chimney ho-ho-hoing are the easy part.
For some sidewalk Santas in Manhattan, December means long days collecting donations for the Volunteers of America, the nonprofit group that is New York State's largest provider of shelter services for single adults.
The group provides a home away from the North Pole, a shelter on the Upper East Side.
The Santas' presence creates some only-in-New-York scenes: suited Santas clambering onto the M5 bus, Santas picking up midday snacks in a deli, Santas trudging along a lonely sidewalk as night falls.


The Performance Was Good, but the Lap Was Better


Rape -- and Soldiers' Morale
All wars are alike in at least three particulars: death, destruction and rape.
A Serbian fighter named Borislav Herak recently gave The Times's John F. Burns one reason that rape is so often part of a soldier's arsenal.
Serbian commanders told him and his companions that raping Muslim women was "good for raising the fighters' morale."


Classical Music in Review
Downtown Chamber and Opera Players  Middle Collegiate Church East Village
Mimi Stern-Wolfe and her Downtown Music Productions specialize in concerts with an attitude.
Past programs have focused on feminist issues and Holocaust themes.
On Wednesday evening, the group presented its third annual benefit concert for the United AIDS Relief Effort, which includes a meal program at Middle Collegiate Church.
Four composers who have AIDS and four who died of it were represented.


Review/Cabaret; Connecting the Strands: Woman of Many Voices
Melba Moore has as many different singing voices as she has had phases in her show business career.
And in "Songs My Mother Taught Me," her one-woman show that plays at the Ballroom through Dec. 20, those voices often sound like different personalities housed in the same body.
A chronological history of Ms.
Moore's musical life, the show begins with songs she learned from her mother, a jazz singer who worked with musicians like Dizzy Gillespie and Pearl Bailey in the 1940's and 50's.
Her renditions of "Something Better Than Love," "Stormy Weather" and "Dat Dere" respectively pay homage to Ms.
Bailey, Lena Horne and Oscar Brown Jr.


Help for Neediest: A Job on Crutches
Barbara Johnson endured a life of pain and emptiness for two decades, shuttling in and out of hospitals so surgeons could mend bones that were crushed when she jumped from a third-story window to escape a fire.
She was usually confined to bed during those years, a prisoner of her own body.
But in recent months, Miss Johnson has broken free.


World Economies


Review/Mime; Conjuring Up Worlds Out of Silence
Marcel Marceau remains a master of silence.
The French mime, who first toured America during the 1955-56 season, appeared on Saturday night at Lehman Center for the Performing Arts at Lehman College in the Bronx and was as gently comic and technically spectacular as ever.
As he has done in the past, Mr.
Marceau devoted the first half of his program to a variety of themes and the second half to sketches about a clown named Bip.
The title of each work was announced on a placard held by Mr.
Marceau's assistants, Blanca del Barrio and Bogdan Nowak.


Better Times May Lead Clinton to Focus on Deficit
The economic team that President-elect Bill Clinton has chosen and a recent pickup in economic growth mean that Mr.
Clinton is likely to take a tougher approach to reducing the Federal budget deficit than he expressed during the campaign, transition team members said this weekend.
In interviews, a number of advisers said the encouraging economic news and the likelihood that the President-elect would choose a deficit "hawk" to be his budget director made it less likely that Mr.
Clinton would decide to push the deficit up temporarily to give the economy a quick jolt.


Fire Damages 15 Businesses in Queens Block
For a year, Frank Gil put off buying fire insurance for his pet store in Woodside, Queens.
But yesterday, he regretted not spending the extra $2,000 a month after fire swept through his and 14 other small businesses, destroying eight.
"I worked 15 years as a waiter saving money so that some day I could open my own business," said Mr.
Gil, as he surveyed the damage with his wife, Pirkko, at Woodside Pet Food and Supplies.
"Now it's all destroyed and I have no way of rebuilding it."


Ex-Jersey Leader Dies


Critic's Notebook; Re Somalia: How Much Did TV Shape Policy?
The emplacement in recent days of network news big guns alerted the nation that something serious was afoot in Somalia.
Dan Rather, Tom Brokaw, Ted Koppel and the scores of lesser correspondents have become certifiers of disaster.
If they are on the spot, watch out!
Their latest trip is especially appropriate since, as the background reports to the arrival of American troops have reminded viewers, it was television's wrenching pictures from Somalia that goaded a reluctant Administration to act.
Although the medium may have lagged behind some print journalists in taking note of mass starvation in yet another black African country, once the pictures appeared of the fly-tormented faces and bloated bellies of dying babies the effect was stunning.
The natural reaction of Americans, pity for the dying and rage against the gun-happy druggies who were stealing their food, became too much for Washington to resist.


Seeds of a Newspaper Struggle
The root of Mortimer B. Zuckerman's current problems in trying to take over The Daily News go back to a 114-day newspaper strike that began 30 years ago this morning.
Then, at the zenith of the power of unions nationally, it was the Big Six -- Local 6 of the International Typographical Union -- that in effect shut down the industry.


Brister Comes Back For Steelers' Stretch
Entering the season, many Steeler pundits thought that Bubby Brister was the better choice over Neil O'Donnell to lead Pittsburgh at quarterback.
Bubby Brister thought so, too.


No Headline
To paraphrase from Dorothy and 'The Wizard of Oz': 'Toto, you ain't in Riyadh any more,' -- MICHAEL P. KALLERES, a U.S.
Navy vice admiral.  [ A18:1. ]


Books of The Times; Henri Troyat Adds His Life of Flaubert to the List
Flaubert By Henri Troyat Illustrated.
Translated by Joan Pinkham. 374 pages.
Viking. $25.
"The intellect of man is forced to choose," wrote William Butler Yeats, "Perfection of the life, or of the work,/And if it take the second must refuse/A heavenly mansion, raging in the dark."


Thompson Marsh, 89, Denver Law Professor
Thompson G. Marsh, a professor of law at the University of Denver for 60 years, died on Saturday at his home in Denver.
He was 89 years old.
Professor Marsh, who joined the faculty at the University of Denver after graduating from its law school, was its first full-time professor of law and over the next six decades became an institution both at the school and in the Denver legal community.


Twisted Insults
To the Editor:
R.
J.
Graydon's Nov. 29 letter describing the exchange of insult and riposte between John Wilkes and the Earl of Sandwich is 180 degrees out of kilter.
It was the Whig, Wilkes, who responded to the Jacobite Earl's taunt of " 'Pon my honor, Wilkes, I don't know whether you'll die on the gallows or of the pox," with "That must depend, my Lord, upon whether I first embrace your Lordship's principles, or your Lordship's mistresses." After all, one must not attribute "Read my lips" to Michael Dukakis.
LEWIS MYERS  Scarsdale, N.Y., Nov. 29, 1992


Everest &amp; Jennings International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Edison Brothers Stores reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


COMPANY NEWS: A $30 Million Carrot; Whirlpool and Frigidaire In Refrigerator Contest
A coalition of utilities that is dangling a $30 million carrot before refrigerator makers has selected Whirlpool and Frigidaire as finalists to build an ozone-friendly, super-efficient model.
The announcement is scheduled to be made today by the Super Efficient Refrigerator Program, which comprises 25 public and private utilities.
The ground rules laid out in July call for a refrigerator that has no chlorofluorocarbons, which deplete the ozone layer, and that uses 25 percent less electricity than the Federal standard.
The utilities are seeking to save the cost of building new generating stations by lowering demand for power.
Refrigerators and freezers consume about 20 percent of the electricity used in American homes.


Classical Music in Review
Artur Pizarro  Pianist 92d Street Y
Artur Pizarro put in a tacit good word for the competition process on Saturday night.
From winners of major events (Mr. Pizarro won the Leeds International Piano Competition in Britain two years ago) one has come to expect the gregarious and the overpowering.
In Schumann's "Bunte Blatter" and the Debussy "Suite Bergamasque," this young Portuguese pianist, now a resident of the United States, offered pictures of intimate, often quiet, musicianship and a rounded, beautifully colored sound.


Christmas PC Books
FOR the computer fan on your gift list, there is a tough-minded, plain-spoken new guide to selecting and buying hardware and software.
Some samples of its approach:
"Though word processors now take months to master, they can do just about anything anyone would ever want to do to text -- except, of course, manipulate words with the ease and efficiency of word processors produced five years ago."


Kenneth I. Nissman Executive, 46
Kenneth I. Nissman, a men's clothing executive in New York, died on Saturday at Beth Israel Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 46 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of complications from AIDS, the Pincus Brothers-Maxwell company said in an announcement.


Surprising Victory, Yes, but Another Week of Injuries
Almost 24 hours after their storybook victory over the Buffalo Bills, the Jets returned today to the harsh reality of their immediate future: three more games in 1992 with a roster that has increasingly been decimated by injuries.
In the third quarter of the 24-17 victory over the Bills, the Jets' starting free safety Lonnie Young tore ligaments in his right knee.
He will undergo a magnetic resonance imaging exam Tuesday, and faces reconstructive surgery.
He is out for the season.


Emil Haury, 88, Anthropologist Who Studied American Southwest
Emil W. Haury, an archeologist and anthropologist who was influential in the study of the prehistory of the American Southwest, died Saturday at his home in Tucson, Ariz.
He was 88 years old.
He had suffered from a heart ailment for three months, said his secretary, Carol A. Gifford.


Lois Braun; Leader of Jewish Groups, 73
Lois Braun, a member of the board of the New York Federation of Reform Synagogues, died yesterday at her home in Larchmont, N.Y.
She was 73 years old.
She died of pancreatic cancer, her husband, Julian, said.


Campbell Slides Toward End of Bench
Pat Riley has spoken.
After 16 games of sorting out the lineup, the Knicks finally have an eight-man rotation that suits their coach.
But it doesn't include a one-time starter, Tony Campbell, or Herb Williams or Hubert Davis.


Chiron's President Quits
SAN FRANCISCO, Dec. 7
The Chiron Corporation said today that Hollings C. Renton had resigned as president and chief operating officer, effective July 1.
Mr.
Renton joined Chiron in December 1991 when it acquired the Cetus Corporation.
The terms of the acquisition included an $800,000 severance package for Mr.
Renton, who is 46 years old, if he resigned by Dec. 11, 1992.


Washington Memo; New and Old Questions For Senate Ethics Panel
The Senate is stepping warily into the unfamiliar role of deciding how seriously to take sexual-harassment charges, while also confronting familiar arguments over how well Congress polices itself.
The Senate Ethics Committee, already preparing an inquiry into harassment charges against Senator Bob Packwood of Oregon, is considering a similar investigation of Senator Daniel K. Inouye of Hawaii.


A Rising Cost Of Modernity: Depression
IF the 20th century ushered in the Age of Anxiety, its exit is witnessing the dawn of the Age of Melancholy.
The first international study of major depression reveals a steady rise in the disorder worldwide.
In nations as diverse as Taiwan, Lebanon and New Zealand each successive generation is growing more vulnerable to the malady.
Although rates of depression rise with age, the study found increases among young people.
In some countries the likelihood that people born after 1955 will suffer a major depression -- not just sadness, but a paralyzing listlessness, dejection and self-deprecation, as well as an overwhelming sense of hopelessness -- at some point in life is more than three times greater than for their grandparents' generation.


White House Wraps Christmas in Laughs
Summoned to the East Room of the White House this morning for formal Christmas greetings, President Bush's staff heard the Marine Corps Band grind out "Hail to the Chief" and waited anxiously for the appearance of their leader.
Instead, they got Dana Carvey, the comedian and George Bush impersonator, whom the President had secretly invited to the White House on Sunday as repayment for "a lot of laughs" in four years.


Building Imaginary Railroads Under Real Trees
TOY trains are not found under the Christmas tree as frequently as they once were, but some railroad buffs may be delighted this year to find a train set in their computers.
A new railroad simulation called A-Train, from the company that developed the popular Sim City program, allows would-be engineers and tycoons to construct railroads and railroad empires.
The $69.95 program is available for DOS-Windows, Macintosh and Amiga programs.


Jury in Ex-C.I.A. Official's Case Reports Agreement and Deadlock
The jurors in the Iran-contra retrial of Clair E. George reported today that they had reached a unanimous verdict on some charges but were deadlocked on others.
The trial judge then ordered them to continue deliberations in the hope of reaching a verdict on all seven counts.
The note from the jurors came on the ninth day of deliberations.
Mr.
George, who was once a top official in the Central Intelligence Agency, is charged with lying to Congress and investigators about the agency's knowledge of the Reagan Administration's secret arms sale to Iran and diversion of the profits to the Nicaraguan contras.
First Indication of Deadlock
His first prosecution ended in a mistrial in August, after the jurors said they were deadlocked.
Prosecutors from the office of the independent counsel for Iran-contra matters decided to retry Mr.
George rather than drop the case.


Organist Is Sentenced for Burglaries at 2 Churches
Oather James Blocker, a reclusive 47-year-old church organist who confessed to stealing religious articles from more than 500 churches and synagogues in the Northeast, was sentenced today to between 4 and 14 years in prison for burglaries in two churches on Long Island.
Smiling nervously as he awaited sentencing, Mr.
Blocker told the court that "there were no excuses" for his actions and that he "deeply regretted" the thefts.


Review/Music; A Gust of Woodwinds
Ebony and bamboo spoke louder than melody and harmony in Douglas Ewart's music on Wednesday night at Merkin Concert Hall.
Mr.
Ewart, a woodwinds player and instrument maker, led five other woodwind players and a bassist, Malachi Favors Maghostut of the Art Ensemble of Chicago, in pieces that brought together families of instruments to savor the shared timbres.
The first part of the concert featured clarinets, from contrabass up to E-flat sopranino.
Except for "Red Hills," a piece inspired by hairpin turns and speedy drivers in Jamaica, the themes were negligible.
But the textural possibilities of six clarinets gave the pieces their depth.
One clarinetist, often Mr.
Ewart, would play ardent, long-breathed melodies; the others -- Edward Wilkerson, J. D. Parran, Don Byron, Mwata Bowden and Henry Threadgill -- would take turns in sinuous or mocking solos and set up burbling undercurrents or sustained chords behind a solo or duet.
Scurrying, crooning, tootling or undulating, the clarinetists made each tune develop its own reedy ruminations.


Bush and Yeltsin in Talks to Gain A-Arms Accord
President Bush and President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia have begun personal negotiations by telephone and letter in the last week in an effort to resolve differences that threaten a major nuclear arms reduction agreement that the two announced in June, the White House said today.
Mr.
Bush's spokesman, Marlin Fitzwater, said Mr.
Bush spoke by telephone to Mr.
Yeltsin on Sunday about the differences, which negotiators at lower levels in the Moscow Government had raised this year.


Wider Human Testing Ahead for Drastic Gene Therapy
THE first patient to be treated for a fatal cholesterol disease by receiving new genes in her liver tissue is faring so well that the scientist who devised the gene therapy technique wants to try it on others.
Dr.
James M. Wilson of the University of Michigan Medical School in Ann Arbor, reporting to the Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee of the National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Md., last week, presented the preliminary results of a radical new method for treating familial hypercholesterolemia, a rare inherited disorder that results in extensive cholesterol buildup throughout the body and early death, usually from a heart attack.
The patient, a 29-year-old woman from Quebec, underwent the drastic therapeutic operation last June, when about 15 percent of her liver was cut out, and the excised cells supplied with copies of an essential gene the woman lacked.
The altered cells were then reintroduced into the woman's liver through the portal vein that feeds the organ.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Northwest Airlines canceled a $3.5 billion order of Airbus jets as part of an $8 billion package of cost savings and new financing.
The cancellation of the order for 74 aircraft was one of the most severe measures yet in the slumping airline industry's two years of efforts to control spending.  [ Page D1. ]
Carl C. Icahn agreed to support T.W.A.'s pension funds.
If approved by the bankruptcy court, the agreement will allow the airline to emerge from Chapter 11.  [ D5. ]  T.W.A. is said to have chosen Backer Spielvogel Bates to handle its advertising account, valued as high as $60 million.  [ D21. ]


Executive Changes
ATLANTIC MUTUAL COS., Madison, N.J., an insurance holding company, appointed Klaus G. Dorfi senior executive vice president.
BANK OF BOSTON CORP., Boston, named William J. Shea chief financial officer and treasurer, succeeding Peter J. Manning, who will concentrate his efforts as executive vice president of acquisitions and mergers.


COMPANY NEWS
CENTURY 21 REAL ESTATE CORP., Irvine, Calif., will reorganize its operations to create seven decentralized divisions.
FLEET FINANCIAL GROUP, Providence, R.I., a bank holding company, sold about $525 million of mostly nonperforming real estate assets.


Muslims Oust Some Serbian Forces From Sarajevo Siege, Bosnians Say
Muslim forces struck back today at the better-armed Serbs besieging Sarajevo, driving some Serbian forces from two city suburbs and surrounding others on a hilltop west of the Bosnian capital, a Bosnian Army statement said.
The upsurge in fighting came as the leaders of the Serbs, Croats and Muslim Slavs of Bosnia and Herzegovina prepared to meet on Tuesday in Geneva with mediators attached to the peace talks sponsored by the United Nations and the European Community on the former Yugoslavia.


Giants Are Shot, but Handley's Still Tinkering
The Giants as we know them apparently have ceased to exist.
Though Coach Ray Handley declined to discuss his own future today, he will continue to replace some veterans as the Giants play out the string in the 1992 season.


3 Israeli Soldiers Are Slain, Uprising's Biggest Such Toll
Three Israeli soldiers were shot to death today while on patrol in the Gaza Strip, apparently by Islamic militants who drove up alongside their jeep and raked it with automatic gunfire.
It was the largest number of soldiers killed in a single attack in the occupied territories since the start of the Palestinian uprising against Israel five years ago this week.


Former Shearson Executive Will Join Cantor Fitzgerald
Only six months after joining Steinhardt Partners, Peter J. DaPuzzo, the former co-head of international equities at Shearson Lehman Brothers, is moving on again.
Mr.
DaPuzzo said yesterday that he was leaving Steinhardt, a money management firm, to join Cantor Fitzgerald, a brokerage firm, as a senior managing director.


Agency Search By Bausch &amp; Lomb
Bausch &amp; Lomb 's personal products division in Rochester said yesterday that it had placed Clear Choice, a new nonalcoholic mouthwash, in review.
Billings for the new account were estimated at $10 million to $15 million.


The World's Only Other Cop
President-elect Clinton talks boldly about expanding the U.N.'s role in global crisis management.
But judging from this year's grim experiences in Bosnia, Cambodia and Somalia, the U.N. has already taken on more responsibilities than it can manage.
To achieve his internationalist vision, Mr.
Clinton will have to strengthen the U.N. before calling on it to shoulder more burdens.
Otherwise it will continue to stumble, forcing the U.S. to assume disproportionate global responsibilities.
The top priorities are giving the U.N. military muscle, improving its finances, strengthening its management and broadening representation on the Security Council.


Parking Rules
Because of the Feast of the Immaculate Conception, alternate-side parking rules are suspended in New York City today.
Other regulations remain in effect.


Job for Hobert Is Cited
The Pacific-10 Conference is investigating whether University of Washington athletic boosters improperly provided quarterback BILLY JOE HOBERT with a job in high school and financial benefits after he joined the Huskies, The Seattle Times has reported.
If the conference or National Collegiate Athletic Association determines that the boosters created a recruiting or competitive advantage, the Huskies could receive penalties ranging from a reprimand to a ban on playing in televised games and bowl games after the Jan. 1 Rose Bowl.


Trenton Seeks Guarantees For College
Assembly Republicans today proposed a $75 million bond act to finance a package of education bills highlighted by guaranteed financial aid for New Jersey high school graduates attending college or vocational school in the state.
To qualify, all students would have to do is successfully complete 12 semester hours at an accredited college in the state -- regardless of their families' financial status or whether the school is public or private.
Education experts said there was no precedent for a state making such an offer.


Classical Music in Review
Rosemary Glyde  Violist Kosciuszko Foundation 15 East 65th Street
Rosemary Glyde showed up at the Kosciuszko Foundation on Sunday afternoon with a trunkload of viola obscurities.
The only pieces an average concertgoer might have previously encountered came at the program's outset: the "Prelude" from Vaughan Williams's Viola Suite and the fiercely rhapsodic Solo Sonata by Aram Khachaturian.
Ms.
Glyde then plunged into the unknown with two pieces by Edwin York Bowen, an English composer born in 1884 who was a close associate of the violist Lionel Tertis.


Mets' Choice Is Mike Who?
The front-office executive for the Mets made his way through the packed ballroom to the microphone and announced: "The Mets select, from the Columbus roster, right-handed pitcher Mike Draper."
It wasn't great drama, and the reaction was complete silence.
That said, the Rule V draft selection by the Mets was to date the most noteworthy thing the club has done this week.
Draper, the 26-year-old property of the Yankees who set an International League record with 37 saves in 1992, has a chance to be a factor in the bullpen at Shea Stadium in 1993.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-19  DEADLY RIOTS SWEEP INDIA  India was swept by bloody rioting between Muslims and Hindus a day after Hindus destroyed a mosque in the town of Ayodhya.
More than 200 people were killed and hundreds more injured.
A1  MILITANCY CONFOUNDS NEW DELHI  News analysis: The razing of a Muslim mosque exposed the depths of Hindu fundamentalism and the weakness of India's Government.
It also challenges the Constitution, which requires that India preserve its secular character.
A16


'Cheers' to End Production in March
After 11 seasons, "Cheers," the longest-running comedy series on television, is ending production, Paramount Pictures' Network Television Division announced tonight.


CUNY Head Seeking Overhaul Of 19 Autonomous Campuses
The Chancellor of the City University of New York is pressing for an overhaul of the 19-campus system that would eliminate or consolidate some academic programs so that the university could improve or expand others.
The consolidation is intended to transform CUNY from a collection of autonomous campuses into an integrated university system with a shared faculty and one strong leader, the Chancellor.


Student Charged in Slaying Over $100 Debt
A 17-year-old Queens College student has been arrested and charged with stabbing a high school student to death over a $100 debt, the police said yesterday.
Dale Ramphal, of 52-70 72d Place in Maspeth, Queens, was charged with second-degree murder and criminal possession of a deadly weapon in the death of Ryan Dionne, 16, of 58-11 60th Lane, said Detective John Wilde, of the 104th Precinct.
Mr.
Ramphal was being held at the Queens House of Detention.


Sports of The Times; The 'Push' Baseball Needs
THE healthy part of the heated controversy concerning Marge Schott, said Steve Greenberg, the deputy commissioner of baseball, is that "without that push things don't get done."
"Push" means different things to different people, however.


Staunch Conservative Wins G.O.P. Post in House
In a victory by conservatives over the moderate wing of the party, House Republicans today selected as their third-ranking leader Representative Dick Armey, a blunt-talking Texan with a penchant for bashing liberal Democrats and promoting supply-side economics.
Mr.
Armey's 88-to-84 victory was too narrow to signify a definitive direction for Republicans in the post-election rebuilding period, even in the House where as an overwhelmed minority they are little more than a debating team.
But it is one more indication that Republicans do not interpret the defeat of President Bush as a sign that they should retreat from conservative positions on issues like taxes and abortion.


Baseball Owners Vote to Reopen Labor Talks
By the slimmest of majorities, 15-13, the major league baseball owners voted today to reopen negotiations on the collective bargaining agreement with the players, instantly creating speculation that the absence of a new agreement could jeopardize the beginning of the 1993 season.
Richard Ravitch, the owners' chief labor executive, played down the likelihood of a lockout, saying that "everybody wants to see no disruption in baseball" and disclosing that the owners without dissent raised from a simple majority (15) to a three-fourths vote (21) the authorization required for a lockout.


Big Test for Small Force: Logistics of Somali Aid
Though the American force heading to Somalia is far smaller than the one that fought in the Persian Gulf, the logistics of military intervention in the Horn of Africa are in many ways far more difficult, senior military officials said today.
The logistics, as well as questions about Somalia's long-term future, help explain why the Pentagon has dismissed White House assertions that the operation, which is to begin Wednesday, could end before President-elect Bill Clinton takes office.


T.W.A. Pact On Pensions Is Reached
Carl C. Icahn virtually wrote the final chapter in an era in aviation history and to his involvement with financially troubled Trans World Airlines yesterday by reaching an agreement with the Government to support the airline's pension funds.
If approved by the bankruptcy court, the agreement with the Pension Guarantee Benefit Corporation will allow the airline to emerge from Chapter 11 bankruptcy-law protection from creditors.
It could also enable Mr.
Icahn, a major figure in high-stakes corporate takeovers, to bow out of the airline with little financial damage.


Will Rangers Need A Revolving Door?
Brian Leetch can sense the worry.
Personally, he has no reason for concern.
He is the top defenseman on this Rangers team, and one of the best defensemen -- if not the best -- in the league.
His job is untouchable.
Some of his teammates don't feel quite as safe.
On Sunday, the Rangers imported four players from their Binghamton farm team.
And they are trying to sign free agent Kevin Lowe out of Edmonton as well.


Remembering a Day Which Has Lived in Infamy


Mideast Peace Talks Reconvene In Washington but Quickly Stall
Israeli and Arab negotiators opened another round of the Middle East peace talks here today, but like last month's sessions, the discussions were clouded by violence in the Middle East and political sparring here.
As a protest over what its considers a lack of progress in the talks, the Palestinians sent a rump delegation made up of only four representatives rather than the 14 negotiators normally in each side's delegation.
The Palestinians also asked the United States to intervene directly in the talks.


Q&amp;A
The Sandman
Q.
When you are tired, do your eyes feel scratchy because of the sand you wake up with the next day?
A.
"Sand" and scratchy eyes are not cause and effect but are both the result of irritation, according to Dr.
Thomas D. Lindquist, associate professor of ophthalmology at the University of Washington in Seattle.


Youth, 16, Stabbed In School, Police Say
A 14-year-old junior high school student stabbed a 16-year-old five times in the lobby of a Brooklyn school yesterday morning after the older youth tried to slash him with a razor, the police said.
The injured youth, whose name was withheld by the authorities, was taken to the City Hospital Center at Elmhurst after being stabbed once in the back, three times in the chest and once in the head, said a police spokesman, Sgt.
Nicholas Vreeland.
The youth, who was not a student at the school, Halsey Junior High School 296, also suffered a collapsed lung, he said.
Yesterday afternoon, he was reported to be in stable condition.


College-Aid Plan in Trenton
Republicans offered a plan to guarantee financial aid for New Jersey high school graduates attending college in the state.
Page B1.


U.S. Lures Dominicans, Too, to the Cruel Sea
After failing to persuade relatives in New York to take her in, losing money on a counterfeit visa that was never delivered, and prostituting herself in the hope of finding an American willing to marry her long enough that she could emigrate legally, Josefina Archibald was down to what for many Dominicans represents the final hope.
In the dark of a seedy merengue bar in a run-down quarter of this sprawling capital recently, Miss Archibald, a 19-year-old mother of one whose education ended in junior high school, handed over to a man named Carlos the equivalent of $150.
It represented one-half payment for a risky trip in a small boat that she expects to take her to Puerto Rico early next month.


DSP Technology Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Battling Nuclear Waste in Michigan
Here on the shore of Lake Michigan, in the yards of the Palisades nuclear reactor, sits a row of 100-ton concrete-and-steel storage casks designed to hold nuclear waste for decades and keep it safe from earthquakes, tornados and even plane crashes.
Across the Michigan peninsula in Midland, Mich., just off Saginaw Bay, is Mary P. Sinclair and her fax machine, office-sized photocopier, reams of files and network of activists, which she is using to pepper everyone she can think of with letters about why the Covert solution to nuclear waste disposal is a bad one.


Classical Music in Review
Garah Landes  Pianist Merkin Concert Hall
Just a few bars of the first of Mendelssohn's "Songs Without Words" revealed a pianist inclined to poetry.
Garah Landes may not have the most sure-fire technique, but he is unquestionably a master of tone and coloration, and his program on Sunday night played straight to his strengths.
Mendelssohn's first three "Songs" and his "Rondo Capriccioso" were followed by three works of Chopin: the Nocturnes in B major and C minor (Op. 62 No. 1 and Op. 48 No. 1) and the Polonaise-Fantaisie (Op. 61).
The sound Mr.
Landes produced was mesmerizing, and he proved also a compelling dramatist in the stormy middle section of the C-minor Nocturne.


Jack Carlson, 59, Budget Specialist And Ex-U.S. Aide
Jack Carlson, an economist, budget specialist and leading economic spokesman for American business interests, died yesterday in Suburban Hospital in Potomac, Md.
He was 59 years old and lived in Potomac.
His family said he had died of a heart attack.


Ukraine's Nukes-for-Aid Bid Is Justified
To the Editor:
You report Nov. 13 that Ukraine is demanding economic aid and security guarantees before it will give up its nuclear arsenal.
Ukraine has good reason for complaint against Western policy, or rather, lack of policy.


Forest City Enterprises Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


INSIDE
Court Declines to Take Case on Abortion Wait
The Supreme Court refused to hear a challenge to a Mississippi law that requires women to wait 24 hours for abortions after receiving counseling.
The Court also let stand a lower court decision that threw out the criminal conviction of John Poindexter in the Iran-contra affair.
Page A22. 3 Israeli Soldiers Slain&gt;
Three Israeli soldiers were killed in the occupied Gaza Strip, apparently by Islamic militants who raked their jeep with automatic gunfire.
Page A3.
More Changes in Taxes
The tax-code tinkering that took place over 12 years of Republican administration is expected to continue under the Democrats.
Page D1.
Baseball Talks to Reopen
Owners voted to reopen negotiations with the players' union, a move that could ultimately jeopardize the start of the 1993 season.
Page B17.


Books of The Times; Henri Troyat Adds His Life of Flaubert to the List
Flaubert By Henri Troyat Illustrated.
Translated by Joan Pinkham. 374 pages.
Viking. $25.
"The intellect of man is forced to choose," wrote William Butler Yeats, "Perfection of the life, or of the work,/And if it take the second must refuse/A heavenly mansion, raging in the dark."


Corrections
A chart on Sunday with sketches of candidates for top economic positions in President-elect Bill Clinton's Administration misstated the age of Lawrence H. Summers, an economist.
He is 38, not 48.


Patterns
Stores' holiday lures
How's business?
It depends on whom you ask.
But one thing is for sure: stores are wooing holiday shoppers in novel ways this season, tempting them not only with traditional sales, but also with special discounts and services.
Henri Bendel customers were notified that anything charged to their accounts between Nov. 27 and Jan. 9 would earn a 10 percent rebate.
Subscribers to The New Yorker magazine were invited to a cocktail reception and evening of shopping last week at the Fratelli Rossetti shoe store on Madison Avenue, during which they could save 15 percent on purchases.
And Bloomingdale's charge-card holders were invited to a private night of shopping yesterday with personal appearances by designers, as well as refreshments, free alterations, deliveries and discounts.


Northwest Cancels Jet Order
Northwest Airlines, trying to retrench and survive, said yesterday that it had canceled a $3.5 billion order of jets from Airbus Industrie as part of an $8 billion package of cost savings and new financing.
The cancellation of the order from the European aircraft consortium was one of the severest measures yet taken in the slumping airline industry's two years of efforts to control spending.
The canceled order was for 24 A340 aircraft and 50 A320 models.


Museum Chief Quits
THE American Museum of Natural History announced yesterday that Dr.
George D. Langdon Jr., would step down as president next June and that a search had begun for his replacement.
William T. Golden, chairman of the museum's board of trustees, said that Dr.
Langdon was approaching his 60th birthday and had asked to be replaced when his five-year term ends June 30.
Dr.
Langdon, Mr.
Golden said, "has been our president throughout a demanding five-year transition which has positioned the museum for the future."


40 Killed in Fighting As Somalia Awaits Americans' Arrival
As Somalia prepared for the arrival of American troops, heavy fighting continued today in Baidoa, a rural town that has been the center of the famine relief effort.
Forty people were reported killed and 48 wounded in clan fighting today, in addition to 24 killed on Sunday, relief officials said.
They were worried that the recent break in the heavy rain would allow the rival armies, which had been bogged down by mud, to move more quickly.


Richard J. Hughes, Governor and Judge, Dies at 83
Richard Joseph Hughes, who reshaped New Jersey's education system as Governor and then offered a new direction for the national right-to-die debate after becoming the state's Chief Justice, died yesterday.
He was 83.
Mr.
Hughes died about 2 A.M. at his vacation home in Boca Raton, Fla.
He had suffered a stroke earlier this fall and died of congestive heart failure, according to a statement released by his stepson, W. Michael Murphy, the Morris County Prosecutor.


Probert Free to Travel
BOB PROBERT of the Detroit Red Wings was cleared yesterday by the Immigration and Naturalization Service to travel between the United States and his native Canada.
The ruling means that Probert will be able to live in Canada and still play hockey in the United States for the Red Wings, said JAMES MONTGOMERY, the director of the Detroit district office.
It has been nearly four years since Probert was told that if he left the United States he could not return.
He was arrested in March 1989 on drug possession charges at the tunnel between Detroit and Windsor, Ontario, his hometown, and was ordered deported shortly after the arrest.
He later was convicted of the charges.


Microscopic Diamonds Are Not Stuff of Stars
NEW research on microscopic diamonds found in areas of Montana and New Mexico has shown they were not formed in the stars, as once believed, but rather on Earth when a large meteorite hit the Yucatan Peninsula in Mexico 70 million years ago.
The authors of a study published in the current issue of the journal Science report that the diamonds did not have the chemical abundances expected for those found embedded in meteorites.
They suggest they were synthesized through the unusual chemical reactions that occurred within the rocks of Earth when the Yucatan meteorite struck.


Xtra Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


D.C. to Keep Redskins In New Cook Stadium
The Washington Redskins' owner, JACK KENT COOKE, reached agreement yesterday with the District of Columbia Government to build a new stadium adjacent to Robert F. Kennedy Stadium, the team's existing home.
The deal calls for the city to lease the stadium site to the Redskins for $1 a year for 30 years.
After that, Cooke, or his estate, will donate the facility to the District and the team will be given 12 five-year options to rent the stadium and parking facility according to a fixed payment schedule.


Motion to Dismiss All Charges In Sex Assault Case Is Rejected
The judge in the Glen Ridge sex assault trial today rejected a defense motion for dismissal of all charges against four former football teammates accused of assaulting a mildly retarded woman in March 1989.
But at the same time, the judge, R. Benjamin Cohen, ruled that the defense lawyers were clearly entitled to receive some documents that they argued last week had been improperly withheld from them by the prosecutors.


On My Mind; The Lucky Americans
In Bosnia and Serbia, it all seemed clear that the killing and the terror came out of old, ugly Balkan history and hatred.
Except for the human duty to try to save Bosnian Muslim lives, none of it could possibly have any meaning or connection to America.
"Lucky Americans," I wrote in a notebook.
It meant: So far from that world, that past, thank God, so safe from that kind of archaic tribal struggle.


Florio Presents Proposal To Restructure State Debt
The Florio administration unveiled today a $1.6 billion bond refinancing and new debt plan that would capitalize on lower interest rates to pump more than $900 million into New Jersey's state coffers over the next three years, but at the expense of higher bond payments later.
The bond restructuring plan would allow the state to refinance $700 million in existing bonds and issue an additional $900 million in bonds without voter approval.


Shocked, Stunned, Adjusting To the Deal
There was an initial and tremendous shock for Jim Abbott, and today, 24 hours later, the newest member of the Yankees was still attempting to sort out his feelings.
"I'm starting to move into a bit of excitement," said Abbott.


Business and Health; AIDS Solution: Long Way to Go
GOVERNMENT agencies approved plans last week to expand testing of several unproven AIDS vaccines, but Government and company researchers are still far from a pharmaceutical solution to the AIDS problem.
Scientists say that combining AZT with other drugs that attack the virus offer more immediate promise than the vaccines.


A Promotion To President At Monsanto
The Monsanto Company said yesterday that Robert B. Shapiro, the head of its agricultural products group, would move up to president and chief operating officer on Jan. 1.
The 54-year-old Mr.
Shapiro will succeed Earl H. Harbison Jr., who will become chairman of the company's executive committee until he reaches the company's mandatory retirement age of 65 in August.


Citizen Watch Selects D.M.B.&amp; B.
The Citizen Watch Company of America, based in Lyndhurst, N.J., said yesterday that it had selected D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles in New York to handle its American and Canadian account, previously handled by Young &amp; Rubicam New York for four years.
Billings were estimated at $10 million to $12 million.


BULGARIA MUST FIX RUN-DOWN A-PLANT
Bulgarian officials are struggling to change the reputation of the nuclear power plant here, which some Western engineers regard as the most dangerous in the world.
But in the three years since Bulgaria's Communist Government was ousted, Kozlodui's stream of problems has become a flood.
The management is still molded by obsolete Soviet attitudes but can no longer get help from its former Soviet patron.


Market Place; Hot Concept, Big Following, But Stock Takes Hefty Fall
Eagle Hardware and Garden has a hot retailing concept and a big Wall Street following.
But it seems to have some trouble counting.
Yesterday, Eagle shares, which had closed last week at $33.375, sold for as little as $19.50 before rallying to end the day at $26.75, down $6.625 in over-the-counter trading.
The plunge came after the company reported that it had $2.4 million less in inventory than it had previously reported.
That is more than 5 percent of the $45 million in inventory it shows on its books.


More Mathematicians
American educational institutions continue to award doctorates in mathematics at a near record rate, but more than half the recipients are foreigners, and employment prospects for the new mathematicians are distinctly uncertain.
A survey conducted by the American Mathematical Society and the Mathematical Association of America reported that in the 1991-92 academic year, 1,050 Ph.D. degrees in mathematics were awarded, one of the highest numbers on record.
Women, historically underrepresented in mathematics, did especially well; some 24 percent of the new doctors in mathematics were women.
The median starting salaries for Ph.D. mathematics teachers also favored women, according to the survey.
New male teachers can expect starting salaries of $34,000, while the starting salaries of women in comparable jobs average $34,900.


CHRONICLE
When her only child was killed in 1986 at the age of 24 in a helicopter accident over Mali, Countess ALBINA DU BOISROUVRAY sold the movie studio she operated in Paris and her real estate, art and jewelry, all of it worth some $100 million, and set about financing projects she said "would continue my son's loving presence."
Today in Boston, the dean of the Harvard School of Public Health, HARVEY V. FINEBERG, is to announce the establishment of the Francois-Xavier Bagnoud Health and Human Rights Center, a professorship and fellowships, all named for the countess's son and intended to strengthen the links between human rights and health.


Germany Agrees on Law to Curb Refugees and Seekers of Asylum
Moving to defuse anxiety over the influx of immigrants and the rash of rightist attacks on foreigners in Germany, leaders of the country's main political parties have agreed on a new law to make it harder for asylum-seekers and refugees to enter Germany.
The agreement on the new law was reached late Sunday, and Interior Minister Rudolf Seiters predicted today that when approved by Parliament, it would lead to "a substantial easing of the asylum problem." The law is not expected to lead to any immediate expulsions, however.


Classical Music in Review
Cosmopolitan Chamber Orchestra  Ethical Culture Society
The Cosmopolitan Symphony Orchestra, a freelance ensemble for young professional musicians, has spawned a scaled-down subsidiary, the Cosmopolitan Chamber Orchestra.
On Saturday afternoon, Michael Morgan led this reduced band in a program that, in stylistic terms, hung together oddly: Milhaud's jazzy "Creation du Monde" was followed by the fluty Baroque ebullience of Bach's "Brandenburg" Concerto No. 4.
The intermission smoothed over the leap from the Bach to Mahler's "Ruckert" Lieder and Wagner's "Siegfried Idyll."


From Gulf to Somalia: General Marches On
Into the turmoil of Somalia enters Lieut.
Gen.
Robert B. Johnston, a meticulous square-jawed believer in order and discipline.
He is expected to arrive in Mogadishu, the Somali capital, soon to lead 28,000 American troops and other allied forces armed with a United Nations mandate to protect the delivery of relief supplies.


Seton Hall Wins Big East Opener


Bradlees Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 7


Islanders Romp as Mullen Scores Twice
Islanders 6, Lightning 1
TAMPA, Fla., Dec. 7 (AP) -- The Islanders knew their mission against the slump-ridden Tamp Bay Lightning and wasted no time accomplishing it.
"We know they've been struggling and we wanted to put pressure on them right away," said Brian Mullen, who scored his fourth and fifth goals of the season, the first at just 3 minutes 2 seconds of the first period, in a 6-1 rout of the Lightning tonight.


Texfi Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 30


Review/Music; Searching for Challenges
It is by no means certain that the Kronos Quartet meant its listeners to find a unifying current in the program it played on Saturday evening at Alice Tully Hall.
Ambiguity, after all, is a spice that this new-music ensemble values, and it is not unlike the Kronos to offer a program that seems stylistically random at first, but acquires cohesiveness upon reflection.
What seemed to unite the six works the group played was the sense that each was a response to a peculiarly modern predicament.
The music was not concerned with purely artistic challenges -- how to subvert sonata form, for example -- but with responses to issues that ranged from the Holocaust to the confusions of cultural intermarriage.


CHANCELLOR FINDS SUPPORT ERODING ON SCHOOL BOARD
w York City Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez backed away from the most scornful statements in his new autobiography yesterday as members of the Board of Education who will vote on renewing his contract began voicing deepening disenchantment.
The Chancellor's remarks came on a day in which he faced growing opposition from major members of the school board.
The antagonism was especially important since Mr.
Fernandez had made the near-unanimous support of the seven-member board a condition for his remaining past June, when his contract expires.


The Odds of a Shark Attack
THE chance of being killed by a shark in United States waters, scientists say, is far less than that of dying from a bee sting, a snake bite or even lightning .
But that does not mean there is no risk.
Worldwide, there are probably 50 to 75 shark attacks every year, resulting in 5 to 10 deaths, according to the records in the International Shark Attack File at the Florida Museum of Natural History in Gainesville.
About half occur off the United States, where affluence and leisure and hundreds of miles of prime beaches draw people into the ocean.


Observer; The Firing Culture
After years of feeding on strawberries, cream and honey, or tons of money if you'd rather not be poetic about it, corporate executives are suddenly getting fired.
Mr.
Stempel of General Motors was the most spectacular instance of their new vulnerability.
Now Mr.
Robinson of American Express is said to be getting the boot.
Note that I don't dare breathe the names of these boardroom commanders without calling them "Mister." Such is the awe that corporate giants inspire in those bred to think of them as an elite class.
"Corporate statesmen," they were called in the Eisenhower years.
One was invited to kowtow.
Now they get fired.


Grace Chief, 79, Is Retiring After 47 Years
J.
Peter Grace, one of American industry's bluntest and most colorful executives, will retire as chief executive of W. R. Grace &amp; Company at the end of the year, the company announced yesterday.
Mr.
Grace, who at age 79 is suffering from cancer, has been chief executive since 1945, a span the company says is unmatched by any other chief executive of a leading American industrial concern.


Problem Gambling Masks Severe Depression
To the Editor:
"Fervid Debate on Gambling: Disease or Moral Weakness?" (front page, Nov. 21) loses sight of a third possibility that could obviate the need for a debate in the first place.
A psychoanalytic approach to problem gambling sees it as neither a moral weakness nor a disease, but rather as a symptom of a disease.
This shift in prognosis avails the problem gambler of an altogether more favorable prognosis, even though the disease of which problem gambling is a symptom is difficult to treat in its own right.


Behind the Facade, a Building Divided
For 108 years, the four-story Montgomery Block has been an ample presence on East 86th Street, as well as an architectural symbol of an almost vanished Yorkville, with the Kleine Konditorei restaurant on the ground floor, delicate ornamentation and a powerful cornice above.
Until now.
Tenants figured out something was about to happen last Monday when they were surrounded by scaffolding.
"You couldn't see down to the street anymore," said Kathleen Murtha, whose mother, Mary, has lived in the Montgomery for 40 years.


Bailey Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 25


Maddux and Howe Head Yankees' List
As the courting of Greg Maddux continued in New York today, the Yankees moved closer to completing a contract agreement with free-agent reliever Steve Howe.
The club was also exploring its chances for reaquiring third baseman Charlie Hayes.
Howe, the left-handed setup man who was recently reinstated to baseball after a drug-related ban, was expected to sign with his old club within 24 hours.
The deal will be for two years, both guaranteed, worth in excess of $4 million.
The deal will contain an option year as well as a variety of incentives.


EUROPEANS FACING BATTLE OF BUDGET
Instead of providing an occasion to repair tattered dreams of regional unity, a summit meeting of European Community leaders this week may well result in a new rift over an issue that deeply concerns all 12 member countries: who pays for and who benefits from the community budget.
The summit's agenda is already weighed down by seemingly more crucial problems -- the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina, Denmark's rejection of the treaty on European unity, French objections to a community farm trade agreement with the United States and applications for new membership in the community.


AMERICAN EXPRESS SHARES SURGE TO A 52-WEEK HIGH
After the disclosure by the American Express Company over the weekend that James D. Robinson 3d was resigning as chief executive, the company's stock rallied to a 52-week high yesterday.
The stock, which was the most active on the New York Stock Exchange, gained $1.375, to $24.75.
More than 8.8 million shares changed hands.


Bombardier Puts Engineer In Charge of de Havilland
Bombardier Inc., the Canadian transportation conglomerate, today named an engineer to head de Havilland Inc., the ailing Ontario-based maker of commuter jets it acquired from the Boeing Company a year ago.
Kenneth G. Laver, 41 years old, replaces Jim Schwalm, an American who has resigned to resume his career in the Boeing organization.
Mr.
Schwalm joined de Havilland in 1987, a year after its acquisition by Boeing.


Grand Jury Hears Evidence in Crown Hts. Case
Brooklyn prosecutors began presenting evidence to a grand jury yesterday about the events surrounding the beating of a homeless black man in Crown Heights, in a case that is likely to turn on the credibility of the victim, who has a long arrest record.
At the same time, members of the New York City Human Rights Commission, who are all mayoral appointees, defended Mayor David N. Dinkins's actions in the Crown Heights case and appealed at City Hall for New Yorkers to refrain from comments that would inflame tensions in the city.


Justice Obstructed in the Poindexter Case
By refusing to hear a Government appeal in the case of John Poindexter, the Supreme Court has failed to stand up for important criminal laws that were gutted by a lower court ruling.
Mr.
Poindexter was a national security adviser to President Reagan and the highest-ranking defendant in the Iran-contra scandal.
He was convicted of conspiracy and obstruction, including destruction of evidence and sending misleading information to Congress.
But the U.S.
Court of Appeals in Washington reversed the conviction and now the Supreme Court has refused to hear the case.


Accounts
*
Lucille Roberts Health Clubs, New York, to Follis/DeVito/Verdi, New York, to handle its account, previously at Baron &amp; Zaretsky Advertising, New York.
Follis/DeVito/Verdi was also named by Futai Inc., Edison, N.J., to handle the umbrella manufacturer's American account.
Combined billings were estimated at $3 million.


MOZAMBIQUE FORCE PROPOSED AT U.N.
Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali asked United Nations members today to send a peacekeeping force of up to 10,000 troops and civilians to prepare free elections in Mozambique.
The request was made as the member countries owe the United Nations a total of more than $500 million for unpaid bills for other peacekeeping operations.


Review/Rock; Joe Satriani as Guitar Hero
As a musical form, heavy metal's attractions are pretty obvious: a show is a good way for the audience to rebel for a few hours, to create a community of like-minded people, acting out the role of antisocial hero.
If the music is anything, it's mythic.
Joe Satriani, a guitarist who has made a habit of selling huge amounts of instrumental rock records, spent a good portion of his show at Roseland on Saturday night distilling the myth.
But Mr.
Satriani, who has a good reputation among the guitar cult subculture, was distilling the wrong part of the myth.
Instead of working with hard rock's spectacle, and its ideas of rebellion, he was working a small substrain, the guitar hero, a myth that appeals, if the crowd at Roseland was any indication, to a mainly male audience.
As any heavy-metal demographer knows, that's only half the equation.


Pulling Down India's Temple
The central task confronting India since its birth 45 years ago has been maintaining a secular state in a multi-religious society -- in short, respecting the rights of India's vastly outnumbered Muslim minority.
Yet secularism has long been resisted by Hindu militants, and still is.
On Sunday, a hateful Hindu mob destroyed a mosque in Ayodhya, igniting bloodstained riots.
But if Hindu zealots ignited the rampage, blame for building the bonfire lies with demagogic politicians and a timid central Government.


Hint That Demjanjuk Once Was Treblinka Guard
Despite denials and contradictory testimony in Israel's case against John Demjanjuk for Nazi war crimes, a new clue that supports allegations that he served at the Treblinka death camp has been found in a 10-year-old letter.
In the letter, written to a German archive, Jerome A. Brentar, a Cleveland travel agent long active in Mr.
Demjanjuk's defense, sought what he called Mr.
Demjanjuk's "original military card issued in Camp Treblinka." The letter was reprinted recently in the magazine Reform Judaism.


S.&amp; L. Gets Debt Accord
The Glendale Federal Bank, the nation's fifth-largest savings and loan, said today that it had reached an accord with leading bondholders that would allow the troubled bank to raise $100 million to help meet new Federal capital requirements.
Glendale, the main subsidiary of GlenFed Inc., has been under pressure from regulators to bolster its capital because of problem loans.
Under terms that are subject to approval by stockholders and the Office of Thrift Supervision, bondholders would exchange debentures worth $141 million for preferred bank stock of the same amount.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  CONSOLIDATION PLAN FOR CUNY
The Chancellor of the City University of New York is pressing for an overhaul of the 19-campus system that would eliminate or consolidate some academic programs so the university could improve and expand others.
The consolidation is intended to transform CUNY from a collection of autonomous campuses into an integrated university system with a shared faculty and one strong leader, the chancellor said.
A1.
DISENCHANTMENT OVER FERNANDEZ'S BOOK
New York City Schools Chancellor Fernandez has backed away from the most scornful statements in his new autobiography as members of the Board of Education who will vote on renewing his contract began voicing deepening disenchantment.
A1.


Back to Basics, Little Richard Is Happy at Last
Those who invent genres both define them and are stuck with them.
Little Richard, hair like an apartment building, sexually ambiguous, wildly extroverted and very funny, is coming to New York for three nights at Tramps (45 West 21st Street, Chelsea), starting this evening.
Little Richard (Richard Penniman), for those who don't remember, helped invent rock-and-roll.
He made a strain of American extremism, all Saturday-night hysteria, a regular part of international mass culture.
As much as he has tried to renounce the spirit of abandon he had advocated with his first important recordings, exchanging it for the spirit of religion, Mr.
Penniman, two years short of 60, always seems to return to the carnivalesque secular style that made him famous.
The great reverberations of "Tutti Frutti," "Good Golly Miss Molly" and "Slippin' and Slidin' " that forever changed the idea of expressionism have him but good.


Pause in Trade Talks Urged
Senator Max S. Baucus, the Montana Democrat who heads the Senate Finance Committee's trade panel, called today for the Bush Administration to stop taking part in world trade talks until it had consulted extensively with President-elect Bill Clinton and his transition team.
Senator Baucus made the remark at the end of a speech here sponsored by the Center for National Policy, a nonpartisan public policy group.
In an interview afterward, Mr.
Baucus said the trade talks should stop entirely until the transition team had time to come up with a position.


T.W.A. Said to Have Picked Backer Spielvogel for Ads
Trans World Airlines has chosen Backer Spielvogel Bates Inc. to handle its European and American advertising, an account valued as high as $60 million, according to people close to the deal.
T.W.A. and Backer Spielvogel executives declined to comment.
But the sources, who spoke on the condition of anonymity, said a formal announcement would probably made today or tomorrow.
T.W.A. was apparently waiting to resolve some of its financial difficulties, including the decision announced yesterday by the airline's chairman, Carl C. Icahn, to provide financing for T.W.A. and to guarantee certain pension payments.


Sexual Behavior Levels Compared in Studies In Britain and France
The higher you are on Britain's social ladder, the more likely you are to have had more than one sexual partner in the past year.
And in France young people are more likely to use condoms than their elders.
These are among the findings of new studies of sexual activity in France and Britain.


Ex-Priest Goes on Trial In Child-Molesting Case
Testimony began today in the trial of a former Roman Catholic priest who has been accused of sexually assaulting a minor here and of molesting more than 100 children in three states.
The defendant, James R. Porter, who left the priesthood in 1974 and now lives in a suburb of St.
Paul with his wife and four children, sat impassively in a Minneapolis courtroom as one of his accusers, Sara M. Davidson, said he had attacked and fondled her in 1987 when she was 15 years old and baby-sitting the Porter children.


H.I.V. Clue Supports Early Use Of Condom
A TEAM of Harvard researchers has uncovered new evidence that H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS, is present in sperm-free fluid that precedes ejaculation.
They said the findings showed the need for men to put condoms on before any genital contact occurs.
Because sperm are generally absent from pre-ejaculatory fluid, many scientists had assumed that the fluid was also free of H.I.V.-infected cells.
But the researchers, led by Dr.
Deborah Anderson, associate professor of obstetrics, gynecology and reproductive biology at Harvard Medical School, found the virus in samples they studied.


HACKER INDICTED ON SPY CHARGES
In the first use of Federal espionage charges against a computer hacker, a Federal Grand Jury here has indicted a well-known Silicon Valley programmer on charges of stealing a classified military document, the Federal authorities said today.
The 14-count indictment, filed Friday in Federal District Court in San Jose, supersedes a previous indictment that had charged the suspect, Kevin L. Poulsen, and two other hackers with computer and communications fraud.
The espionage charge, which applies only to Mr.
Poulsen, allows prosecutors to seek stiffer penalties.


Corrections
A report in the Press Notes column on the Media Business page yesterday about speculation over a possible new editor in chief for The Daily News referred incorrectly to the current editor of The New York Post.
He is Lou Colasuonno.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Dec. 1 about the initial stock trading of Caremark International Inc. misstated the financial performance of a competitor, T2 Medical Inc.
Growth in T2's earnings has exceeded Wall Street's projections.


Neediest Aids Babies At Risk
They are babies few people want, sickly and fragile infants often abandoned by parents who cannot bear the emotional or financial burden of raising them.
Some are born of mothers whose drug use left the children suffering from cerebral palsy, Down syndrome or diabetes.
They are known as boarder babies because they usually languish in hospitals for months while social service agencies search for homes for them.
Even after the babies leave, they require constant attention and special medical care.


Beijing Journal; China Is Fighting for Its Soul: Its Looted Antiques
It was not drugs the peasant was selling under the cover of darkness, but something just as restricted, and he was very careful as he displayed his wares on a quiet street before dawn.
"Ming Dynasty," the peasant, a thin man in his 40's, nervously told a dealer, who was crouched down, scrutinizing the blue-and-white porcelain vases.
If they really did date from the Ming Dynasty, which collapsed in 1644, then they were probably dug from a tomb and are barred from leaving the country.


The Cotton Bowl Puts NBC And Irish in Awkward Spot
Presume, for a moment, that NBC exerts a smidgen of influence over the teams chosen for its bowl games.
NBC pays dearly to be a player on New Year's Day: $2.7 million for the Cotton Bowl and $6 million for the Orange Bowl.
If one presumes NBC's influence, then how should we view the Cotton Bowl's selecting No. 5 Notre Dame to play No. 4 Texas A&amp;M at 1 P.M., even though the Fighting Irish's national appeal would be put to maximum use on the 8 P.M.
Orange Bowl?


Chess
When you have accepted your opponent's surprise sacrifice and run into more trouble than you expected, one of the difficult decisions facing you will be how much you must concede.
Because, unless your enemy is following a will-o'-the-wisp, you usually cannot hope to keep everything -- material and position.
To appreciate this, it is useful to look at an example of the wrong thing to do.
This can be seen in a game between two Americans, both Soviet emigres, Grigory Kaidanov, a Lexington, Ky., grandmaster, and Ilya Gurevich, a Worcester, Mass., international master.
It was played in round 3 of the Western States Open in Reno, where Kaidanov shared first place with Dmitry Gurevich of Chicago.
Each won $1,750 for his 5-1 score in the 6-round Swiss-system tourney of 320 entrants held at the Sands Regency Hotel Oct. 30-Nov. 1.


TV Shopping Network Is Acquired
The Liberty Media Corporation said yesterday that it would take control of the Home Shopping Network of St.
Petersburg, Fla., the company that distributes a shopping cable service to 40 million homes.
The move increases the concentration of ownership in the cable industry.
Liberty already owns 21 percent of QVC Network Inc., Home Shopping Network's major rival.
And Liberty's chairman and largest shareholder, John Malone, is also the president of Tele-Communications Inc., the nation's largest cable operator.
Bought 80% Voting Stake
Liberty, a cable television operator and programmer based in Cheyenne, Wyo., said it would purchase an 80 percent voting stake in Home Shopping from RMS L.P., a partnership controlled by Roy Speer, Home Shopping's chairman and chief executive.


James P. Layton, Pioneer in Rocketry And Jets, Dies at 73
James Preston Layton, an aeronautics engineer who spent more than four decades working on rocket technologies, died Thursday at O'Connor Hospital in San Jose, Calif.
He was 73 years old and lived in Santa Clara, Calif., where he had moved from Princeton, N.J., in May.
The cause of death was cancer, his family said.


Problem Gambling Masks Severe Depression; Myth of the Victim
To the Editor:
Your report on problem gambling (front page, Nov. 21) states the disease concept may lead individuals to reject responsibility for their behavior, whether gambling or drug abuse.
It is indeed puzzling why this should follow.
In the case of most diseases, like diabetes or arthritis, sufferers are expected to take action against the illness, even though they are not responsible for its cause.
Supporters of Alcoholics Anonymous and Gamblers Anonymous hold addiction is a disease whose cause is unrelated to individual control, but treatment
is
under his/her control via the self-help group in 12 remedial steps.


By Design; New Bra Image
The brassiere is more than just an essential undergarment.
It also has fashion status.
As such it is both "in" and "out" right now.
Designers seem to be unanimous about dropping the bra for day.
At the recent spring showings, models were obviously nude beneath sheer or semi-opaque tops.
Even the suit jackets usually had low closings, displaying an expanse of bare skin.


General Host Corp.  reports earnings for 12wks to Nov 1


Clinton Warns That Predictions of Economic Upturn Might Be Premature
As he prepared to announce his economic team later this week, President-elect Bill Clinton emerged from days of virtual seclusion today to warn that predictions of an economic upturn might be premature.
On a stop in Chicago on his way from Little Rock, Ark., to the capital, Mr.
Clinton emphasized to students at Wilbur Wright Community College, a vocational school, that his economic prescriptions were still essential.


Check Technology Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Prosecutors Find No Evidence of Criminality in Shooting by a Transit Officer
Prosecutors have questioned most of the witnesses in last month's shooting of a plainclothes transit police officer in Brooklyn by fellow officers who said they mistook him for a mugger, and have found no major conflicts in their accounts and no evidence of criminal negligence, investigators said yesterday.
But they said no conclusions had been drawn because the Brooklyn District Attorney's office had yet to interview two key witnesses -- the victim, Derwin Pannell, who was shot in the neck outside a subway station in Canarsie on Nov. 17, and an unidentified woman fare-beater who was being held at gunpoint by Officer Pannell when three other officers saw him in a dark areaway and two shot at him.
Woman Has Not Been Found
The investigators said the woman, who fled after the shooting, had not been found despite an intensive search.
They also said they were uncertain why Officer Pannell had not yet agreed to be questioned; he was still hospitalized, they said, but had recovered sufficiently to speak to them.


Classical Music in Review
Chamber Music Society  Alice Tully Hall
David Schiff's "Solus Rex," commissioned by the Chamber Music Society and played under the composer's direction on Friday night, behaves like a talented, if somewhat compulsive, raconteur.
Instruments, especially David Taylor's bass trombone, become characters in the biblical story of Saul and David, Mr.
Taylor inducing his particular device to shout, snort, moan and guffaw in an orgy of anthropomorphic virtuosity.


Peril to the Indian State: A Defiant Hindu Fervor
When fanatical Hindus attacked a mosque in the northern town of Ayodhya on Sunday, they did more than reduce the 16th-century edifice to rubble.
They also exposed the depths of Hindu fundamentalism and the weakness of India's Government, posing a fundamental challenge to the nation's Constitution.
For more than three years, Hindu revivalist groups have focused their attention on the Ayodhya mosque, which was built in the 16th century on the spot where Hindus believe the god Ram was born 5,000 years ago.


Review/Music; With 3 Maestros and a Bit of the Circus, the Philharmonic Turns 150
The party the New York Philharmonic gave itself last night for its 150th birthday began with an elephant from the Big Apple Circus performing in Lincoln Center's Fountain Plaza and ended with the audience at Avery Fisher Hall offering a standing ovation and singing "Happy Birthday" just before it was showered with confetti shot from cannons.
The hall's balconies were draped with white cloth, with gold fringes that rustled lightly; in front of the orchestra was a thick border of lilies and orchids.
A buffet preceded the event, and champagne followed it.
The entire concert (except for the prefatory show on the plaza) was also broadcast nationwide on PBS.
For the nation's oldest orchestra, it was a wholehearted celebration, seemingly not the sort of occasion for solemn assessment.
The musical festivities were meant to be as overwhelming as the confetti.
Each of the three living conductors who have served as music directors of the Philharmonic -- Pierre Boulez (1971 to 1977), Zubin Mehta (1978 to 1991) and Kurt Masur, the incumbent -- conducted the orchestra in a signature piece that best served his strengths and represented his contributions to the New York Philharmonic tradition.
This was an extraordinary idea.


Pioneer in Radiation Sees Risk Even in Small Doses
The first independent study of the health records of 35,000 workers at a Government bomb plant in Washington State presents a new, more sinister picture of the risks of small doses of radiation.
This finding, by a pioneer in radiation epidemiology, Dr.
Alice Stewart, follows her 14-year struggle to regain access to the health data.
For decades, the Federal Government had limited access to scientists of its choosing, who generally concluded that the radiation exposure had done little harm.


Bonds Must Play Ball With Lawyers
More than 48 hours after Barry Bonds and the San Francisco Giants thought they had completed a record-shattering $43.75 million deal, their future together remained in the hands of lawyers today.
The lawyers were trying to determine a way to protect Bob Lurie, the Giants' lame-duck owner, from liability for the contract in the unlikely event the new ownership group, which made the deal, is rejected by major league club owners.


Harnischfeger Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


F.C.C. Chief Plans to Resign Before Clinton Inauguration
Alfred C. Sikes, chairman of the Federal Communications Commission, said today that he would resign on Jan. 19, the day before Bill Clinton is sworn in as President.
As a commissioner at an independent regulatory agency, Mr.
Sikes's term was scheduled to expire on June 30.
But the new President is entitled to name a new chairman as soon as he takes office, and Mr.
Sikes, a lifelong Republican who was appointed to the F.C.C. by President Bush in 1989, had made it clear he had no interest in remaining at the agency if he could no longer set the agenda.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
7.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
4.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.50
2.86
4.50
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.24
3.25
4.14
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.34
3.38
4.15
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.42
6.46
6.71
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.44
7.48
7.78
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.45
8.50
8.80
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.39
6.40
6.86
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Oregon Now Wonders Who Is Real Packwood
After a quarter-century, Oregonians are hearing about a Bob Packwood who is far different from the man they have sent to the Senate for four terms.
What is equally disheartening to some in a state that likes to think that its politics are different, a state stunned by the accusations of sexual misconduct, is the newfound knowledge that some journalists and state leaders had long heard rumors about another side of the 60-year-old Republican Senator but had never let the voters in on them.


Planetary 'Slingshot' Aims Craft At a Rendezvous With Jupiter
PASSING by Earth for the last time, the Galileo spacecraft is at last ready to sally forth toward its ultimate destination in 1995, the giant planet Jupiter.
And despite the craft's continuing antenna trouble, officials of the $1.4 billion mission have high hopes that by clever improvisation, Galileo should still achieve nearly all of its scientific objectives.
Today Galileo will streak within 190 miles of the southern Atlantic Ocean, cross South America and Australia, loop the planet and then whip out, with a change of direction and an extra charge of energy from Earth's gravity, on its Jovian trajectory.
Its closest approach to Earth will occur at 10:09 A.M., Eastern standard time.





Review/Pop; Musical Traditions Shared Across an Ocean
An ocean separates Cuba from West Africa geographically, but not musically.
Los Munequitos de Matanzas, the 40-year-old Cuban group that performed at Davis Hall at City College on Saturday night, plays songs that share rhythms, dance steps and sometimes even the language with Yoruba and Abacua traditions from West Africa.
The 13-member group concludes its first United States tour this week in New York City.
It has also released an album, "Rumba Caliente 88/77" (Qbadisc).
Using only percussion, voices and bodies in motion, Los Munequitos's program moved from ritual songs to secular rumbas.
It was folklore without a hint of archival distance, secure in the power of time-tested rhythms and melodies.


976 Points of Light -- and Counting
Midway in his acceptance speech to the Republican National Convention in 1988, George Bush waxed inspirational about all the organizations that perform good works in America -- "a brilliant diversity, spread like stars, like a thousand points of light, in a broad and peaceful sky."
A year later, as President, he started honoring those "points of light," one a day.
Yesterday's was No. 976 -- some 30 volunteers who work with patients at the Burn Intensive Care Unit of the Metrohealth Center in Cleveland.
On Sunday Mr.
Bush cited the California Grey Bears, a group of senior citizens in Santa Cruz who gather and distribute 3,000 bags of food a week to needy seniors.


Studios Get a Reprieve In Battle Over Reruns
A Federal appeals court in Chicago gave Hollywood movie studios a reprieve yesterday in their battle to retain regulations that prevent television networks from owning the lucrative rerun rights to shows they broadcast.
The United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit gave the Federal Communications Commission 120 days to justify the need for continued restrictions, setting up a new round in the long battle between Hollywood and the networks.


Open Call Issued By LoJack
The LoJack Corporation in Dedham, Mass., an auto security company, said yesterday that it had placed in review its consolidated account, with billings estimated at $3 million.
The media portion is currently divided among three agencies and the creative portion is handled in-house.
David W. Manly, LoJack's vice president of marketing and sales, confirmed a report of the review this week in Advertising Age and Adweek.
He said LoJack was looking for an agency that not only had a strong track record in building consumer product businesses, but also with expertise in media buying.


Two Ad-Spending Forecasts Debate Amount of Growth
BY the time 1992 is over, advertising spending in the United States will have risen 4.5 percent over 1991, a leading industry researcher said yesterday.
To a degree, an increase over 1991 was relatively easy to achieve, since the drop in ad spending last year marked the first such drop in 30 years.


A Door Opening Wide for the Poor
The City University of New York began in 1847 as a free academy for young men of poor and immigrant families who normally did not have access to other universities and colleges in the city.
Since then, CUNY has become one of the largest universities in the country.
It has graduated 11 Nobel Prize winners and more corporate leaders than any other university system, based on a ranking by Standard and Poor's.


NOVELL IN DEAL TO USE ELECTRONIC DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM
Novell Inc., a computer-network software company, is licensing a system from Electronic Book Technologies that will permit Novell to convert its printed manuals into electronic documents for a variety of computers.
Systems that permit the electronic storage and distribution of documents are becoming a significant business.
Such systems are designed to reduce printing cost and increase the efficiency and ease of distributing printed material.
Electronic Book Technologies, based in Providence, R.I., offers a system called Dynatext.
Novell is based in Provo, Utah.


BRIEFS
Debt  *
AMR Corp. is offering $200 million of 7 3/4 percent unsecured notes due Dec. 1, 1997, at 99.954 to yield 7.76 percent through Morgan Stanley.
The noncallable notes are rated Baa-2 by Moody's Investors Service Inc., BBB by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corp. and BBB- by Duff &amp; Phelps. *
Norwest Financial Inc., Des Moines, a unit of Norwest Corp., is offering $100 million of 6.875 percent senior notes due Dec. 15, 1999, at 99.317 to yield 7 percent, through Merrill Lynch.
The company is also offering $100 million of 4 7/8 percent senior notes due Dec. 15, 1994, at 99.764 to yield 5 percent.
The noncallable notes are rated Aa-3 by Moody's, A+ by S.&amp; P. and AA by Duff &amp; Phelps.


New York Copes as Best It Can With Homeless-Family Crisis
To the Editor:
"Homeless Policy, in Contempt" (editorial, Nov. 24) echoes the same misplaced argument regarding New York's ongoing homeless-family crisis sounded in Justice Helen Freedman's recent contempt decision: just make this problem go away.
Omitting any discussion of the resources required to remedy the conditions that were the basis for Justice Freedman's injudicious rendering of contempt sanctions, you follow the court's lead in taking out its frustration on New York City officials.


Credit Markets; Reports of Clinton Nominees Ease Fears of Bond Traders
The bond market rallied yesterday as it absorbed the names mentioned over the weekend for important economic appointments in the Clinton Administration.
The price of the 30-year bond was up almost half a point, and prices of Treasury notes rose across the board.
Traders and analysts said they were encouraged by the expected choice of Senator Lloyd Bentsen, chairman of the Finance Committee, as Secretary of the Treasury, and the consideration of other potential appointees like Representative Leon E. Panetta, the chairman of the House Budget Committee, as director of the Office of Management and Budget.


Analog Devices reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Terror of Deep Faces Harsher Predator
THE shark, that mythic terror of the deep, has been top predator of the seas for nearly 400 million years.
But sharks themselves are now being wiped out en masse by the human appetite for shark flesh, and their disappearance could disrupt the ecology of the world's oceans.
The threat comes just as scientists are reaching beyond the "Jaws" image of the shark as a primitive, mindlessly malevolent eating machine that has long shrouded the beast's true nature.
Behind the legend, researchers are finding a wondrously sophisticated animal whose biology, once understood, could also yield important medical benefits.


Editors' Note
A front-page article on Nov. 30 described signs that the American economy may be recovering.
It quoted business people and economists who were beginning to see signs of improvement.


Disability Law Applies To the Candidates Too
To the Editor:
I read with interest your Nov. 26 editorial discussing former Senator Paul Tsongas's cancer diagnosis.
The suggestion that all Presidential candidates make their full medical records available for evaluation implies that those with serious medical conditions need not apply.
This is in direct conflict with the Americans with Disabilities Act, which prohibits discrimination on the sole basis of medical illness.
One may argue that disclosure does not preclude a candidate from entering a race, but allows the electorate to make an informed decision.
The disability act protects all people, including Presidential candidates.
If an investigation of an individual's medical records is performed primarily to disclose information in order to influence a vote for or against, then that constitutes discrimination according to the law.


Town Sees Small Gain In Big Fight
THE last decade has been hard on this historic village, once the center of commerce and industry on Long Island.
As shoppers abandoned Hempstead's downtown and retailers moved out, crime, especially drug dealing, increased.
But over the weekend, for a few hours at least, the street corners were "virtually free of crime."


Another 2d-Half Struggle For Pirates
P.
J.
Carlesimo is now .500 in his career as a college coach and Seton Hall is 5-1 on the season, but how the two got there tonight wasn't expected.
For the second consecutive game, the Pirates struggled against a lesser opponent before taking charge in the late stages to pull out a 65-56 victory.


Somalia Famine No Different: Children Are the First to Die
A year ago, almost to the day, 5-year-old Mohammed Abukar lay on his back in a decrepit hospital yard, his right leg newly amputated after a shell blast in the war that killed his family.
With only his grandmother to look after him and a famine looming, the prospects of survival were dim for the bright, brown-eyed boy with an engaging smile.


Bayou Steel reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Leslie Cheek Jr., 84; Led Virginia Museum
Leslie Cheek Jr., an architect and a former director of the Virginia Museum of Fine Arts, died on Sunday at his home in Richmond.
He was 84 years old.
He died after a series of strokes, said his daughter, Elizabeth Morgan of Belmont, Mass.


AT LEAST 200 KILLED IN INDIA AS MUSLIM-HINDU RIOTS RAGE
India's towns and cities were swept by rioting between Muslims and Hindus on Monday, leaving more than 200 people dead and hundreds more injured a day after militant Hindus destroyed a 16th-century mosque in the northern town of Ayodhya.
In Bombay alone, which experienced some of the worst violence, 59 people were killed, many when police opened fire on rampaging mobs.


'Granddaddy' Cactus's Death Throes
THE oldest, biggest and most thickly limbed saguaro in the United States, a giant cactus known here with crisp Western affection as "Granddaddy," is dying of what scientists say is the succulent equivalent of extreme old age.
The cactus has survived in the magnificent if thirsty desertscape of the Saguaro National Monument East for about 300 years, twice as long as the average saguaro lives.
Now it is rotting away of bacterial necrosis, a secondary infection that often besets an elderly cactus already weakened by injury from frost, animals or insects.


Review/Fashion; Costume Change At the Met
The newest permanent floating costume exhibition opens Thursday at the Metropolitan Museum of Art in the redesigned galleries of the Costume Institute.
Twenty years ago, a new era in the presentation of costumes at museums was inaugurated by Diana Vreeland with "The World of Balenciaga." Annual exhibitions on Hollywood, Russian costume, Yves Saint Laurent and the like drew more than half a million visitors in the nine months each show was on view.
Inspired by the Metropolitan shows, other museums all over the country were inspired to stage their own.


Stop &amp; Shop Companies reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 7


Ram vs. Allah: 2 Different Cures for India's Ills
Hari Dass Sharma and Mohammed Alim may be united in their hopes for a peaceful solution to the crisis provoked on Sunday when a mob of militant Hindus demolished a mosque in northern India.
But the solutions offered today by these men of different faiths were completely at odds.
Mr.
Sharma, a member of India's Hindu majority and the proprietor of a small foundry in this village, said he did not approve of the destruction but that the militant Hindus, known as kar sevaks, should be allowed to build a temple to the god Ram, whom they believe was born at the site.


Jays Re-sign Carter and Swipe Molitor
Showing they can perform in the front office as well as they did on the field this year, the World Series champion Toronto Blue Jays executed an electrifying double play tonight, re-signing free-agent Joe Carter and snatching Paul Molitor from the Milwaukee Brewers.
The Blue Jays gave Carter $19.5 million for three years and Molitor $13 million for three years.
Each has an option year that would make Carter's four-year total $25 million and Molitor's $16 million.


Now, From Somalia, 3 Star Newscasters
Two television networks, CBS and NBC, have sent anchormen to Somalia; a third, ABC, has sent the host of its late-night news program.
It is the first time the three have sent so many star newscasters to a foreign country since January 1991, when they sent their anchormen to cover the Persian Gulf war.


Cablevision Systems Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Electric Car Is Reviewed
The General Motors Corporation said today that it was reviewing its electric-car development program to determine whether to push ahead with commercial production during the next few years.
The G.M. statement, issued by a spokesman with little elaboration, suggested that the No. 1 auto maker, pressed by huge financial losses, could either delay or scale back the project, or seek a partner to help bear the costs.


Classical Music in Review
"Die Schone Magelone"  William Sharp, baritone Accompaniment by William Blier, pianist Readings by Beth Dixon New York Festival of Song  Greenwich House Music School
The 15 Romances that Brahms published as his Opus 33 dance around a story without telling it.
The texts are the reflective interludes that punctuate Ludwig Tieck's novel, "Love Story of the Beautiful Magelone and Count Peter of Provence," a retelling of a medieval chivalric tale.
The directors of the New York Festival of Song reasoned that with a plot so close at hand, the Romances could be recast as a song cycle -- or at least, a singspiel -- by condensing the story into a between-songs narrative.


Crack Addict Found Able To Face Trial
Larry Hogue, the crack-addicted, homeless veteran who residents of West 96th Street say has terrorized them for seven years, was found competent by a judge in Manhattan yesterday to stand trial on a charge of criminal mischief for scraping a car with a knife.
Mr.
Hogue, 48, who has been jailed and hospitalized repeatedly, has for some become a symbol of the failings of the mental health and criminal justice systems.


Problem Gambling Masks Severe Depression; Family and Friends
To the Editor:
Contrary to your headline, obsessive gambling is not a moral weakness but a complex bio-psycho-social problem ("Fervid Debate on Gam bling: Disease or Moral Weakness?", front page, Nov. 21).
Our clinical experience, supported by research, indicates that for some people gambling is a habit; for others, an emotional problem, and for others, an addiction similar to alcohol and drug addiction.
Still others suffer from a personality disorder, with out-of-control gambling as only one manifestation.
These and other theories serve as an explanation, not necessarily an excuse, for such gambling.


Review/Television; Keeping Child With AIDS From Becoming a Pariah
With docudramas, sometimes the subject itself compels attention.
"Blood Brothers: The Joey DiPaolo Story," tonight at 7:30 on HBO, addresses AIDS.
Then sometimes an uncommonly strong performance or two can do wonders for a mediocre script.
CBS's "Killer Among Friends," tonight at 9, can claim the indispensable contributions of Patty Duke and a young actress named Margaret Welsh.
"Blood Brothers" is part of a fact-based series of half-hour dramas with the umbrella title of "Lifestories: Families in Crisis." The story of Joey DiPaolo, a Brooklyn youngster infected with the AIDS virus during a blood transfusion, is fairly well known.
Over the last year or so, he and his mother Carol, who outspokenly refused to let him be treated as a pariah by educators and neighbors, have appeared extensively on news and talk shows, constantly dispelling destructive myths about people with AIDS.


GTE Southwest Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Honors for Scholars Who Are Athletes
Thirteen college football players sat down for lunch yesterday at the "21" Club in Manhattan.
One of the 13 was Jim Hansen, an offensive tackle from Colorado who has just been awarded a Rhodes Scholarship.
Another was Rod Tranum, a wide receiver from Massachusetts Institute of Technology with a perfect grade average.
And still another was Darrin Smith, the linebacker for the No. 1-ranked Miami Hurricanes.
His presence was particuarly noteworthy because it was the first time in the 40 years of the National Football Foundation that a Hurricane player had been among those honored for their achievements on the field and in the classroom.


A Comptronix Options Account Is Frozen
Prudential Securities agreed yesterday to freeze the account of a customer who made almost $350,000 on stock options of the Comptronix Corporation the day the company announced the suspension of its top management for falsifying the company's books.
The freeze was sought in a lawsuit filed on Nov. 27 in Federal court in San Francisco by MDNH Partners, the trading firm that sustained the loss on the disputed options trade.
Robert C. Friese, a lawyer for MDNH, identified the affected customer as Domer Ishler, a component parts broker in Huntsville, Ala.
The freeze, he said, "insures that the money will stay locked up while we determine whether the trade should be rescinded and whether we have a basis to allege insider trading against Mr. Ishler."


Justices Decline to Hear Mississippi Abortion Case
Providing further evidence that it has said all it plans to say for now on the subject of abortion, the Supreme Court today refused to hear a challenge to a Mississippi abortion law that requires women to wait 24 hours for their abortions after first receiving counseling intended to persuade them to change their minds.
In turning down the case, without comment and with no recorded dissent, the Court declined an opportunity to clarify its ruling in a Pennsylvania case last June that the Constitution does not permit states to place an "undue burden" on women's access to abortion.


Corrections
The Art in Review column in Weekend on Friday misidentified an artist whose sculpture, of glass jars filled with paint, is part of a group exhibition at Muranushi Lederman Productions in SoHo.
He is James Elaine, not James Siena.


Harold Kreiger, 86, Lawyer for 60 Years
Harold Kreiger, a lawyer in Jersey City for 60 years, died on Saturday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 86.
Mr. Kreiger died of a heart attack, said his wife, Stephanie.


Japanese Regulators Seize Files in Stock-Pricing Inquiry
Japan's new stock market regulatory agency, created in July to rebuild the credibility of the scandal-tainted stock market, took its first enforcement action today, seizing records of parties said to have been involved in manipulating the shares of an affiliate of the Unisys Corporation.
Agents of the Securities and Exchange Surveillance Commission raided the offices of a group of speculators and an arm of a large real estate company in investigating the suspected attempt to manipulate the shares of Nihon Unisys, a computer leasing, sales and software company formed by Unisys and Mitsui &amp; Company, the big trading house.


Robot Named Dante To Explore Inferno Of Antarctic Volcano
AN eight-legged robot named Dante is to descend into the smoldering crater of an Antarctic volcano soon in an attempt to reach a lava lake that long has remained out of the reach of human explorers.
The spidery walking robot, tethered to the rim of the constantly erupting volcano, is to slowly rappel down the sheer, vertical walls of Mount Erebus.


Supreme Court Roundup; Iran-Contra Appeal Refused by Court
Turning down an appeal from the independent prosecutor in the Iran-contra case, the Supreme Court today let stand the appeals court decision that threw out the criminal conviction of John M. Poindexter, the highest-ranking Reagan Administration official to be found guilty in the affair.
Arguments by Lawrence E. Walsh, the independent counsel, that the appeals court's ruling last year was a legal watershed that would make it all but impossible to prosecute people once they had testified before Congress under a grant of immunity, did not appear to interest the Justices.
The Court acted without comment or recorded dissent.


CHRONICLE
Seems there's some turbulence in the world of weather watchers.
Tomorrow a group of meteorologists plans to demonstrate outside the studios of WNYW, Channel 5, at 205 West 67th Street to protest the reassignment of the station's forecaster NICK GREGORY from weeknight duty on "The 10 O'Clock News" to the weekend evening broadcasts.
Members of the North Jersey Weather Observers and the Long Island Weather Observers, two groups of professionals and amateurs, are also planning to urge viewers not to watch Channel 5, owned by Fox, unless Mr.
Gregory is reinstated to the daily job, which he held from June 1987 until October.


Bridge
If you are looking for a holiday gift for a bridge player, here are some possibilities.
All prices include shipping.
Annual subscription to a magazine: The Bridge World, 39 West 94th Street, New York, N.Y. 10025, $38 for 12 issues; or Bridge Today, 18 Village View Bluff, Ballston Lake, N.Y. 12019, $24 for 6 issues.


The Push and Pull Over Taxes
The 12 years of Republican reign seem, looking back, like a constant political war over taxes, a war that will almost certainly continue next year after Bill Clinton becomes President.
Year after year, ignoring the counsel of economists and business executives that the wisest tax code is a stable and predictable one, the laws were changed in important ways.
It happened in 1981, 1982, 1983, 1984, 1986, 1988, 1989 and 1990, more frequent and detailed changes in taxes than ever before in American history, and another new law would have been adopted this year if President Bush had not cast a veto.
Change and More Change
Income tax rates were slashed, cut again and then increased slightly.
Tax breaks to encourage business investment and personal savings were widened, then repealed.
A surtax on the elderly to pay the cost of catastrophic illnesses was approved in 1987 and retracted in 1988.
Social Security, Medicare and gasoline taxes went up.
Corporate taxes fell.


Petrovic, Feeling Slighted, May Not Re-sign With Nets
Just as the Nets are getting excited about their six-game winning streak, they were presented with a new problem today: the growing possibility that guard Drazen Petrovic will leave the team after this season.
In October, Petrovic, who is in the last year of his contract with the Nets, made it known that he had received numerous preliminary offers to play basketball in either Italy or Spain next season.
Petrovic also made it known that he had mixed feelings about returning to the Nets next season.
"If we are going to build a championship-caliber team," he said at the time, "then maybe I'd stay."


Struggle Worthy Of Texas Looms Over Senate Seat
Lloyd Bentsen's appointment as Treasury Secretary is not even official yet, but that has not stood in the way of a feverish outbreak of political jockeying and speculation over who might replace him in what would be only the third change of Senators in Texas since 1961.
Former Mayor Henry Cisneros of San Antonio and former Lieut.
Gov.
Bill Hobby are considered the two front-runners to be named by Gov.
Ann W. Richards to fill the post on an interim basis, if Senator Bentsen gives it up to become a member of President Bill Clinton's cabinet.


Less Meat Please, With The Chinese
LOOKING back at recipes in the first Chinese cookbook I ever owned, I discovered a startling fact: The amount of meat in the dishes was quite small, relative to the other ingredients.
That is the way Chinese traditionally eat.
But when Chinese cooking crossed the Pacific the proportions changed: The meat became the central note, the vegetables secondary.


CNL Realty Investors Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


S.P.I.-Suspension &amp; Parts Industries Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Somali Clans Planning Last Grab for Advantage
The competing clans that have ravaged this country spent the day today plotting attacks to wring the last bit of military advantage over their foes before the arrival of American forces, which are expected to put a damper on much of the fighting.
The faction under Gen.
Mohamed Farah Aidid, which controls southern Mogadishu and most of the southern part of this dogleg-shaped country, was making plans to swoop into the famine-hit town of Bardera and oust the forces of Gen.
Mohammed Siad Hersi Morgan.
General Morgan, a son-in-law of former President Mohammed Siad Barre, wanted to ride into Kismayu, the southern port city, and fight General Aidid.


Eating Well
SHAME on you, Michael Jordan, for making children think that by drinking Gatorade they can soar above the rim as you do.
Anyone who doubts the power of television commercials should tune in to "Buy Me That 3! A Kid's Guide to Food Advertising," a joint effort by Consumer Reports and HBO on Thursday and on Dec. 16, 20 and 23.


Daedalus Enterprises Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


London Journal; With Its Bombs, Will the I.R.A. Steal Christmas?
Joanna Grace said her friends and relatives in suburban Essex thought she was daft when she asked them to join her on a Christmas shopping trip into central London on Monday.
"They said, 'What? And get blown up?' " Ms.
Grace recalled as she stood with her 3-year-old son, Thomas, outside the gaily decorated windows of Selfridges department store on Oxford Street.
"I know the bombs won't stop me, but I'm not so sure about others. All of this terror does have an effect on the way a lot of other people now go about their lives."


Changes Due In Hospitals, Panel Says
A panel commissioned by Mayor David N. Dinkins last year to conduct a top-to-bottom investigation of New York City's sprawling public hospital system identifies weaknesses that have already been pointed out and endorses changes that have already been made.
The blueprint for caring for the health of New Yorkers, covered in 28 recommendations from the commission to the Mayor, supports the direction chosen by the Dinkins administration and suggests moderate changes while rejecting more radical proposals.


Give Diplomacy a Chance to Revamp Somalia; Restrict to Relief
To the Editor:
The good news is that Washington has decided it's time to apply "tough love" principles in Somalia, where disorder is so severe that less than half the donated food and medicine gets past warlords and looters to reach the multitude of innocent victims.
President Bush's offer to deploy American troops to support the relief effort represents the sort of humane leadership the international community requires for effective action.
The bad news is that our troops risk undertaking a dangerous mission without a clear objective.
An open-ended notion of why they're there could land them in the very quagmire everyone wants to avoid.
We need to be explicit with ourselves, our allies and Somali friends that our sole objective is to safeguard the humanitarian relief operation -- not to occupy, pacify or take charge of the country politically.
Drawing the distinction is vitally important:
*
Troops should be used to take control of ports, airfields and storage facilities used for relief purposes; to escort food convoys and personnel; to protect distribution sites; to provide a communications network and air-mobile rescue capability, and to organize and train local civilian guard forces.
And they should be ordered to do so in the face of opposition from warlords or hoodlums, using whatever force is necessary.
* But American troops should
not
be used to settle clan feuds, chase down and punish errant warlords, or police any sort of political truce or cease-fire.
The time may well come when outside forces are needed for these purposes as well, but that's another mission altogether, involving a different set of policy judgments.
Inevitably, the sheer presence of an imposing modern military force will lend political stability to the situation.
But that's incidental.
For now, let's focus squarely on the limited but vastly more important objective of saving innocent lives from needless starvation.
FRANK CRIGLER  Arlington, Va., Nov. 27, 1992
The writer, a consultant in international relations-conflict management, was ambassador to Somalia, 1987-90.
ILS&gt;Drawing.


Sliwa's Angels Empowered New Yorkers in the Fight on Crime
To the Editor:
We were stunned by your sweeping denunciation of Curtis Sliwa and the Guardian Angels (editorial, Nov. 27).
Your news articles portray the Angels as a small band of incompetents gone astray from their original mission and exploited by their leaders.
We, the citizens of the West Village, have a much different point of view.


Thomas Knowlton, 83, U.S. Labor Arbitrator
Thomas Anson Knowlton, a retired national labor arbitrator, died on Sunday at his home in Millbrook, N.Y.
He was 83 years old.
Dr.
Knowlton taught economics at the University of Maine and was later a field examiner with the National Labor Relations Board under President Franklin D. Roosevelt.


Martech USA Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


HOLE BEING DRILLED TO REACH MINERS
Rescue workers began drilling today through 900 feet of limestone in an effort to provide air for eight coal miners missing underground since an explosion Monday morning.
After meeting with experts at the hillside mine and visiting the miners' relatives, Gov.
L.
Douglas Wilder told reporters that the drilling could take 24 hours.
He said the strategy was being tried because carbon monoxide and methane gas were preventing rescuers from venturing inside.


Educator's $960,000 Payment Prompts Outrage
This fall, at 62, Edward J. Murphy, an influential administrator and superintendent of a special school district on Long Island, received the highest retirement award in the history of New York State -- $960,000.
Now, as state officials scramble to recoup the payment, they say the retirement award threatens to undermine not only the public's attitude toward Dr.
Murphy's 42-year career, but its support for ever increasing taxes to pay for public education.


'Clustering' of White Pupils Stirs Richmond Furor
No one is saying exactly why white pupils have been clustered at the predominantly black Bellevue Model Elementary School here, but it seems clear that as long as they have been a small minority in the school, some effort has been made to keep white children in any given grade grouped in the same classroom.
Now a complaint about that "clustering" has set off a furious debate here about how ethnic and cultural diversity can be maintained in an overwhelmingly black school system without discriminating against someone.


Bridge
At national championships, which the American Contract Bridge League insists on calling, long-windedly, North American Championships, Canadians, outnumbered, tend to lose out to players from south of the 49th parallel.
But they had a glorious moment in the final of the 1964 Spingold Teams, when a Toronto team (Eric Murray, Sam Kehela, Bruce Elliott and Shorty Sheardown) defeated another Canadian team (Marvin Altman, Bruce Gowdy, Fred Hoffer, Ray Jotcham).
The Toronto foursome retained the title a year later.
A later generation of Canadians had a notable victory at the Fall Nationals in Orlando, Fla., 10 days ago.
Boris Baran and Mark Stein, both of Montreal; Geoff Hampson of Toronto, and Mark Molson of Fenton, Mich., an expatriate Canadian, won the North American Swiss Team title.
Captaining the team and adding a cosmopolitan flavor was Lewis Kaplan, an American with British citizenship who lives in Paris.


Ready for a Battle, Troops Storm Beach But Find No Enemy
Just as dawn peered into a new morning here, a CH-46 Sea Knight helicopter roared over a sandy bluff and touched down near the airport just long enough for 15 members of Lieut.
Hezekiah Barge's Marine infantry platoon to barrel out the ramp of the twin-rotor chopper.
"Let's go! Let's go!" Lieutenant Barge shouted over the din and the dust kicked up by the helicopter's thumping blades, urging his men in desert- camouflaged fatigues and 85-pound packs to fan out in a 180-degree arc across low, scrubby terrain that overlooked hangars and utility buildings near the airport.


A High-Tech Baton for Living-Room Maestros
Conducting his ensemble in a recent performance at Arizona State University, Arthur Weisberg paid attention to the strange-looking instrument alongside the flute, clarinet, violin, cello and piano.
The success of the music, an experimental piece called "Virtual Encounters," depended on a computerized apparatus that looked like an oversized pizza box played by a man with what seemed to be a pair of timpani mallets.
Mr.
Weisberg need not have worried.
After the performance the audience's applause repeatedly brought the group back out on stage.
During the fourth bow, the conductor leaned over to the pizza-box virtuoso and whispered: "We've got a hit. Let's take this thing on the road."


Israel Closes Gaza in a Search for Soldiers' Killers
Israel closed off the Gaza Strip today and confined hundreds of thousands of Palestinians there to their homes as the army searched for the killers of three soldiers who were gunned down on Monday while on patrol.
Between army-imposed curfews and a general strike called by the Palestinians themselves, Gaza's dusty towns and tumbledown refugee camps were virtual ghost towns.
They are likely to remain that way for several days, certainly through Wednesday, when Arabs in occupied Gaza and the West Bank mark the start of their anti-Israel uprising on Dec. 9, 1987.


Corrections
A sports article by The Associated Press in some copies yesterday about the status of National Football League labor negotiations misinterpreted comments by Paul Tagliabue, the commissioner.
There is no preliminary accord on a collective bargaining agreement.
An article about the talks between owners and players appears today on page B22.


Mets Looking to Add Tanana; Magadan Signs With Marlins
The Mets, their search for a fifth starter sputtering, were negotiating late tonight with veteran left-hander Frank Tanana.
Tanana, 39 years and a veteran of 19 seasons in the major leagues, has won 12 or more games in seven of the last nine seasons.
In 1992, Tanana was 13-11 for the Tigers.
He pitched 186 innings, and he has pitched 200 or more in six of the last nine seasons.


Hanger Orthopedic Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
A headline yesterday about the shooting of a plainclothes transit police officer in Brooklyn by fellow officers referred incompletely to the prosecutors' investigation.
No conclusions have been drawn, because the Brooklyn District Attorney's office has yet to interview two witnesses, including the officer who was shot.


William Shawn, 85, Is Dead; New Yorker's Gentle Despot
William Shawn, the shy, strong-willed editor who ran The New Yorker for a third of this century, died yesterday morning at the apartment on the Upper East Side of Manhattan where he had lived since 1950.
He was 85 years old.
He died of a heart attack, said his son Wallace Shawn, the actor.


COMPANY BRIEFS
TCF FINANCIAL CORP., Minneapolis, and Republic Capital Group Inc., Milwaukee, announced the signing of a definitive agreement for TCF to acquire Republic Capital in a tax-free stock-for-stock exchange for valued at $62.4 million.
TYCO TOYS INC., Mount Laurel, N.J., announced it had reached an agreement in principle to acquire a majority interest in Munecas y Juguetes Ensueno S.A., the distributor in Mexico of Tyco and a wide range of other toy products.
Terms were not disclosed.


Live, and in Great Numbers: It's Somalia Tonight With Tom, Ted and Dan
The troops landing in Somalia yesterday jumped from their rubber boats and headed into the dunes -- and into the glare of television lights.
More than 75 reporters and camera crews were waiting on the beach with microphones on and videotape rolling.
The pictures they beamed to American viewers had the smoothly produced look of a made-for-television drama, with everything from distant shots of soldiers clambering ashore to close-ups of their camouflage uniforms as the troops made their way through the sand, and through the horde of journalists.
A Tactical Cartoon
For at least two of the major television networks, the camera crews and reporters on the beach were part of the news.
Tom Brokaw, the anchor of the "NBC Nightly News," said in his report from Mogadishu that the troops' night-vision goggles had been affected by the television lights.
"We're told they were not amused," Mr.
Brokaw remarked.


Excerpts From 'McTeague'
Excerpts from William Bolcom's "McTeague," a new opera recently given its premiere by the Lyric Opera of Chicago, will be presented with piano accompaniment in the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum's "Works and Process" series on Dec. 14 and 15, at 8 P.M. at the Marymount Manhattan Theater, 221 East 71st Street.
Mr.
Bolcom will accompany singers from the Lyric Opera and will join the co-librettists Arnold Weinstein and Robert Altman in a discussion of the work.
The two-act opera is based on an 1899 novel by Frank Norris, which also inspired Erich von Stroheim's 1923 silent-film classic, "Greed." Tickets are $15; $10 for students and seniors.
Information: (212) 423-3699.


A New Foreign Policy for a New Era
As Bill Clinton prepares for inauguration, his Presidency already seems haunted by the great issue he pointedly avoided in the campaign -- national security and foreign policy.
History will judge the Bush Administration's missed opportunities and neglect of a revolutionary world as an almost epic blunder, leaving a legacy of contradiction and hazard.
Unless the new Administration develops a coherent view of a transformed world and of America's new international interest, role and purpose, there will be no more than a marginal, politically arbitrary reapportionment of huge national security budgets, which are now largely wasted on cold war vestiges yet are essential to finance domestic revival and deficit reduction.
The same capricious politics are likely to raid non-military international spending or exploit trade tensions for short-run advantage, all with insidious effect.


Personal Health
THAT time of year is here when slippery walkways become a hazard for millions of older Americans for whom a fall can mean a debilitating and even fatal hip fracture.
This year, more than 280,000 Americans will suffer hip fractures.
Three-fourths will be women and 87 percent will be 65 or older.
For half, the fracture will mean lost independence and a continuing need for nursing-home care or assistance at home.


Economy Still Needs Repair, Clinton Says
Fearful that recent reports suggesting an economic rebound could blunt public pressure on Congress, President-elect Bill Clinton cautioned that hard times were probably not over and that, in any case, painful long-term changes were still required.


Knicks Keep a Streak Alive While Nets Let One Expire
There's a pattern developing here, but don't broach the subject with Pat Riley.
Whether his fear is bad luck or only bad karma, the Knicks coach does not care to dissect his team's success on its home court.
To ask him about it is to invite a cold stare, or an expletive.
But it is worth noting anyway.
The Knicks won, 100-88, against the Seattle SuperSonics last night at Madison Square Garden and are 9-0 at home.
How do you ignore that?


Working Mothers Need More Flexibility
To the Editor:
In the continuing debate pitting the stay-at-home mother against the "working" mother, we now have the Nov. 13 letter by Margaret A. Hagen, director of the graduate program in human development at Boston University, "What Mothers and Babies Decide to Do" (responding to Joyce Cohen's Oct. 21 letter, "Staying Home"), scolding: "If mommy is not happy working at all, she should quit and stay home."


Metropolitan Diary
YOU MISSED AUTUMN To all you New Yorkers who moved down South: You missed blazing trees, the crunch of dry leaves, And tart apples that freshen your mouth.
You missed carved pumpkins, stuffed scarecrows, and the first icy hail that pings at your windows.
I needed the heater as I drove to town.
Look for me I'm coming down!
STELLA E. SMALLHEISER
. . .


U.S. to Play Brazil in Soccer
The United States national soccer team will play Brazil at the Yale Bowl in New Haven in the first match of the U.S.
Cup exhibition tournament on June 6.
At a news conference yesterday in Manhattan, Carlos Alberto Parreira, coach of Brazil, promised he would do his best to free the top Brazilian players from their European club commitments for the match.
Brazil, which maintains two separate national teams -- one at home and one abroad -- must also compete in the South American championships and in the 1994 World Cup qualifying matches immediately following the U.S.
Cup games.


General Parametrics reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


A.M.A. OPPOSES CAP ON MEDICAL COSTS
In a rebuff to President-elect Bill Clinton, the American Medical Association today rejected the idea of an overall national limit on health care spending.
But the doctors said they were willing to consider other ways of restraining costs.
At a meeting in Nashville, the association's House of Delegates approved a resolution saying the A.M.A.
"strongly opposes a national ceiling on health-care spending."


Military Contractor Drops Merger Opposed by F.T.C.
Alliant Techsystems said yesterday that it would abandon an agreement to acquire a big part of the Olin Corporation's military business because of an antitrust lawsuit by the Federal Trade Commission.
Alliant Techsystems, a military contractor based in Edina, Minn., agreed in August to acquire the ordnance division of Olin and its Physics International Company for 2.82 million shares of Alliant common stock, or 22 percent of its total, in a deal valued at about $130 million.


Carjacking: New Name for Old Crime
When Lieut.
Allen Tharling joined the Houston Police Department's robbery division 16 years ago, young thugs were stealing cars and pickup trucks at gunpoint.
"In those days we didn't call it carjacking," the lieutenant said.
"We called it robbery. Not much has changed except the name." But he added: "Now there's more of it and the suspects are younger."


Smile, and Say Hearing
The manager of heavyweight champion RIDDICK BOWE and a member of his camp will face a state disciplinary hearing in Las Vegas, Nev., for allegedly assaulting a photographer after Bowe dethroned EVANDER HOLYFIELD.
The Nevada State Athletic Commission voted in a closed session Monday night to call manager ROCK NEWMAN and BERNARD BROOKS JR.  in for a hearing.


IN THE KITCHEN WITH David Bouley; Putting Heart Into Affairs of the Palate
IF you're the type who's afraid of commitment, you'd better think twice about eating at Bouley.
First, there's the wait for reservations at the TriBeCa restaurant, which on the weekends can run three months.
Then, there's the popular tasting menu, a nine-course innovation that costs $80 a person and can take up to four hours to consume.
But perhaps most important is that, unknown to you, the diner, you have not come to Bouley just to eat.
You have unwittingly entered into an impassioned affair with a possessive lover.
"I cook as if I were in love with everyone I'm cooking for," David Bouley, the chef and owner, declares, and he's not kidding.
After you have finished each course, your plate is presented to him in the kitchen.
If you have finished the food, his smile is dreamy, sated.
If you have not, he grows sullen.
The corners of his mouth turn down.
If you leave too much, he'll go into the dining room to find out why.


Don't Lower Flag on Rokeby
For the last three months, the auctioneer's gavel has chipped away pieces of the empire, but there are still 26 race horses and two ponies in the picture-postcard barn of the Rokeby Farm in South Carolina these days, and MacKenzie Miller says, "That's what's left."
Miller, the last trainer for Paul Mellon's elegant stable, says he is not presiding over a wholesale dismantling.
Instead, in a time of plunging prices for horses and horse farms, in an era when many of the first families of racing are retiring their colors, Rokeby is carrying out one of the great orderly cutbacks in horse history.


Germany Closes the Gate
Engulfed by refugees and torn by violent attacks on foreigners, Germany has decided to clamp down on a frontier now entirely open to asylum-seekers.
The ruling Christian Democrats and the opposition Social Democrats agreed last weekend on a tough policy that would end the refugee tide by closing the gates to newcomers from countries said to be free of repression.
Nobody can reasonably fault Germany for trying to limit and regulate a huge influx of refugees.
But Chancellor Helmut Kohl and the Bonn political establishment have regrettably taken the easy way out.
They would do better to set a quota on immigrants and nurture a more pluralist society by adopting a formula for citizenship based on residence rather than blood ties.


This Mayflower Is Off to Discover Warmer Waters


Replacing Judge Wachtler, With an Eye on Politics
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo was surely exaggerating when he called it "the most publicized vacancy in the history of the United States of America," but it is no secret that with former Chief Judge Sol Wachtler's abrupt resignation from the New York State Court of Appeals last month, his job is very much available.
Mr.
Cuomo has said that he would prefer to name someone already on the court, and the guess of many politicians and lawyers is that he might appoint its only woman, Judge Judith S. Kaye.
But before he can appoint anyone, the long and complicated task of reviewing prospective candidates and nominating names from which the Governor will choose rests on a 12-person commission that meets only when there are vacancies.
Replaced Patronage System
Formed in 1978 when the state's voters passed a constitutional amendment calling for judges on the Court of Appeals to be appointed rather than elected, the Commission on Judicial Nomination was meant to be an alternative to the old system, in which party bosses handpicked candidates, who tended to run unopposed.


Salvador Battalion Ends in Praise and Protest
With former enemies demonstrating outside, the most praised -- and criticized -- of the Salvadoran Army's elite battalions was dismantled today as part of the countdown to the formal end of civil war.
Two A-37 Dragonflies roared overhead, and President Alfredo Cristiani praised the Atlacatl Battalion for heroism and distinguished service as its troops formed for the final time in their maroon berets and bandanas, their M-16 rifles at their sides.


More Cuts Are Forecast For I.B.M.
I.B.M. will soon announce a charge against earnings of more than $1 billion to dispose of assets and cut its work force further, two Wall Street analysts predicted yesterday.
The International Business Machines Corporation has already taken charges of $4.2 billion this year and cut its payroll by roughly 40,000 people.
Further cuts would be a recognition by the computer giant that expenses must be trimmed even more in the face of weak demand worldwide, especially for its mainframe computers and large storage disks.


Autozone Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 21


METRO DIGEST
METRO DIGEST  NEW YORK CITY  FEW SURPRISES IN HOSPITAL REPORT
A panel commissioned to investigate New York City's sprawling public hospital system identifies weaknesses that have already been pointed out and endorses changes that have already been made.
The blueprint for caring for the health of New Yorkers supports the direction chosen by the Dinkins administration and suggests moderate changes.
But it stops short of recommending the sweeping changes hoped for by some critics.
B2.
HASIDIM MAY COOPERATE IN INQUIRY
After more than a week of virtual silence, several Hasidim may step forward to offer prosecutors information about events surrounding the beating of a homeless black man by a group of Hasidim in Crown Heights last week, the lawyer for the rabbinical student charged in the case said.
Their testimony could prove an important development in a case fraught with political dangers whatever its outcome.
Without any new witnesses, the prosecution would have to rely largely on the testimony of the beaten man, Ralph Nimmons, who has a long arrest record.
B3.
FERNANDEZ LOOKS TO ALBANY FOR SUPPORT
On the eve of a meeting of the New York City Board of Education to discuss whether to uphold the suspension of a local board in Queens that refuses to teach respect for gay people, the Schools Chancellor, Joseph A. Fernandez, looked to the State Legislature to bolster his authority.
B3.
The 1990 conviction of a Brooklyn landlord is overturned.
B3.
REGION  A DEADLOCK IN FARE DEBATE
Negotiations aimed at bailing out the Metropolitan Transportation Authority and preventing a possible fare increase on subways and buses remained deadlocked after the first face-to-face meeting on the issue between Governor Cuomo and leaders of the State Legislature.
B6.
SIGNS OF FRIENDSHIP, SIGNALS OF ABUSE
A high school guidance counselor testified today that the mildly retarded woman in the Glen Ridge, N.J., sex assault case was desperate for friends and thought that it was a gesture of friendship when boys fondled her.
B6.
How the defense can prepare for the testimony of the woman at the center of the case.
B6.
THE HUNT FOR A CHIEF JUDGE
Governor Cuomo was surely exaggerating when he called it "the most publicized vacancy in the history of the United States of America," but it is no secret that with former Chief Judge Sol Wachtler's abrupt resignation from the New York State Court of Appeals last month, the job is very much available.
B7.
Survival rates for heart bypass patients in New York State improved significantly in the last three years, report says.
B6.
Rutgers to stop displaying students' names along with their Social Security numbers on materials circulated among students.
B4.
About New York by Michael T. Kaufman B3  Chronicle B7  Neediest Cases B8


Trimel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Layne Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


TCG International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Atwood Oceanics reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


MacFrugal's Bargains-Close-Outs Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 1


Clinton Expected to Name Woman Attorney General
President-elect Bill Clinton is moving to name the first woman to serve as Attorney General, and transition aides in Washington and Arkansas said today that he was considering four candidates.
The finalists, three judges and a Washington lawyer active in public-interest causes, are emblematic of the women who entered law schools in small numbers in the 1950's and 1960's and then rose to the top of their profession.


A Spanish Wine Gains a Following
IN the verdant Spanish region of Galicia, which is celebrated for a cuisine of simply prepared Atlantic fish and shellfish, albarino is daily fare.
In Chicago, Galician-born Gabino Sotelino calls albarino "the best white wine in Spain" and plugs it at Ambria, his cosmopolitan French restaurant.
And in Berkeley, Calif., an albarino is the sole Spanish white on the stylish Chez Panisse's wine list.
Just enough of this sensuous bone-dry or near-dry rieslinglike wine, named for the albarino grape, has come to the United States to give it public-secret status.
Restaurateurs say they find albarino more appetite whetting as an aperitif and more versatile with meals than most California chardonnays or Burgundies.


No Headline


Pesky Notre Dame Tests Ranked Indiana but Loses
Indiana 75, Notre Dame 70
SOUTH BEND, Ind., Dec. 8 (AP) -- The clutch shooting of Calbert Cheaney, who scored 15 of his 19 points in the second half, enabled No. 4-ranked Indiana to recover after losing a 17-point lead for a 75-70 victory over Notre Dame tonight.


Landlord's Criminal Conviction Is Overturned by Appeals Court
An appeals court has overturned the 1990 conviction of J. Leonard Spodek, a landlord who was involved in several highly publicized cases about violations in dozens of apartment buildings that he owned in Brooklyn.
Over the years, Mr.
Spodek was the subject of complaints about thousands of violations in his many buildings, and he went to jail for 45 days in a 1986 case.


Heinz (H.J.) (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 28


CHRONICLE
Every once in a while, LOWELL P. WEICKER JR. likes to step out of his role as Governor of Connecticut.
Last year, he put in nonsinging appearances as a naval officer in "Madame Butterfly" and as a constable in "The Barber of Seville," productions of the Connecticut Opera Theater in Hartford.
Now he has signed on to make a cameo appearance next Nov. 6 in the opening-night performance of "Robin Hood: The Musical," an original production of the Warner Stage Company, a community theater group in Torrington, Conn.
His role?
King Richard the Lion-Hearted.


CHRONICLE
Once again, they're changing the stationery, the business cards and the sign on the door at Akin, Gump, Hauer &amp; Feld, the Washington law firm, to include the name of one of its founders, ROBERT S. STRAUSS (it goes between Gump and Hauer).
Mr.
Strauss returned last week to the office he left in the summer of 1991, when he was named Ambassador to the Soviet Union.
He served there during its collapse and its reorganization into republics.
He arrived back at the firm shortly after VERNON E. JORDAN JR. took a leave from the firm to direct President-elect Bill Clinton's transition team.


Corrections
An obituary yesterday about Richard J. Hughes, former Governor of New Jersey, referred incorrectly to a statement by a Rutgers University professor that became an issue in the 1965 governorship campaign.
The professor, Eugene D. Genovese, said he would welcome a victory in Vietnam by the Vietcong, not by North Vietnam.


New Yorkers Shopping Out of State May Be Charged Sales Tax They Owe


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
AL -- Named Phyllis K. Merhige vice-president for administration and public affairs.
BOSTON RED SOX -- Acquired Ivan Calderon, outfielder, from the Montreal Expos for Mike Gardiner and Terry Powers, pitchers.
Agreed to terms with Scott Bankhead, pitcher, on a two-year contract.


Painting Nations Blue
The American marines who hit the beaches of Mogadishu have begun a new type of United Nations operation unlike the peacekeeping missions or the wars that the Security Council authorized in Korea and the Persian Gulf, and it may become a model for similar crises in the post-cold war era.
The soldiers are going into Somalia under their own commanders and their own flags though only after the United States sought and received formal permission to send them from the United Nations exactly as it did before sending its forces into the Korean and Persian Gulf wars.


Hasidim May Cooperate In Crown Heights Inquiry
After more than a week of virtual silence, several Hasidim may step forward today to offer prosecutors information about events surrounding the beating of a homeless black man by a group of Hasidim in Crown Heights last week, the lawyer for the rabbinical student charged in the case said yesterday.
If the District Attorney, Charles J. Hynes, finds the witnesses credible and decides to put them before a grand jury, their testimony could prove an important development in a case fraught with political dangers whatever its outcome.
Without any new witnesses, Mr.
Hynes would have to rely largely on the testimony of the beaten man, Ralph Nimmons, who has a long arrest record.


Executive Changes
EMI-VIRGIN MUSIC PUBLISHING, Los Angeles, named Kaz Utsunomiya president.
EPSON AMERICA INC., Torrance, Calif., appointed Norio Niwa president and chief executive.
He will continue to serve as president and chief operating officer of the computer products business unit at Epson Portland Inc.


Corrections
A picture caption on Monday with an article about vacated corporate buildings in the suburbs misidentified the picture at the left.
It showed a building built for GTE that now houses Stamford city offices.
The picture at the center, labeled the GTE building, was the company's corporate headquarters, also in Stamford.


First Chef: American, Perhaps?
ALICE WATERS, the mother of modern American cooking, has sent a letter to Bill and Hillary Clinton urging them to appoint a White House chef who would promote American cooking.
The letter has been endorsed by 75 of the nation's leading chefs.
"We chefs from across the country," it says, "believe that good food, pure and wholesome, should be not just a privilege for the few, but a right for everyone. Good food nourishes not just the body, but the entire community."


In Time of Need: Helping the Poor Pay Their Bills
When she talks of the looming threat of losing her home and her lifelong belongings, her voice is filled with fear and uncertainty.
"The thought of having to sell my home and the only possessions I have left is very frightening," said the 63-year-old woman who lives alone in Sheepshead Bay, Brooklyn.
She insisted on anonymity out of embarrassment.


Saudi Joins Bidding for Circle K
In a continuing struggle for control of the bankrupt Circle K Corporation, the Commonwealth Oil Company said yesterday that it intended to file an amended reorganization plan for Circle K that includes $360 million of equity capital supplied by a Saudi prince.
Besides further complicating the situation surrounding Circle K's future, the emergence of Prince Turki bin Fahd bin Jalawi al-Saud now pits members of the royal families of Saudi Arabia and Kuwait in competition in the bidding for the Phoenix-based company, which owns thousands of convenience stores.


Virco Manufacturing reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Revco D.S.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 14


Give Diplomacy a Chance to Revamp Somalia; Clinton's Quagmire?
To the Editor:
For President Bush, Somalia is a win-win situation.
If he wraps it up in his remaining lame-duck Administration, he has another Desert Storm illusionary victory for the history books.
If the incursion fails, Mr.
Bush will have left Bill Clinton in a quagmire that will stymie his domestic efforts just as Republican cries in the 60's that Lyndon Johnson was soft on Communism kept him preoccupied with Vietnam, undercutting his Great Society programs.


Joe B. Love Dies at 88; Minister at 16 Colleges
The Rev.
Joe B. Love, a retired Methodist minister who served on 16 college campuses, was co-author of a theater piece and assembled an art book, died Friday at the Anna Jaques Hospital in Newburyport, Mass.
He was 88 years old and lived in Newburyport.
He died of congestive heart failure, his family said.


Andrew J. Kappell; Professor, 41
Andrew J. Kappell, an associate professor of English at Hofstra University, died on Sunday at St.
Vincent's Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 41 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of complications from AIDS, said Alice Levine, chairwoman of the English department at Hofstra.


Yeltsin Offers to Concede More Power to Congress
President Boris N. Yeltsin today offered the Russian Congress a say in choosing security and foreign ministers, apparently in an effort to gain critical votes for the embattled Acting Prime Minister, Yegor T. Gaidar.
The concession, and Mr.
Yeltsin's formal nomination of Mr.
Gaidar as Prime Minister, set the stage for another fateful encounter between the President and the 1,041-member Congress of People's Deputies, the highest legislative authority in Russia.


Nordson Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 1


Give Diplomacy a Chance to Revamp Somalia; Don't Stop Short
To the Editor:
The mission in Somalia as currently envisioned is too narrow and shortsighted.
The situation there, as in many other areas of third world conflict, did not occur overnight and will not be put right in a quick military action.
Nor will establishing security in the cities and along main highways be enough to allow Somalia to heal.


Odd's-n-End's Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Knicks Keep a Streak Alive While Nets Let One Expire
The Nets' six-game winning streak was sure to end at some point, and it did tonight against a very good Phoenix Suns team.
But it took one of the best basketball players in the world to do it.
Maybe you've heard of him?
Charles Barkley.
If the Nets learned anything from their 105-100 defeat at the Byrne Meadowlands Arena it is that they are indeed capable of playing with the best -- and would have beaten one of them if not for some mistakes down the stretch.


Culp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 1


Italian Town Hitches Its Wagon to a Pale Star: White Truffles
IN these remote reaches of Tuscany, what on earth -- or at least under it -- is there to talk about all through winter's long gloaming?
The answer is simple: truffles.
And it's serious talk, said Roberto Cappelli, who, at 26, is Italy's second-youngest mayor and an exponent of the truffle as a promotional device for this village, where an ancient castle balances on a bluff of rock.


Cogeco Inc. reports earnings for Year to Aug 31


Prices of Municipal Bonds Rise
The prices of actively traded municipal bonds rose about 1/4 point yesterday as investors moved to buy ahead of what could be a rally at the beginning of next year.
The demand was good enough that several new issues were repriced to lower yields.
Some of the buying, traders said, was in anticipation of the drop-off in new issuance that usually comes at the end of December and the begining of January, a factor that could push prices higher.


U.S. FORCES ARRIVE IN SOMALIA ON MISSION TO AID THE STARVING
A contingent of United States Marines came ashore here at dawn in assault helicopters and a hovercraft to secure the airport and port, leading a military relief operation to deliver food to the starving of Somalia.
Scattered small-arms fire was heard, apparently from the marines, as small personnel carriers and eight-wheeled tanks disgorged from the hovercraft at the port.


New York Philharmonic Celebrates 150 Years


A McDonald's Burger of the Garden Variety
No, Detroit is not about to diversify into the bicycle business, A.T.&amp; T. is not planning to sell postage stamps and Nike has no plans to sell saddle shoes.
It is true, though, that the McDonald's Corporation has begun test-marketing, yes, a vegetarian burger.
McDonald's, the company that has made the red-blooded American hamburger an international cultural icon on a par with Coca-Cola, is doing its best to play down its exploration of the meatless burger frontier.


Agency Gives Up Cruise Account
J.
Walter Thompson Chicago announced yesterday that it had resigned the Premier Cruise Lines account, with billings estimated at $4 million, after handling the account nearly three years.
J.
Steve Davis, general manager at Thompson's Chicago office, cited profitability as the main reason for the resignation.
He said his agency was awarded the account in February 1990, when billings were estimated at $10 million, adding that 1993 billings would continue to drop.
Mr.
Davis also said the agency felt it had greater opportunities elsewhere in the travel and leisure category.
"Premier was a blockage for us," he said.


Fleet Call Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Tale of Literary Mystery Wins The First Russian Booker Prize
In the old days, Russian writers writing in Russia won prizes named after Lenin and Stalin, and their works were judged on their value to the proletariat.
Tonight, a 55-year-old Russian writer won the first Russian Booker Novel Prize, an annual award made famous in Britain and now transplanted to a Moscow literary scene unaccustomed to the rituals of the glitterati.
After an evening of soft music, champagne and caviar, television cameras and speeches, Mark Kharitonov was named the winner of a prize of six million rubles, or $16,000, for "Lines of Fate," which has so far appeared only in a Moscow literary journal.


Link to an Illustrious Past, and a Possible Fortune
In 1984, Antoinette S. Beeks, a telephone company manager in Atlanta, received a call from her mother in Detroit.
Barely able to believe the words she spoke, Myrtha L. Delks told her daughter that a Detroit museum planned to hold an exhibit of works by Bill Traylor, a black artist, born into slavery, who had been dead nearly four decades.
Bill Traylor was Ms. Beeks's great-grandfather.


Yields Flat On C.D.'s for Week Ahead
Average yields on money market accounts and certificates of deposit at most banks in New York and around the country are virtually unchanged for the seven days beginning today, according to The Bank Rate Monitor.
Analysts said rates were unlikely to change much until President-elect Bill Clinton's inauguration next month.
"Every time a new positive economic indicator pops up, it lessens the possibility of strong Government intervention to stimulate the economy," said Robert K. Heady, publisher of The Monitor.
"And that tends to hold rates down." Treasury Bills Down
Moreover, the average discount rate on short-term Treasury bills dropped Monday at the weekly auction, reversing direction after eight consecutive weeks of increases.


Ark Restaurants Corp. reports earnings for 14wks to Oct 3


B&amp;H Maritime Carriers Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


HINDUS ARE FORCED FROM MOSQUE SITE
Cheerfully shouting slogans, thousands of militant Hindus who demolished a mosque here on Sunday left the town today on special buses and trains after they were driven from the disputed site by commandos in a predawn raid.
Before they were forced to leave, the Hindus had leveled the ground, built a brick platform and set up a temple of fluttering pink cloth and brown tarpaulin on the hillock where the Babri Masjid had stood for 464 years.


Fernandez Looking to Albany to Shore Up His Authority
Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez looked to the State Legislature in Albany yesterday to rescue his shaky authority as he braced himself for a possible rebuff by the members of his own Board of Education.
The seven-member central board meets today to discuss whether to uphold the Chancellor's suspension of a local board in Queens that refuses to use the curriculum guide that teaches respect for gay families.


Chancellor Fernandez's Foot
Those who know me know that my style is straightforward.
When I came here in 1990, I said you were going to love me or hate me.
So says New York City Schools Chancellor Joseph Fernandez, scrambling to ameliorate some blunt observations in his forthcoming autobiography about Gov.
Mario Cuomo, Mayor David Dinkins and the central Board of Education.


HA-LO Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Campus Journal; Fireworks and Dazzle At Panel Talk on Beauty
For a Princeton student, the scene must have been jarring.
On a stage normally occupied by tweedy professors lecturing about Keynesian economics, four women -- Linda Wells, editor of Allure magazine; Alisa Bellettini, producer of MTV's "House of Style" fashion program; Cindy Crawford, the top fashion model, and Camille Paglia, the author of "Sexual Personae" -- sat under the blaze of television camera lights Saturday and discussed beauty.


Univa Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Interpoint Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


At 78, Someone Who Is Still Beat Yet Undefeated
HERBERT HUNCKE, the prototypical hipster who helped name the Beat Generation after tutoring its literary founders in drug use, slang and spontaneity, is still carrying on in the East Village, defying all the actuarial tables at the age of 78.
You knock on the window of the basement apartment on East Seventh Street to be greeted by a suspicious stare.
"What's in it for me?" asks the man who as a 31-year-old thief and addict helped give William Burroughs his first shot of drugs and then met and lived with Allen Ginsberg, Jack Kerouac and Neal Cassady.
"I don't need any more fame," he says.


New York State Crosses the Hudson in Search of Taxes
As 3,000 New Yorkers who went shopping in New Jersey last weekend will soon discover, strangers were snooping around their cars: New York officials intent upon making them pay the sales tax they owe.
James W. Wetzler, State Commissioner of Taxation and Finance, sent four employees into parking lots across the Hudson River to write down the license numbers of cars with New York plates.


Americans Will Find Somalia Full Of Arms Provided by Superpowers
The American marines who landed in Somalia tonight have entered a country that is awash in weapons, many of them Soviet-made but also including American arms supplied to the African country by Washington in the 1980's.
Moscow was the principal weapons supplier to Somalia during the 1970's, and Soviet and Eastern European arms have continued to flow into the country in recent years from Libya and have been smuggled in from neighboring Ethiopia, current and former American officials say.


New Mexico Sanctioned
New Mexico's athletic program was placed on three years' probation yesterday by the National Collegiate Athletic Association for major violations within the men's track team and the now-defunct women's gymnastics program.
The sanctions were announced by university officials and the N.C.A.A.
Committee on Infractions chaired by a University of Virginia professor, ALAN WILLIAMS.


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L.
Penguins Defeat Jets  Mario Lemieux was one of three Pittsburgh players with a goal and two assists last night as the Penguins beat the Winnipeg Jets, 5-2, for their eighth victory in 10 games.
Lemieux increased his National Hockey League-leading totals to 32 goals and 78 points as the Penguins improved their record to 20-7-3.
Lemieux has had at least 2 points in 25 of his 29 games this season.
Ron Francis and Jaromir Jagr also had a goal and two assists each as the Penguins raised their home record to 11-1-2.
The Penguins are 7-2-1 in their last 10 games against Winnipeg.
Pittsburgh is 18-0-3 this season when leading after two periods. (AP) Blackhawks 3, Red Wings 2: Detroit lost its fourth straight game at home for the first time in three years as Michel Goulet's third-period goal was the difference for Chicago.
The last time Detroit lost four consecutive games at Joe Louis Arena was November 1989.
The Blackhawks, 3-0-1 in their last four games, outshot Detroit, 41-30, to give goalie Tim Cheveldae his first five-game losing streak since January 1991.
An apparent goal by Shawn Burr of the Red Wings with 5 minutes 39 seconds left in the game was waved off by Referee Dan Marouelli, who ruled Burr kicked the puck in. (AP) Oilers 3, Flames 1: The Oilers ended a six-game streak without a victory against their provincial rival as Bernie Nicholls's disputed goal in the first period helped Edmonton defeat Calgary.
With the Flames a man short, Craig Simpson sent a pass through the crease that hit Nicholls in the skate and went past goaltender Mike Vernon at 17:50 for a 2-1 lead.
Vernon complained to Referee Ron Hoggarth, who called for a video review.
Replays showed the puck went in off Nicholls's skate, but also that he was in the crease at the time.
Hoggarth allowed the goal to stand. (AP) TENNIS  Ivanisevic Triumphs  Goran Ivanisevic had 17 aces yesterday to beat Guy Forget of France in the opening round of the Grand Slam Cup in Munich, Germany, but was not happy with the playing surface.
"This court is too fast to enjoy playing," the big-hitting Croat said after defeating Forget, 7-5, 6-4.
In other matches, Henri Leconte of France produced the first upset in the $6 million tournament by beating Wayne Ferreira of South Africa, seeded fifth, 3-6, 6-3, 6-0.
Petr Korda of Czechoslovakia, seeded seventh, rallied to beat Wally Masur of Australia, 2-6, 7-5, 6-4.
In the last match of the day, another serve-and-volley specialist, Richard Krajicek of the Netherlands, seeded eighth, swept past Emilio Sanchez of Spain, 6-3, 6-2.
By reaching the quarterfinals, the winners made sure of collecting $300,000 in the richest tournament in the world.
First-round losers took home $100,000. (AP)


Sports of The Times; Club Owners: Centipedes With Pistols
THEY may have 100 feet apiece, like some slow-moving little creature, but sooner or later these baseball owners are going to shoot enough of their own feet to bring their game to an ugly halt.
They plugged themselves in their pedal extremities once again this week when they voted, by a pitiful and public 15-13 margin, to reopen negotiations on collective bargaining with one year left in their contract.


Royals Make Cone Game's Highest-Paid Pitcher
The broad and bold hunt for the top pitching that the Yankees have mounted in the last month suffered a setback today when David Cone signed an unprecedented, multiyear contract with the Kansas City Royals in baseball's latest spectacle of frenzied spending.
Cone, who was born and raised in Kansas City, Mo., and who was traded from the Royals to the Mets in 1987 in a lopsided five-player trade, agreed to a three-year deal for $18 million.
The package included a $9 million signing bonus, one paid up front and one that is the largest ever in baseball history.
The contract, for the moment, makes Cone the highest-paid pitcher.


General Kinetics reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Talks Off to a New Start, but Finish Seems Far Away
Paul Tagliabue, the National Football League commissioner, said the players' lawyers have been given a new proposal that he feels could pave the way for a collective bargaining agreement.
"We've had some good business-like discussions, and we're going to try to bring these discussions to a close within the next 10 days and hopefully produce something that's good for the players, the fans and the league," Tagliabue said, referring to talks with Gene Upshaw of the players association and Jim Quinn, the players' lead lawyer.
"If we don't get something done soon, we'll be back in court, which will be a poorer alternative to what we have."


Public &amp; Private; Whose Best Interests?
This is the sad story of a little girl, the four adults who want her, and the legal system that calls her by three initials and treats her as something even less significant than that.
"In the interest of B.G.C.," it says in all the documents.
B.G.C. stands for Baby Girl Clausen, although she is nearly 2 and the people she calls Mama and Papa are named DeBoer -- Roberta and Jan DeBoer of Ann Arbor, Mich.


Charles Brown; Dancer, 38
Charles Brown, a former soloist with the Martha Graham Dance Company, died on Dec. 1 at St.
Vincent's Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 38 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of AIDS, said a friend, Nancy Perlman.


60-Minute Gourmet
TO my taste, nothing is more satisfying on a wintry evening, or easier to prepare, than a simple roast of beef, pork or lamb.
My personal tastes have always leaned toward pork, not only because of its excellent flavor, but also because it can be exquisitely moist when cooked properly.
I recently prepared an easy weeknight dinner for four using a lean pork tenderloin.
Most pork in butcher shops and supermarkets is quite lean today, owing to modern breeding techniques that fit today's health consciousness.
Well-trimmed meat cut from the tenderloin of pork is less fatty than tenderloin of beef, and nearly as lean as skinless chicken breast.
A three-and-a-half--ounce portion of trimmed pork has 4.8 grams of fat; beef tenderloin has 9.6 grams, and chicken breast, 3.6.
The same portion of pork has 166 calories, compared with 207 for beef and 165 for chicken.


No Headline
"I'm worried about a young teen-age Somalian whose been chewing khat during the afternoon and all evening and wants to test the U.S. Marines. " -- COL.
GREG S. NEWBOLD, commander of the Marine expeditionary force.  [ A1:6. ]


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-17  MARINES LAND IN MOGADISHU
A contingent of U.S. marines arrived in the capital of Somalia in assault helicopters and a hovercraft to secure the airport and port, leading a military relief operation to deliver food to starving people.
A1  WAITING AND WONDERING
Practicing some survival Somali phrases -- and wondering what would happen in peacekeeping turned to confrontation -- were among the first missions of the first marines to land in Somalia.
A1


Nets' Contrast: Coleman and Anderson
From the day Derrick Coleman slammed his teammates in print last month, the new coaching staff of the New Jersey Nets has gotten what it considers to be a fairly good read of its two young franchise players, Coleman and Kenny Anderson.
It hardly likes what it sees of Coleman.
It loves the current view of Anderson.
Who would have expected Anderson, who at 22 is old enough to be a college senior, to stand up in the face of Coleman's tirade, become one of the team's voices of reason and then lead the Nets to six straight victories -- the most vicious response imaginable after Coleman's complaints that, among other things, he wasn't getting the respect he deserved as the team's "go-to" player?


Calloway's Nursery Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


First Cash Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Review/Television; Road Wars: The Carjacking Reality
It's crime-of-the-month time on "48 Hours." Tonight's report, "Steal That Car," chases down perps in Newark, San Diego, Houston, Wilmington, N.C., and St.
Petersburg, Fla.
In Newark, the much advertised problem is joy-riding youths, some not yet in their teens, who perform what are known on the streets as doughnuts and crazy eights in other people's cars.
The camera catches their movements, to sometimes confusing effect, from the windows of police cars, whose drivers are under orders not to give overly hot pursuit, for fear that the youngsters will blithely run down any pedestrians in the way.
Interviews with a few of the blank-faced youths leave one with a feeling of despair for them as well as for car owners.


Biosearch Medical Products Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Wine Talk
ABOUT a dozen wine enthusiasts gathered in a room in a nondescript Manhattan office building last Saturday morning to sample some Burgundies.
Well, not just some Burgundies.
There were 40 wines, all good, many exceptional, and all from the excellent 1990 vintage.
The wines were from the Burgundy Wine Company, a shop at 232 West 11th Street that specializes in wines of that region of France.
The daylong tasting was held at the International Wine Center at 32 West 29th Street, an organization that regularly provides a venue for such events.


Foe of Slovak Leader Asking For U.S. Aid for New Nation
A leader of the opposition in Slovakia, which is to become an independent republic in three weeks, said today that the United States should assist his country regardless of the relatively authoritarian character of its current Government.
In an interview, the opposition leader, Ivan Miklos, deputy chairman of the Civic Democratic Union party in Bratislava, said, "Isolation would be punishment more for democratic forces than for the Government."


Transmedia Network Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Justices Reinstate Civil Rights Suit In Seizure of Illinois Mobile Home
Taking a surprisingly broad view of the Fourth Amendment's protection against unreasonable search and seizure, the Supreme Court ruled unanimously today that government participation in an illegal eviction can amount to a violation of tenants' constitutional rights.
The decision reinstated a Federal civil rights suit against Cook County, Ill., brought by a family whose mobile home was dragged from its rented space by the landlord of a Chicago-area trailer park with the assistance of deputies from the county sheriff's office.


A New Elle Publisher Is Named
Hachette Magazines named Diane Wichard Silberstein as publisher of Elle yesterday.
Ms.
Silberstein, who has been advertising director of Conde Nast's Allure, will replace Gail Stone, who is leaving the company after a year as publisher.
Although Elle has the second-highest circulation of the four leading fashion magazines -- the others are Vogue, Harper's Bazaar and Mirabella -- some magazine consultants and media directors say it has lost both its momentum and its presence in the fashion field.
It was the only one of the four whose circulation was down in the first half of this year, and its advertising pages have been considerably lower this year.
A Challenger to Vogue
When Hachette started the United States edition of the magazine in 1985, Elle sent ripples of excitement through the fashion world with its vivaciousness, its stylish European sensibility and its clear appeal to young women, who had come to think of Vogue as a magazine for their mothers.


ARI Network Services reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


MANY WILL ESCAPE ETHICS RESTRICTION
After weeks of internal debate, transition officials for President-elect Bill Clinton said today that they had drafted ethics rules that would apply to fewer than half of the Administration's political appointees.
While the rules would be the strictest imposed by any Administration, transition officials said they did not go as far as some of them had expected because of a concern that they might scare away prospective appointees.


3 Historic Districts Are Created in TriBeCa
Three TriBeCa historic districts were created yesterday by unanimous votes of the New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission, which is seeking to preserve the 19th-century commercial and mercantile flavor that remains in that part of lower Manhattan.
Together, the three districts encompass 333 buildings and nine vacant lots.
Under the landmarks law, any demolition, exterior alteration or new construction in these districts would be subject to approval by the landmarks panel.


Serbs Cut Sarajevo Off From Airport and Urge Exodus
Serbian forces surrounding Sarajevo used tanks today to seize the road linking the airport with the heart of the city, blocking the only route for international aid and leaving its inhabitants completely cut off.
The attack was accompanied by a statement from Serbian nationalist leaders offering "safe passage" out of the Bosnian capital for any residents wishing to leave.
The Serbian nationalist news agency said the offer extended to people of "all ethnic backgrounds," including the Muslims who make up at least three-quarters of the Sarajevo's population of about 400,000, and warned that the exodus should begin within days.


Intermetco Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Topics of The Times; Extended Forecasts: Clouded
December comes in with some mixed extended weather forecasts.
Scientists making new studies of ancient minerals believe that the earth's next Ice Age, which has been scheduled to deep-freeze much of the North within a few centuries, may not come for another 10,000 years.
Scientists studying tree rings, another reliable recorder of climate changes, are finding no signs yet of the imminently predicted greenhouse effect, which could disastrously warm up the earth.


Topics of The Times; Vocal Veeps
In compiling the new 16th edition of Bartlett's "Familiar Quotations," the editor, Justin Kaplan, has created an incidental treasury of remarks by a class of men not generally known as phrase-makers -- U.S.
Vice Presidents.
For example, the new Bartlett's records for the first time John Nance Garner's notorious disdain for the position he held under Franklin D. Roosevelt: "The Vice Presidency isn't worth a pitcher of warm piss." (No, he didn't say "spit.")


Riots Interrupting the Worldly Clamor of Bombay
As large swaths of Bombay were engulfed by fires and riots that have killed at least 80 people in the last two days, much of the rest of India's biggest city assumed a haunting, most un-Indian silence today.
Both the violence and the hush were sharp departures from the regular rhythms of a place that has prided itself as a bustling center of finance and one of Asia's most cosmopolitan cities.


United Kingdom Fund Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Judge Rules Noriega Is Prisoner of War
A Federal judge in Miami ruled yesterday that Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega was a prisoner of war under the Geneva Conventions and that it was "open to serious question" whether he could receive the rights guaranteed by the treaty should he be sent to a maximum-security Federal penitentiary.
Acknowledging that he was venturing into uncharted legal waters, Judge William M. Hoeveler held yesterday in Federal District Court that the treaty's definition of a prisoner of war was broad enough to apply to Mr.
Noriega.


Long-Term Therapy Will Begin for Byrd
Dennis Byrd will begin an extensive physical therapy program later this week when he is moved to the Department of Rehabilitation Medicine at Mount Sinai Medical Center in Manhattan, the Jets said yesterday.
Byrd, a Jets defensive end, suffered a broken vertebra in his neck and remains paralyzed below the waist as the result of a collision with a teammate in a game on Nov. 29.


Bonds and the Giants Come to an Agreement
The two most controversial and economically significant issues that have developed at baseball's winter meetings -- the Barry Bonds contract and the owners' reopening of the collective bargaining agreement -- have turned on the uncompleted sale of the San Francisco Giants.
The incoming owners finally resolved their problem with the Bonds contract today, completing the six-year, $43.75 million deal by agreeing not to make Bob Lurie, the outgoing owner, liable for the contract if the new group does not gain approval.


Go-Video Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Counselor Says Woman in Abuse Case Sought Affection to Gain Friends
A high school guidance counselor testified today that the mildly retarded woman in the Glen Ridge sex assault case was desperate for friends and thought that it was a gesture of friendship when boys fondled her.
The counselor, Carol P. Bolden, who works at Columbia High School in Maplewood, N.J., said she had repeatedly advised the young woman when she attended Columbia in 1986 and 1987 that "her body was very, very private."


U.S. Orders Relief Workers Indoors for 48 Hours
Relief workers have been advised by the United States military to stay indoors for at least the first 48 hours after the arrival of American troops in the Somali capital, but many relief officials are concerned that the interruption will last longer, gravely affecting hundreds of thousands of hungry people.
A 48-hour hiatus is not expected to have a great effect on the delivery of aid, at least in Mogadishu, which has received more food and health care than any other area.


Mother Gets Neediest Cases' Help For Her Daughter's Rare Disease
They came alone, mother and daughter, unprepared for a foreign land where the winters are so harsh and the food, though plentiful, is too expensive.
But they thought doctors in America could cure the daughter's rare illness, so they stayed.
Since arriving in New York from Barbados about a year ago, Cicely Inniss has scraped by while her 13-year-old daughter, Odella, has undergone several operations to undo the crippling effects of Blaunt's Disease, which causes severe deformity of the knees.


Someone's In the Kitchen With . . . a Book
JADED as I am, I sometimes wonder whether the world really needs another cookbook.
Yet, cooking titles continue to pour off publishers' lists, especially now at gift-giving season, promising fulfillment from old ways or rejuvenation from new ones, cautioning healthful restraint or endorsing self-indulgence, introducing us to new products, new techniques, new ethnic cuisines.
Charts, polls and surveys all indicate that no one cooks anymore, yet someone out there is buying cookbooks -- a lot of someones, by the look of it -- and if the current offerings are anything to go by, the cooks are fearless in the kitchen and increasingly interested in alternatives to the standard meat-and-two-vegetables American dinner plate.


INSIDE
In the Spirit of Giving: The Neediest Cases
A mother and her daughter came to America in search of medical treatment for the child.
Now they get help with mounting expenses.
Page B8.
Noriega Is Ruled a P.O.W.
A judge said Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega was a prisoner of war and questioned whether he could be sent to a civilian prison.
Page A18.
The largest severance award in the history of New York, to a school superintendent, has prompted outrage in Albany.
Page B5.
Where There's No Beef
McDonald's, the company that made the hamburger an international cultural icon, is testing a meatless burger in the Netherlands.
Page D1.
Serbs Cut Sarajevo's Lifeline
Serbs seized the road from the airport to Sarajevo, blocking the only aid route and stirring fear of an all-out attack to take the city.
Page A3.
A Letterman Pact With CBS
David Letterman, NBC's late-late night star, accepted an offer for $16 million a year and his own show opposite Jay Leno at 11:30 P.M.
Page C17.
Struggling to Live for Art
A brief torment of hard times and then lifelong success as an artist: it is a dream for many, a reality for few.
First article of a series, page C17.


Atlanta Alters Golf Strategy for '96 Games
Organizers for the 1996 Olympic Games in Atlanta, who have encountered resistance to their plan to incorporate a golf competition at the Augusta National Club as a medal sport, will try a softer approach next week when they appear at a meeting of the International Olympic Committee in Lausanne, Switzerland.
Billy Payne, the president of the Atlanta Committee for the Olympic Games, will attend, but not put forth any proposals.
Instead, David Fay, executive director of the World Amateur Golf Council, will speak on Tuesday before the I.O.C. executive board on behalf of adding the sport for the '96 Games.
He will not suggest a specific site for the golf competition, since Augusta National's restrictive membership policies have been the center of a growing controversy in Georgia and in international sports circles.
The club has one black member and has never had a female member.


This Season, Bottom Line Is on Top
Although sale signs that promise 25 percent off are as ubiquitous as ever in stores this holiday season, retailers are dusting off and playing up time-honored techniques for snaring shoppers -- techniques that take less of a bite out of the bottom line.
The usual seasonal niceties are in place -- the holly boughs, the carols ringing from store sound systems and the extended shopping hours.
But there are some distinct additions over Christmases past.
Some retailers have set up makeshift coat checkrooms to relieve weary shoppers of wraps and packages; others are wrapping and delivering gifts free of charge.


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday about the cancellation of a $3.5 billion jet order by Northwest Airlines misidentified the maker of $2.7 billion worth of additional jets for which orders were being delayed.
It is the Boeing Company.


Hart Holding Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 29


For the Professional Mother, Rewards May Outweigh Stress
RESEARCH substantiates the popular image of stressed-out working mothers who juggle job and home -- the superwomen who have primary responsibility for child care, housework, family meals and recreation while struggling to earn a living or pursue a career.
But, according to a large new study of professional women in the fields of medicine, law, accounting and engineering, the challenge of coping with family demands does not keep women with careers from progressing professionally and deriving satisfaction from their demanding lives.


CUNY Plan Is Questioned By Faculty
City University Chancellor W. Ann Reynolds faced sharp questions and criticism last night from faculty members opposed to a proposal to overhaul the 19-college system.
At a meeting of the University Faculty Senate, Dr.
Reynolds heard the first of what is likely to be a long debate over the reorganization plan, as several faculty members told her they were concerned that the proposal would weaken the university academically.


People
*
Stephani Cook was named to the new post of senior vice president and director of strategic planning and research at Bloom FCA, New York.
She was previously an independent consultant. *
Jeanne Chinard was named senior vice president of advertising at Estee Lauder U.S.A., New York, succeeding June Leaman, now senior vice president for creative services at Estee Lauder Inc.
Ms.
Chinard was previously an executive vice president and senior creative director at Young &amp; Rubicam New York.


Telling the 'Yeas' From the 'Nays' In New Products
EVERY time a new product arrives in a supermarket, it comes with a long history, starting with somebody, somewhere, who hoped that this item would satisfy some deeply felt need.
And make a million.
This year, 16,000 new products have arrived in supermarkets and drugstores.
Have you been longing for Golden Crisp Tostada Bowls, Coffee-mate in hazelnut flavor, Nordic Mist sparkling water or Oreo pie crust?
They're here.
And that's just food.
Every conceivable household item is now sold through supermarkets, with each new offering reflecting something about our material soul: things like Shoe Dri shoe deodorizers, Scottissue made of recycled paper, and grease-releasing Tide.


Bill Filante, 63, Dies; California Lawmaker
Bill Filante, a California Assemblyman for 14 years who often parted ways with his Republican colleagues, died of brain cancer at his home in Terra Linda, Calif., today.
He was 63.
Dr.
Filante was a medical doctor.
He had been at home recovering from surgery performed in August, but a representative said he apparently suffered a stroke last week.


Heart-Bypass Survival Rates Up in New York, Study Says
Survival rates for heart bypass patients in hospitals across New York State improved significantly in the last three years, according to a report released today by the State Health Department.
The report details survival rates attributed to individual hospitals and doctors, providing a kind of consumer guide to the procedure.
Of the four hospitals with the best records, two are in New York City -- the Montefiore Medical Center's Weiler Hospital and Montefiore's Moses Division -- and two are on Long Island -- Winthrop-University Medical Center and University Hospital at Stony Brook.


Innovex Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Tom Pritchard; Editor, 64
Tom Pritchard, executive editor of King Features Syndicate, died on Friday at his home in Norwalk, Conn.
He was 64 years old.
He died after a heart attack, the syndicate said.


When Key Witness Is Retarded, Lawyers Face Delicate Task
If the mildly retarded young woman who prosecutors say was sexually assaulted in Glen Ridge, N.J., takes the stand to face the four young men on trial in the case, lawyers will be watching to see how the defense handles a most delicate task: smashing the credibility of an inherently sympathetic witness without alienating the jury.
They will probably try to do it, according to other defense lawyers, by continuing to cast a net of doubt about the woman's credibility before she appears, then trying to trip her up, gently, when she is on the stand.


Hillsborough Resources reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Random Access reports earnings for Year Aug 31


New Teller Machines That Listen
Someday, perhaps as soon as early 1994, account holders may be talking back to their automated teller machine -- and it won't be in disgust.
A.T.&amp;T. and its computer unit, NCR, the world's largest maker of computerized bank tellers, are developing a new machine that identifies clients by voice, rather than by passwords punched into a keyboard.
The new approach will do little to allay security concerns around teller machines.
Several well-publicized robberies and assaults have led to new laws around the country, including New York City, where security guards or video cameras will eventually be a requirement.


Stuarts Department Stores reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Funeral Set for Hughes
The funeral for Richard J. Hughes, former Governor and Chief Justice of New Jersey, will be held Monday at 11 A.M. at the Church of the Blessed Sacrament in Trenton.
Bishop John C. Reiss of the Trenton Diocese will officiate.
Burial will be at St.
Mary's Cemetery.
A public viewing will be held Sunday from 3 to 9 P.M. at St.
Mary's Cathedral, three blocks from the State Capitol.


Electro-Catheter Corp. reports earnings for Year to Aug 31


Statistical Portrait of the Nation; Marriage Patterns for Women


Redmen Scare UConn But Lose in Overtime
No one, least of all the first-year coach Brian Mahoney, had put too much stock in St.
John's 3-0 record.
After all, the victories were over St.
Francis of Brooklyn, Iona and Niagara -- not teams of Big East caliber.
Tonight, the young and relatively inexperienced Redmen faced up to reality, meeting Connecticut in the opening Big East game for both teams before a capacity crowd of 8,241 at the Gampel Pavilion.
In an exciting but sloppily played contest, Connecticut was extended into overtime by the scrappy Redmen before prevailing, 74-72.


A.L. Van Houtte reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 10


Robert Patrick Jr., 58, Tax Lawyer in Capital
Robert J. Patrick Jr., an international tax lawyer and a former official of the United States Treasury Department, died Friday at his home in Bethesda, Md.
He was 58 years old and also lived in Garrett Park, Md.
He died of melanoma, said a spokesman for Price Waterhouse, the accounting firm for whom Mr.
Patrick was director of international tax law at its Washington office.


Metro-Richelieu reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


Daily Challenge to Be True to One's Dream
When Donato Mancini moved into his cold-water loft in Greenpoint, Brooklyn, the idea was to stay a year, then move on to more comfortable quarters.
That was in March 1980.
"Almost 13 years without a hot shower," Mr.
Mancini said with a rueful smile, gesturing out over his studio.
For nearly 13 years, Mr.
Mancini has cooked his meals on a hot plate and an electric casserole.
Each morning, he has heated water on the hot plate and taken a sponge bath.
And every day, he has picked up charcoal or brush to work on drawings and paintings that pile up in his loft, most of them unsold and unseen.
This has been his routine, in various locations around the city, since he left with an art degree from Pratt Institute in Brooklyn in 1970. 'It's Very Picturesque'
The artist toiling away in a garret was already a cliche when Puccini wrote "La Boheme." But Mr.
Mancini is the genuine article.
For several years, Jock Truman, a retired New York gallery owner, put Mr.
Mancini's loft on a shopping tour he organized for wealthy collectors.
"He'd always stop at my place first," Mr.
Mancini said.
"It's very picturesque. You look at it and say, 'Yeah, this is an artist's studio.' "


Catherines Stores reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Alpine Lace Brands Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 24


Review/Theater; From Birth to Death, Via Allan Sherman
Those who were older than 3 in 1963 must surely remember "Hello Muddah, Hello Fadduh," Allan Sherman's epistolary novelty hit about a homesick boy who pleads to his parents for rescue from the evils of Camp Granada.
Its crowning comic twist was Sherman's setting of a rhymed list of the summer camp's imaginary horrors to the tune of Ponchielli's "Dance of the Hours," from "La Gioconda." The absurdity of the juxtaposition was underscored by the sound of Sherman's voice bellowing a catalogue of complaints in a dialect that suggested Alan King doing the Dead End Kids.
Ponchielli's ethereal aria has never quite recovered from the assault.
Appropriately enough, "Hello Muddah, Hello Fadduh" is the title of a jolly new revue at Circle in the Square Downtown, which features more than two dozen musical parodies by Sherman, who died in 1973.
The songs, which gently satirize suburban Jewish life in the 1960's, follow the adventures of a middle-class everyman named Barry Bockman (Jason Graae) from birth to old age in a Florida retirement community.


DEP Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Vicon Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Shawn's Colleagues Remember a Golden Age
"I think those of us who knew him agreed that it was not the same as if it had been in the old place," said Andy Logan, who was hired by William Shawn at The New Yorker 50 years ago.
"You don't see him coming around the corner as you would have if we had still been there," said Ms.
Logan, who has been covering City Hall for The New Yorker since Fiorello H. La Guardia was Mayor.


Amid a Lost Season, Giants Find Brown
Rookie quarterback Dave Brown may start before the season ends, Coach Ray Handley said today, and the Giants began making preparations for that likelihood by increasing Brown's workload in practice.
Handley said that although he would not jeopardize a chance to win this Saturday's game between the slumping Giants (5-8) and the Phoenix Cardinals (3-10) in Tempe, Ariz., he planned to give playing time to Brown.
And he said he might start Brown in one of the two remaining games after that -- against the Kansas City Chiefs or the Philadelphia Eagles.


Global Ocean Carriers Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Hawks' Wilkins 23 for 23 At Line
Hawks 123, Bulls 114
ATLANTA, Dec. 8 (AP) -- Dominique Wilkins scored 42 points, including a National Basketball Association-record 23 free throws without a miss, as the Atlanta Hawks beat the Chicago Bulls, 123-114, tonight with deadly free-throw shooting.
The Hawks made 39 of 40 free throws, including their final 31 after the rookie Adam Keefe missed in the opening minute of the second quarter.


Grilli Property Group reports earnings for Year to Aug 31


Quick Report Is Expected on Schott's Remarks
The committee investigating alleged racist and anti-Semitic remarks by Marge Schott set no timetable today for completion of its inquiry, but one member said, "It won't take a month."
The four-member panel presented a progress report at a meeting of the major league executive council.
Afterward, Douglas Danforth of the Pittsburgh Pirates, a member of the panel, said they had talked with some people about the alleged comments of the Cincinnati Reds' owner and "we're going to talk to quite a few more people."


Shultz Calls for Military Intervention in Bosnia
Former Secretary of State George P. Shultz has advocated military intervention in Bosnia and Herzegovina, urging that American forces cooperate with the North Atlantic Treaty Organization to stop what he called the "hideous things that take place" under the guise of "ethnic cleansing."
In a speech before the International Rescue Committee at the Pierre Hotel in Manhattan on Monday, Mr.
Shultz proposed a four-part plan to try to end the fighting in Bosnia.


JG Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 24


Andrew Stein and the $50,000 Question
Joan Rivers, the evening's star attraction, stayed only 30 minutes and told only one joke.
But that wasn't the only thing disappointing about New York City Council President Andrew Stein's $1,000-a-head gala earlier this week in the Rainbow Room atop Rockefeller Center.
Mr.
Stein's party, ending a busy fund-raising week for all three mayoral candidates, raised $1 million for his planned mayoral campaign next year.
But like his extravaganza with Frank Sinatra in January, the gala was a reminder of his refusal to play by the same rules as his opponents.
Unlike Mayor David Dinkins and the Republican Rudolph Giuliani, Mr.
Stein refuses to participate in the city's system of public campaign financing.


Negotiations Deadlocked on Bailing Out the M.T.A.
Negotiations aimed at bailing out the Metropolitan Transportation Authority and preventing a possible fare increase on subways and buses remained deadlocked today after the first face-to-face meeting on the issue between Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and leaders of the State Legislature.
Mr.
Cuomo continued to use the threat of a looming fare increase -- perhaps as much as 25 cents as soon as April 1 -- as leverage to push the Legislature to address a host of complex transportation financing issues in a special session that would be held this month.


Pall Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Leasing Is Main Weapon In Battle for Top-Selling Car
WILL the Ford Taurus overtake the Honda Accord as America's best-selling car?
With just a few weeks left in the year, Ford has its work cut out.
Through the end of November, Ford was lagging by roughly 15,000 cars.
But perhaps more interesting than the ultimate winner of these bragging rights is the marketing strategy of both auto makers of using low-cost leases to pump up sales.
Although the lease deals are fairly close at first blush -- $199 a month for the Accord and $248 a month for the Taurus -- they are yielding different and noteworthy results in satisfying consumers.


Pacific Physician Services reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Perry L. Ruston, 86, Conde Nast Chairman
Perry Lounsbery Ruston, a former president and chairman of Conde Nast Publications Inc., died on Sunday at his winter home in Delray Beach, Fla.
He was 86 years old.
He died of heart failure, his family said.


Safety Panel Opens Inquiry Into G.M. Pickups
The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration opened an investigation today to determine whether there is a defect in the design of General Motors pickup trucks built from 1973 to 1987 that poses the danger of fire during a crash.
The investigation is the first formal step in an administrative proceeding to determine the safety of the popular G.M. pickup truck, a process that could take years to resolve and could cost the automaker and the Government hundreds of millions of dollars.
The Federal agency simultaneously solicited public comment for a review of whether standards covering vehicle fuel tanks were tough enough.


Gretzky Back on Skates
The Great One is back on skates.
WAYNE GRETZKY, the National Hockey League's all-time leading scorer, skated for the first time since being sidelined with a back injury and experienced no pain.
The Los Angeles Kings announced yesterday that Gretzky skated for about 40 minutes on Monday at their practice facility in Culver City, Calif., under the direction of doctors.


Harold Yassky; Developer, 62
Harold Yassky, a former hotelier and developer, died Saturday at Humana Biscayne Hospital in North Miami Beach, Fla.
He was 62 years old and lived in North Miami Beach.
Mr. Yassky died of lung cancer, said a son, Marc Yassky.


Tipperary Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Ames Department Stores reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 24


Deaths Mount in Rioting in Indian Cities
Hundreds more were killed today as violent Muslim protests against the destruction of a 16th-century mosque by Hindu fanatics on Sunday engulfed dozens of cities and towns across the expanse of India.
More than 400 have been reported killed in two days of rioting, but the actual number is widely believed to be much higher.


Bon-Ton Stores Inc. reports earnings for 13wks to Oct 31


Police Admit Error In Arrest of Lindros
ERIC LINDROS was mistakenly handcuffed after surrendering to the police on a minor assault charge last week, Durham Regional Police said yesterday in Toronto.
One of the arresting officers asked the 19-year-old Philadelphia Flyers rookie if he would co-operate and wear the handcuffs, the police said.


KCS Energy Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Market Place; Hitching Toys To Hit Movies
IT'S white-knuckle season for the nation's toy manufacturers.
After months of planning and preparation, the Christmas shopping season is well under way, and there is little the toy makers can do now but sit back and hope their long-formulated strategies pay off.
One of the most popular strategies is also one of the most risk-free: figure out which big-budget children's movie is likely to be a hit and then fight to get the licensing agreement to make the toys based on the movie.
That's why many toy makers are drooling over the deal struck by Mattel Inc. with the Walt Disney Company to make dolls and action figures based on the hit movie "Aladdin."


CAM Data Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


The Pop Life
Remembering Roy Orbison
Up to the last minute, Barbara Orbison wasn't sure that she could bear to complete the music left behind by her husband, Roy, who died in 1988.
"I loved the songs but it was still a tough decision," Mrs.
Orbison said recently in an interview from Los Angeles.
"Any time you finish something, it's gone in a way. Then a different form of grief, sense of loss, sets in. But I worked through it."


Books of The Times; Of Black Troops and a White Colonel
Blue-Eyed Child of Fortune  The Civil War Letters of Col.
Robert Gould Shaw  Illustrated.
Edited by Russell Duncan. 421 pages.
University of Georgia Press. $29.95.
Free at Last  A Documentary History of Slavery, Freedom and the Civil War Illustrated.
Edited by Ira Berlin, Barbara J. Fields, Steven F. Miller, Joseph P. Reidy and Leslie S. Rowland. 571 pages.
The New Press. $27.50.
Dedicating the sculpture by Augustus Saint-Gaudens that stands on Boston Common to Col.
Robert Gould Shaw and the black soldiers of the 54th Massachusetts Infantry Regiment, William James said: "There they march, warm-blooded champions of a better day for man. There on horseback among them, in his very habit as he lived, sits the blue-eyed child of fortune." James Russell Lowell composed an elegy for these black riflemen and their young white colonel, who died in battle in 1863, and a century later another Lowell, Robert, wrote his poetic tribute, "For the Union Dead."


Despite Good News, Clinton Says, Economic Ills Remain
President-elect Bill Clinton, fearful that recent optimistic economic reports could blunt public pressure for change, cautioned today that hard times were probably not over and that painful long-term economic reforms were still required.
In a speech before newspaper managers, in meetings with Congressional leaders and again at a news conference, Mr.
Clinton repeated the theme he has been sounding more and more in recent days: that the public should not reduce pressure on Congress for sweeping changes because of optimistic interpretations of recent economic data.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Commonwealth Oil filed an amended reorganization plan for Circle K that includes $360 million of capital from a Saudi prince.
But the convenience store chain still favors an offer from another group, which includes a member of Kuwait's royal family.  [ Page D1. ]


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day on Saturday about proposals in Congress for an investment tax credit for businesses misstated the retroactive date proposed by legislators for the credit.
It is Dec. 3.


Celluar Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Eagle Hardware &amp; Garden Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 30


Players' Economist Criticizes Report
In a sharply worded 10-page "supplemental statement," a member of the committee that studied baseball's economics for two years challenges the committee's conclusion that the industry is on the brink of economic trouble.
Henry Aaron, an economist with the Brookings Institution and no relation to the Hall of Fame player, concluded that baseball is "in political chaos, bereft of any governing mechanism by which clubs can agree to share revenues among themselves in a fashion that will permit clubs both to compete equally on the field and to have an equal chance to make positive operating revenues."


Equity Oil Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Music; The Philharmonic's Birthday Party
The party the New York Philharmonic gave itself on Monday night for its 150th birthday began with an elephant from the Big Apple Circus performing in the Fountain Plaza at Lincoln Center and ended with the audience at Avery Fisher Hall offering a standing ovation and singing "Happy Birthday" just before it was showered with confetti shot from cannons.
The hall's balconies were draped with white cloth, with gold fringes that rustled lightly; in front of the orchestra was a thick border of lilies and orchids.
A buffet preceded the event, and Champagne followed it.
The entire concert (except for the prefatory show on the plaza) was also broadcast nationwide on PBS.
For the nation's oldest orchestra, it was a wholehearted celebration, seemingly not the sort of occasion for solemn assessment.
The musical festivities were meant to be as overwhelming as the confetti.
Each of the three living conductors who have served as music directors of the Philharmonic -- Pierre Boulez (1971 to 1977), Zubin Mehta (1978 to 1991) and Kurt Masur, the incumbent -- conducted the orchestra in a signature piece that best served his strengths and represented his contributions to the New York Philharmonic tradition.
This was an extraordinary idea.


Fluor Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Dec. 4
Nov. 27
Dec. 6
1992
1992
1991
Gasoline production, daily
7.4
7.4
7.3
Distillate production, daily
3.3
3.4
3.0
Gasoline stocks
212.8
212.3
211.5
Distillate stocks
142.4
138.4
141.4
Crude imports, daily
6.2
6.3
6.7
Product imports, daily
1.8
2.1
1.5
Crude stocks
324.8
325.1
346.1
Crude production, daily
7.0
7.0
7.3
Refinery utilization (%)
89.7
89.2
82.3
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Billy Graham To Lead Prayer
The Rev.
Billy Graham, the evangelist who has been spiritual adviser to several Presidents, will deliver the invocation and benediction at the inauguration of President-elect Bill Clinton and Vice President-elect Al Gore, organizers of the event announced today.
Mr.
Graham, like Mr.
Clinton a Southern Baptist, was especially close to President Richard M. Nixon but has long advised Presidents, beginning with Dwight D. Eisenhower and including Lyndon B. Johnson.


Company Promises a No-Effort TV-Rating Device
Seeking again to compete with A. C. Nielsen in the national ratings business, the Arbitron Company announced yesterday that it was developing a high-technology device for keeping track of television and radio audiences.
The device, which would take advantage of the latest military technology, would be worn by viewers, beeper-style.
It would keep tabs on what its wearers are watching and listening to by "reading" an inaudible code etched into a program's sound track.


Metro-North Train Hits Car, Injuring 2
Two New Canaan, Conn., women were seriously injured last night when their station wagon was struck by a one-car Metro-North train on the New Canaan branch of the New Haven line.
Sgt.
Gilbert Machado of the Metro-North police identified the injured as Valentina Barassi, 18 years old, the driver of the vehicle, and a passenger, Maria DePaz Figgini, also 18.
Ms.
Barassi was admitted to Norwalk Hospital.
Ms.
Figgini was admitted to Stanford Hospital.


Letterman Accepts CBS Offer to Oppose Leno on Late TV
David Letterman has accepted an offer from CBS to leave NBC for his own late-night talk and entertainment show opposite Jay Leno at 11:30 P.M. on weeknights.
It was the second bit of bad news for NBC this week: the network learned on Monday that it will lose its highest-rated series, "Cheers," at the end of the season.


Report Cards: Some Say There Must Be a Better Way
Emily Donahue aced her eighth-grade report card last month, so she took a friend to see "Home Alone 2" and her dad gladly paid for the tickets.
Douglas and Keith Murray's parents bought them a new game for their computer because they had made the honor role.
Nicholas Urban's parents told him that good grades are their own reward, but he got his Aunt Kathy in New Jersey to give him a dollar for every "A" he brings home.
For these students at Brennan Middle School in Attleboro, Mass., report- card day is a snap.
But some of their classmates dread it.
Douglas Murray said he knew one boy whose father hit him when he brought home a bad grade.


Allcity Insurance Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Stanley C. Myers, 87, Leading Miami Lawyer
Stanley C. Myers, founder of the Greater Miami Jewish Federation and a prominent civic figure in South Florida for more than 60 years, died Friday at Mount Sinai Hospital in Miami Beach.
He was 87 years old and lived in Miami Beach.
Mr. Myers died of cancer, said his daughter, Judy Gilbert-Gould of Miami.


Give Diplomacy a Chance to Revamp Somalia
To the Editor:
"Do It Right in Somalia" (editorial, Dec. 1) points out that the long-term goal for the United Nations in Somalia is "to help Somalis build a new society." It is imperative that this objective of conflict resolution not be secondary at any time during the humanitarian intervention in that country.
Otherwise, outside forces may leave Somalia a few months from now in even worse shape than they found it.


Deere &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Food Notes
Traditions of Brooklyn
Tomorrow at 6:30 P.M., the Brooklyn Historical Society will be host to an event featuring holiday dishes based on a variety of African cuisines to illustrate the food traditions of different groups that are represented in the borough.
Deedee Dailey, a caterer from Sheepshead Bay, will give a presentation and serve samples of an assortment of dishes.
The event is $1 for members of the society, $5.50 for nonmembers.
Reservations can be made by calling (718) 624-0890.
Some tickets will be sold at the door.
The society is situated at 128 Pierrepont Street (at Clinton Street) in Brooklyn Heights.
No More Wine Drips
Some people serve white wine with everything because it does not stain the tablecloth.
But now they can safely pour some merlot with a steak.
Drop Stop, a new gadget created in Denmark, prevents wine from dripping from the bottle as it is poured.
It consists simply of a flexible disk of silvered plastic that can be curved and fitted into the neck of any wine bottle.
It works.
And it can be reused.
A card with three Drop Stop disks is $3.95.
Postage for each order is $2.
It can be ordered from Hill Marketing, P.O.
Box 2323, Oakland, Calif. 94614.
Decorating With Chefs
What the Ballroom, the restaurant that was once on West Broadway (and is now at 253 West 28th Street), did for the art world with its giant mural portraying SoHo art personalities, the Chefs Cuisiniers Club, 36 East 22d Street, is doing for chefs with a painting by Mark Hess showing famous chefs and restaurateurs.
The painting, being unveiled tomorrow evening, was commissioned by Charles Palmer, an owner of the restaurant.
The 9-by-4 1/2-foot work was done in a style that combines elements of the Italian Renaissance with carefully wrought details of Dutch and Flemish masters and contemporary American photorealists.
It's as eclectic as today's food.
The 10 figures in the mural represent Mr.
Palmer's personal pantheon.
Legends like Marie-Antoine Careme and Auguste Escoffier, French notables like Paul Bocuse, Georges Blanc, Alain Ducasse and Pierre Troisgros are represented, as are the late Jean Troisgros and Alain Chapel.
Wolfgang Puck from California and Sirio Maccioni of Le Cirque in Manhattan are also in the painting.
Prefab Gingerbread
December may be a good month for housing starts in the gingerbread sector.
This year, there are a number of choices in ready-made, ready-to-be-made and do-it-yourself models.
Kits with prebaked gingerbread parts ready to assemble include one from Delicious Promotions, sold at Dean &amp; DeLuca, 560 Broadway (at Prince Street) in SoHo.
The kit, $36, includes icing mix and a pastry bag, plus gingerbread roofs and other pieces.
It can also be ordered by calling (800) 362-7144.
There is no additional charge for delivery.
A gingerbread kit to make a 10-inch house contains gumdrops in addition to icing mix and cookie parts and is available from Hauser Chocolatier, 18 Taylor Avenue, Bethel, Conn. 06801.
It is $20.50 plus $5.50 shipping.
Telephone: (203) 794-1861.
Decopac in Minneapolis is selling official Mickey Mouse gingerbread house kits.
The kit, $19.50 plus $4 shipping, makes an eight-and-a-half-inch house and includes Mickey and Minnie Mouse figures.
Six houses are $60 including shipping.
Telephone: (800) 332-6722.
For those with more money than time, there are a number of choices in ready-made gingerbread houses.
Miniature gingerbread cottages, lighthouses, horse barns and Bavarian houses are the specialty of Bakers and Builders, 4851 Melvin Heights Road, Camden, Me. 04843.
The structures range from 3 to 7 inches high, and some are also available in a spiced chocolate variety.
Prices start at $21.95 for four miniature cottages and go up to $59.95 for the 7-inch Bavarian house.
Shipping is extra.
Telephone: (207) 236-4871.
There is even a Hanukkah gingerbread house from Better Bakers, 634 Wildwood Road West, in Northvale, N.J.
There are two sizes decorated with candies and Stars of David for $35 and $75.
These are not kosher homes.
The bakery is not kosher.
Milk is used in making the house.
Two new books give step-by-step instructions with patterns for making an assortment of gingerbread buildings, including houses and churches, and Christmas ornaments and the like.
"Festive Gingerbreads" by Evelyn Howe Fryatt (Sterling/Tamos, $14.95) is devoted strictly to Christmas constructions.
"Gingerbread Things to Make and Bake" by Teresa Layman and Barbara Morgenroth (Harry N. Abrams, $29.95) has a more varied array including stores, a mill, a carousel and a Noah's ark.
Nationwide Zagat
THIS year, in addition to its annual pocket-size survey of New York restaurants, the Zagat Survey has published a pair of guides to restaurants in cities nationwide.
One lists the top restaurants in each of 29 major cities.
The other covers restaurants offering the best value in 22 cities.
The data in the nationwide surveys were complied from individual surveys done within the last two years in each of the cities.
Tim Zagat, the publisher, said editors in each city had also verified the information.
These guides are $12.95 each in bookstores or by calling (800) 333-3421, and are handy for travelers.
The 1993 New York City survey, listing 1,248 restaurants, is also in bookstores, for $9.95.


Scheib (Earl) Inc. (A) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Nabors Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


PHP Healthcare reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Rykoff-Sexton Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Accounts
*
Fisher-Price, East Aurora, N.Y., to Orsatti &amp; Parrish, Boston, as the toy company's first direct-marketing agency.
Orsatti will work with Fisher-Price's ad agency, Waring &amp; LaRosa, New York.
Billings were not disclosed.


Book Notes
Baker's Memoirs
James A. Baker 3d is doing what many high-ranking Government officials are doing these days as they prepare to leave office: planning to write a memoir about his experiences as a top player in the Ronald Reagan and Bush Administrations.
The book hardly sounds like a Donald P. Regan-style kiss-and-tell about Mr.
Baker's years in Washington and politics.
"The primary focus of the book will be on Mr. Baker's term as Secretary of State and about the unprecedented changes in the world during his tenure," said Robert Barnett, a Washington lawyer representing Mr.
Baker's literary interests.


Sliwa's Angels Empowered New Yorkers in the Fight on Crime; Media's Blessing
To the Editor:
"Curtis Sliwa's Confession" (editorial, Nov. 27) is incorrect in citing fear as the reason ordinarily savvy New Yorkers were taken in by this P. T. Barnum.
While there is no escaping the power of the public's fear of crime and its desperation to accept almost anything that promises relief, fear was not the public's only reason in accepting the Guardian Angels.
The news media in their reporting gave them the legitimacy that led to public acceptance.


Clinton Returns to Capitol, And Bouquets All Around
The opening line got a laugh.
The closing line drew volunteers.
And in between, when President-elect Bill Clinton offered familiar nostrums like "my door will always be open," House Democrats believed him as if the prescriptions were miracle drugs.
The second appearance of the President-elect on Capitol Hill, like the first two weeks ago, displayed healthy doses of mutual flattery and insistent commitments of cooperation.


Indicted Congressman Withstands Challenge
Sweeping aside pleas from freshmen to raise the ethical standards of Congress, House Republicans today dropped a proposal that would have removed their ranking member from the powerful Appropriations Committee because of his indictment on racketeering charges.
Representative Joseph M. McDade of Pennsylvania, who was charged in May with extorting bribes and favors valued at more than $100,000 from military contractors, heralded the vote as a personal victory.
"I'm deeply gratified by the show of support by my colleagues," he said, calling the vote an endorsement of "the sanctity of the presumption of innocence."


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
7.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
4.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.62
2.92
4.35
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.24
3.24
4.18
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.31
3.34
4.19
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.35
6.42
6.70
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.43
7.44
7.78
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.45
8.45
8.80
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.38
6.39
6.86
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Pop and Jazz in Review
Little Richard
Tramps 45 West 21st Street Chelsea Through tonight
TXT&gt;"Yeah! Ow-ow-ow-ow! Whoo!" Little Richard's first words to his audience on Tuesday night were barely words at all.
Opening his first New York club engagement in 25 years, they were the sound of the wild-eyed, edge-of-anarchy exuberance that Richard Penniman brought to rock-and-roll in 1955, and that he can still summon at the age of 60 (his trumpeter brought him a birthday cake midset).
Neither his audience nor his band could be sure what he would do next, whether he would banter, lead a sing-along, play a country song or tear into one of his hits.
"The beautiful Little Richard," as he introduced himself, was a spectacle.
He wore a rhinestone-ornamented fuchsia jacket that matched his boots, with his curly hair ready for shaking and his face a mask of makeup he soon sweated through.
Behind the glitter was a hard-pumping boogie-woogie piano player and a singer who can bend notes into bluesy, sultry curves and whoop in a full-tilt falsetto.
His band isn't old-fashioned; it is heavier on the bass (with two bassists) and closer to guitar power chords than the backup on his mid-1950's hits.
Once Little Richard's piano was raised to its rightful place in the mix, the music had a joyful kick, modernized but not denatured.
While Little Richard's songs may have seemed more startling in the button-down mid-1950's, they haven't lost their disruptive power.
They are celebrations of and incitements to uninhibited pleasure, to "rip it up," to "have some fun tonight," hinting at sexual and other delights so great that mere language can't contain them; the only equivalent is speaking in tongues, with nonsense rhymes and with the holler that broke through "Long Tall Sally" and "Good Golly Miss Molly." There's anger, too, behind the rasp of "Rip It Up" or "Keep a-Knockin'."
Even as Little Richard's songs embrace chaos, there's no mistaking his control.
On the piano his left hand is rock steady, his right a jackhammer of triplets and tremolos.
His singing is precise; in a cornball country ballad, "No Place Like Home" (dedicated to his mother), his inflections shifted from blues to country, while the lonely "Send Me Some Lovin' " ached with loneliness.
Bluesy phrases that sounded improvisatory would return in identical shape in the next verse; every whoop was placed in the rolling rhythm like a demolition team's sticks of TNT.
Little Richard never pretends to be anything but a legend.
On Tuesday night, he brought Lloyd Price (who got Little Richard's hit-making career started) on stage to sing "Lawdy Miss Clawdy." He also tossed off truncated versions of "Tutti Frutti" (tossing rhinestone pins to the crowd) and "Rip It Up," and he took time for shtick, offering one-liners like "I have never been conceited: I'm convinced." But his legend is earned, and he reclaimed it whenever he tore into a song.


Chrysler Notes Are Well Received
The Chrysler Corporation, whose stock is rising as the company's outlook has improved, returned to the bond market yesterday to borrow on the strength of its own name for the first time since 1990.
And the company got a good reception.
Chrysler had initially wanted to sell $250 million of seven-year notes, and the early price talk in the market suggested that the yield would be 9.75 percent, according to James B. Quigley, managing director of the global financial desk at Merrill Lynch, which underwrote the issue with Salomon Brothers.


Garden Q. &amp; A.
Orange Trees for Indoors
Q.
Can you tell me where I can buy an orange tree for indoors?
Are there special instructions for growing it? -- Ann Kissel Grun, East Hampton, L.I.
A.
Citrus plants are believed to have originated in Southern Asia and entered Europe from China around the first century A.D.
The genus includes a number of species of small evergreen trees or shrubs -- the orange, grapefruit, lemon, lime and tangerine, and many hybrids.
In temperate climates they make handsome potted plants, with fragrant leaves and flowers and, when conditions suit them, edible fruit.
Potted citrus plants do best in full sun in rich, well-drained, slightly acid soil that should be kept moist, but not soggy.
For good flowers and fruit, feed from spring through autumn.
You can find plants at local garden centers, but the best selection is from specialty nurseries.
These include Four Winds Growers, P.O.
Box 3538, Fremont, Calif. 94539 (510) 656-2591 (send a self-addressed, stamped, business-size envelope for a brochure); Pacific Tree Farms, 4301 Lynwood Drive, Chula Vista, Calif. 91910 (619) 422-2400 (free catalogue), and Garden World, 2503 Garfield Street, Laredo, Tex. 78043 (512) 724-3951 (catalogue $1).
Donald F. Dillon, owner of Four Winds Growers, recommended the Meyer lemon; a dwarf navel orange, the Washington, and a dwarf grapefruit, the Oro Blanco.
Scented Geraniums
Q.
I grow several kinds of scented geraniums and would love to know something of their uses. -- Joanne Egan, Sacramento, Calif.
A.
The scented geraniums (Pelargonium species) flower only briefly, but have foliage scented like nutmeg, mint or lemon that is useful in potpourri, cakes and jellies.
A pamphlet published by the Western Reserve Unit of the Herb Society of America is available from Shady Hill Gardens, 821 Walnut Street, Batavia, Ill. 60510 (708) 879-5665.
It costs $3.95, plus $1 handling.
Shady Hill specializes in scented geraniums (catalogue, $2).
Address questions to Garden
Q.&amp; A., The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York 10036.
Those of general interest will be published.
Unpublished questions cannot be answered individually.


Ex-Players Accuse Huskies on Benefits
Cash, jobs and benefits were provided to University of Washington football players by boosters in apparent violation of National Collegiate Athletic Association rules, The Los Angeles Times said in yesterday's editions.
The newspaper interviewed more than two dozen former players and others familiar with the Washington program, and found that two prominent Husky boosters have allegedly dispensed much of the cash and jobs.


Ex-Official Keeping $963,883, Lawyer Says
A Long Island school superintendent who received a $963,883 payment upon retiring in September has "no intention" of returning any of the money, his lawyer said today.
The payment, the highest on record in New York State, was attacked on Tuesday as excessive by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and by the State Education Commissioner, Thomas Sobol, who said it was possibly illegal.


Putting Out Unwelcome Mat for Burglars
THE security of your home is a concern that never goes away, whether you are relaxing in your living room or vacationing 1,500 miles away on a beach: you want your property, valuables and family safe, yet you don't want an alarm system that will cost a year's college tuition.
"You can look at a system as an extravagant expense or as you would life insurance," said Eric Rios, an alarm technician for the R.B.D.
Lock and Alarm Corporation in Manhattan.
"You are gambling that you won't be hit if you have an alarm, not that you will be hit."


Gifts to Make Gardeners You Know Glow
Whether the gardener on your holiday list has a passion for rock plants in a country retreat or houseplants on a city sill, the choice of potential gifts is considerable.
For the horticulturally inclined, ideas here range from the practical (a classic villa urn) to the odd (praying mantis egg cases), the elegant (a 19th-century wire plant stand) to the hard to find (botanical prints).
And with gardeners there's rarely a worry about color or fit.


High Court in Serbia Clears Way For a Challenge to the President
Serbia's Supreme Court gave this country's Prime Minister the final go-ahead today to run against Serbia's nationalist President, Slobodan Milosevic, in elections set for Dec. 20.
The Supreme Court reversed a decision made over the weekend by the republic's electoral commission which denied the Prime Minister, Milan Panic, a naturalized American, the right to run for Serbia's presidency on the grounds that he failed to meet a one-year residency requirement enacted last month by Milosevic supporters.


Russell P. Saunders; Organist, 71
Russell P. Saunders, a leading organist and professor of organ at the Eastman School of Music in Rochester, died on Sunday at the Universalist Church in Rochester.
He was 71 years old and lived in Rochester.
He died of a heart attack, said Lawrence A. Martin, a friend and former student.


Russian Legislators Reject Yeltsin's Choice for Premier
The Russian Congress voted today against naming Yegor T. Gaidar as Prime Minister, issuing an embarrassing rebuff to President Boris N. Yeltsin but evidently leaving Mr.
Gaidar and his team at the helm of Russia's economic reforms for at least another three months.
The secret ballot was 467 for Mr.
Gaidar and 486 against.
To be approved, he would have needed 521 votes.
But deputies from all sides agreed that Mr.
Yeltsin still had the authority to retain Mr.
Gaidar as Acting Prime Minister, the position he now holds.


Review/Television; Controlling the Damage After an Environmental Disaster
The movie's first images are of pristine waters, sparkling ice floes, magnificent whales, seals and birds.
Then the camera pans to the massive man-made skeletons of an oil refinery.
The title alone, "Dead Ahead: The Exxon Valdez Disaster," indicates that this is going to be the kind of film that gives damage-control experts nightmares.
The HBO-BBC co-production, having its premiere on Saturday at 8 P.M., is a triumph for anyone dedicated to the environment.
Anyone else can't help but squirm.
There is no disputing what happened at 12:05 a.m. on Good Friday, March 24, 1989.
The oil tanker Exxon Valdez ran aground off Alaska in Prince William Sound, causing an oil spill that would eventually reach nearly 11 million gallons.
The pollution spread over 1,000 miles of Alaskan beaches and killed hundreds of thousands of animals.
Long-term damage is still being calculated, as is the impact of the more recent giant spill off Spain.


May, Archbishop of St. Louis, Steps Down
Pope John Paul II has accepted the resignation of Archbishop John L. May of St.
Louis, the National Conference of Catholic Bishops announced yesterday.
Archbishop May, who is 70, has been under treatment for cancer after surgery to remove a malignant brain tumor last July.


Mets Make Bid For Tanana
The Mets, all but invisible at the major league meetings, at least registered a blip on the radar today when they announced they had made a contract offer to the veteran left-hander Frank Tanana.
Tanana, who has pitched 19 seasons in the majors and amassed 233 victories, has won 13 games in each of the last two seasons for the Tigers.
He has also pitched at least 185 innings in eight of the last nine seasons.


Metro-North Goes 'Where the Fish Are'
Metro-North and its agency, Korey, Kay &amp; Partners in New York, are putting a new twist on the marketing adage to "fish where the fish are."
The commuter railroad line is sponsoring outdoor advertisements, situated where it believes potential customers -- frustrated drivers who might prefer taking the train -- are sure to see it: for instance, alongside the Bruckner Expressway, a major artery for commuters from Connecticut and Westchester.


Clinton Team Issues 5-Year Lobby Ban
President-elect Bill Clinton's transition team today proposed a five-year ban on lobbying by senior political appointees after they leave the Government.
The proposals released today by Mr.
Clinton's transition director, Warren M. Christopher, would also ban officials from lobbying as agents of a foreign government for life and would especially bar Government trade negotiators from going to work for any foreign governments or businesses for five years after leaving the Administration.


COMPANY BRIEFS
FIRST UNION CORP., Charlotte, N.C., has received Federal Reserve Board approval to merge DFSoutheastern Inc., a savings and loan association based in Decatur, Ga., into a wholly owned subsidiary of First Union.


Tax-Exempt Yields Plunge; Taxables Post Slight Rise
Yields offered by tax-exempt money market funds were down sharply this week because of increased demand and a tightening supply of short-term municipal securities, according to the most recent survey by IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report, the newsletter that tracks money-market mutual funds.
But taxable money market fund yields rose slightly, the newsletter said.


Sides at Daily News Set Legal Schedule
Mortimer B. Zuckerman and the union representing Daily News typographers have agreed on a schedule for what could be an 11th-hour legal battle to determine whether Mr.
Zuckerman will buy the bankrupt newspaper.
Mr.
Zuckerman and the New York Typographical Union No. 6 are to resume negotiations this week over whether Mr.
Zuckerman is required to honor lifetime job guarantees the union won in 1974.


'Managed Competition' Is Not Healthy Answer; H.M.O. Bureaucracy
To the Editor:
Regarding your editorial "More Bureaucrats Won't Cut Health Costs" (Nov. 22): Even though H.M.O.'s may be contracting to provide services at unit prices that at first glance appear lower than more orthodox ways of providing health care, it is becoming clear that total H.M.O. costs are as high as or higher than the costs of providing care through other programs.
However, H.M.O.'s spend a far larger percentage of funds on nonclinical activities than is the case with other programs, which themselves already spend more on nonclinical, that is, bureaucratic, activities than ought to be the case.


Those Tumultuous Winter Meetings Conclude Under a Cloud
The last day of major league baseball's business meetings did not deviate from the unrelenting distress that has buffeted baseball in the past six months.
It began with a denial of and an apology from Marge Schott, owner of the Cincinnati Reds, for alleged racist remarks and ended with the death of Carl Barger, president of the expansion Florida Marlins.
In between, Bud Selig, chairman of the executive council, fervently rejected the idea that the game is in chaos.
He also said there is nobody "who has grown up in this business" who doesn't want a strong commissioner, a fact contrary to the view expressed in recent months by some owners.


Two Tough Tracks in Somalia
Operation Restore Hope began propitiously Tuesday for the starving people of Somalia, if less so for the reporters and photographers who met the U.S. forces, faces smeared in camouflage paint, with blinding floodlights.
The resulting uproar all but drowned out the important news: the marines suffered no casualties and encountered no hostile fire.
As significant was the arrival of Robert Oakley, a seasoned former U.S.
Ambassador to Somalia, who has the mission of creating a political opening to parallel the military's humanitarian track.
Food and medicine cannot be delivered securely to desperate Somalis without a cease-fire in the country's murderous clan wars.


Former Citicorp President To Become Chief at Medco
Richard Braddock, the former president of Citicorp who helped expand its consumer banking and credit card businesses, will be dealing with customers of a different stripe as chief executive of Medco Containment Services Inc., a fast-growing drug distribution company.
Martin J. Wygod, Medco Containment's chairman, offered the job to Mr.
Braddock after his resignation in October from Citicorp, where he also directed $1.5 billion in cost-cutting in the last two years.
Mr.
Wygod himself is currently chief executive.


Question of Heart Surgery Is Focus of Clifford Hearing
The question of heart surgery underlay testimony yesterday at a hearing to determine whether Clark Clifford is well enough to stand trial in New York in the Bank of Credit and Commerce International scandal.
Mr.
Clifford's lawyers maintain that the charges against the 85-year-old former Secretary of Defense should be dropped because the strain of a trial could kill him.
Prosecutors from the office of the Manhattan District Attorney, Robert M. Morgenthau, agree that Mr.
Clifford is ill but argue that the case should merely be suspended until he recovers or dies.
Disagreement on Recovery
Justice John A. K. Bradley in State Supreme Court in Manhattan did not rule on the matter.


Regional Refuges Can Work for Haitians
To the Editor:
Your editorial on the need to plan for an "inevitable increase" in the numbers of arriving Haitian boat people (Nov. 28) is in error when it dismisses as "unrealistic" a regional arrangement to provide temporary refuge to Haitians.


Fed Survey Finds an Upturn, but an Uneven One
The economy is improving modestly but unevenly across the country, with retailers expressing optimism about the holiday season, the Federal Reserve said today.
In its periodic assessment of the state of the economy, the central bank said almost all regions were experiencing "a slight to moderate pickup in some or all sectors of the economy" while noting specifically that California was doing worse than other states.


CHRONICLE
A Federal judge has ruled that ALFRED UHRY, author of "Driving Miss Daisy," did not plagiarize the work of HENRY DENKER when he wrote the prize-winning play and movie.
Mr.
Denker, who is the author of 28 novels and seven Broadway plays, contended that Mr.
Uhry had lifted characters, plot twists and ideas from Mr.
Denker's novel and play, "Horowitz and Mrs. Washington." That work was published by G. P. Putnam's in 1979.
As a play, it ran for seven performances on Broadway in April 1980.
Mr.
Uhry's "Driving Miss Daisy" opened off Broadway in 1987 and went on to win the Pulitzer Prize; the movie won four Academy Awards in 1990.


At Capitol Hill, It's Batters Up
Once again, major league baseball has managed to catch the attention of Congress and end up as vulnerable as tinder under a ray from a magnifying glass.
The Senate Antitrust Subcommittee is about to reexamine baseball's sacred 70-year-old antitrust exemption, seeking to determine whether the sport deserves to retain one of the most unique perks ever bestowed on an American industry.
There are those who might say that such inquiries come along just about every time baseball expands without sating the appetite of some baseball-poor sector of the country.
In fact, one of the underlying reasons for today's hearing is that legislators from Florida are livid about the fact that Tampa and St.
Petersburg were once again led on by baseball only to be denied the privilege of gaining one of the two new National League franchises or buying the San Francisco Giants.


7 Found Dead in a Virginia Coal Mine
Two and a half days after an explosion rocked South Mountain Mine No. 3 here, hopes that eight miners had survived the blast ended late tonight when grim officials announced they had found the bodies of seven of the men.
United States Assistant Secretary of Labor Bill Tattersall said the miners "apparently died in their work stations" and "did not survive the blast."
He said rescue workers found "seven of the eight bodies," but were unable to locate the last body or remove any of the dead from the mine because of dangerously high levels of methane gas.


'Managed Competition' Is Not Healthy Answer
To the Editor:
Your two-part editorial ("The Answer: Managed Competition," Dec. 2 and 3) is an exercise in self-deception.
The oxymoronically named "managed competition" will not solve America's health problems but will make them worse.


DSC's Deal With MCI Is Extended
The DSC Communications Corporation today announced a contract extension worth more than $250 million over three years with its largest customer, the MCI Communications Corporation.
DSC, a supplier of telephone switching systems and signaling equipment, was reeling a year ago from a small programming error that caused the embarrassing collapse of telephone service in regions served by the Bell Atlantic Corporation and the Pacific Telesis Group.


Black Man Beaten in Crown Heights Is Missing
The case of a homeless black man beaten by Hasidic Jews in Crown Heights last week was thrown into confusion yesterday when the man's lawyer said he planned to advise his client not to cooperate with prosecutors, then said hours later that his client had disappeared.
The beaten man, Ralph Nimmons, 25, had been expected to testify yesterday as the key witness before a grand jury hearing evidence in the case, which has raised tensions in the racially riven Brooklyn neighborhood and become a political crucible for Mayor David N. Dinkins.


Transactions
Basketball  National Basketball Association
GOLDEN STATE WARRIORS -- Placed Billy Owens, forward, on the injury list.
Activated Keith Jennings, guard, from the injury list.
SAN ANTONIO SPURS -- Acquired J.R.
Reid, forward, from the Charlotte Hornets for Sidney Green, forward, and two draft picks.


50-Year Term in Killing of Vietnamese Immigrant
A young man convicted of second- degree murder in the beating death of a 19-year-old Vietnamese immigrant last August has been sentenced to 50 years in prison.
"Excuse me?" the 18-year-old defendant, Bradley W. Mills, shouted at the judge, interrupting him, after hearing the sentence on Tuesday.
"In that case, you might as well give me the electric chair!"


Have Everything? Guess Again?
WAIT!
ALTHOUGH THE countdown to the holiday season is on, there's no need to panic quite yet.
If you're like many this year, the spirit of the season doesn't seem to have taken hold yet.
Never mind.
To nudge you in the right shopping direction, here's a mixed bag of presents.
The selection is heavily weighed toward the fanciful. (For proof, see the pictures here and on page C4.) But that doesn't mean that things like canisters, a watering can and cozy pillows can't be practical as well.


Sounds of Defeat Surround the Devils
The Devils were so listless tonight against the Washington Capitals that even the "organist" was blamed in the 6-2 defeat.
Otherwise, most of the jeers that repeatedly filled Byrne Meadowlands Arena were aimed at Coach Herb Brooks in the form of chants of "Herb Must Go" from some in the crowd of 9,072.
This was the second consecutive uninspired performance at home by the Devils, who were thoroughly outplayed in a 4-2 loss to the Boston Bruins here Saturday.


INSIDE
Russian Premier Defeated
The Russian Congress voted against naming Yegor T. Gaidar as Prime Minister, issuing a rebuff to President Boris N. Yeltsin.
Page A19.
Arms Makers Consolidate
Consolidation of the arms industry continued, with Lockheed buying General Dynamics's military aircraft unit for $1.53 billion.
Page D1.
Egypt Seizes 400 Muslims
The Government said it had sealed off a sprawling slum in Cairo and arrested 400 Islamic militants in a crackdown on dissidents.
Page A3.
Dining Out Is In Again
After years of belt-tightening, Manhattan restaurants appear busy again.
An many have taken to hear the lessons of the lean years.
Page B1.


Maddux Bolts, and Yankees Feel Jilted
The Yankees suffered another dispiriting setback in their campaign to acquire top-flight pitching tonight when Greg Maddux signed with the Atlanta Braves.
Maddux signed a five-year, $28 million contract with Atlanta, a deal that fell a staggering $6 million shy of the offer the Yankees had presented to Maddux.
The final proposal to Maddux by Yankees even included a $9 million signing bonus.


No Headline
It is announced from Buckingham Palace that with regret, the Prince and Princess of Wales have decided to separate. -- JOHN MAJOR, Prime Minister of Britain.  [ A19:1. ]


Tangled Case of the Mystery Client
Who was driving the car that struck and killed Vincent Fiorito as he walked near his Mamaroneck, N.Y., home on a December evening two years ago?
The authorities believe a Mount Vernon lawyer may have the answer, but despite a court order, he has refused to tell what he knows about the identity of the driver, which remains a mystery.


Chip Indicator Posts 3d Rise
Orders and shipments for chips in the United States market both gained in November, and the semiconductor industry's leading indicator rose for the third time in three months, a trade group reported today.
The Semiconductor Industry Association, based in San Jose, Calif., reported a book-to-bill ratio of 1.13 for the three-month period that ended in November, up from a revised figure of 1.11 in October and from 1.07 in September.
The ratio compares orders with shipments.
A ratio above 1 indicates rising demand.


Sports of The Times; A Message For Maddux's Machine
ON the first ring of Greg Maddux's telephone in his Las Vegas, Nev., home, a young female voice, presumably that of his wife, Kathy, all but jumps out of the answering machine.
"Hi, you've reached the Madduxes," the voice says.
"If you need to send a fax, start transmission now. If you'd like to leave a message, speak after the long beep. Thank you."


Salman Rushdie, in Canada, Asks Help on Iranian Decree
Salman Rushdie visited Canada this week, and very publicly tried to get the Canadian Government to take the lead in bringing pressure on Iran to lift a four-year-old death sentence against him.
The 45-year-old author of "The Satanic Verses," which Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini denounced as blasphemous to Islam and called for Mr.
Rushdie's death, said in an interview that he finds himself in a bind.


Times Square Safety Officers' Two Tasks
To the Editor:
There was one small error in a letter ("Chivalry in Blue," Nov. 28) from a woman who had attended a Broadway show.
The helpful "police officer" who escorted her to the bus was a Times Square Business Improvement District public safety officer, Randolph Bowling.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
7.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
4.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.75
2.77
4.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.22
3.24
4.14
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.33
3.31
4.15
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.38
6.35
6.72
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.43
7.43
7.80
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.45
8.45
8.80
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.38
6.38
6.86
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


U.N. Security Council Takes Step Toward New Move Against Serbia
The United Nations Security Council moved a step closer to ordering new military action to protect Muslims in Bosnia and Herzegovina today, warning Serbian forces to cease their attacks against the capital, Sarajevo, or face "further measures" to be taken as soon as possible.
The statement issued by the Council reflected members' growing concern that the Serbs may now have set their sights on seizing Sarajevo after they briefly cut the airport road into the city on Tuesday and urged its 380,000 inhabitants to flee.


CHRONICLE
Representative MAXINE WATERS, Democrat of California, is due to receive the Princeton Peace Prize for 1991 at Princeton University this evening -- seven months late.
She was to receive the prize on May 4 but did not attend the ceremony because of the riots in her Los Angeles district after the acquittal of four police officers charged in the beating of Rodney G. King.


The Neediest Helps Youths Go to Camp
As the temperature has dropped and his mother has started bundling him up like an Arctic explorer, Andre Tanner has begun to daydream of summer, losing himself in memories of the camp where he discovered his love of nature hikes and the joys of frolicking in a muddy lake.
Andre, 11 years old, has twice escaped his sweltering Queens neighborhood to visit Starlake Camp in Bloomingdale, N.J.
Each time, he returned home bubbling with tales of strange wildlife and counselors who seemed to know everything and sports that he had never played before.


2 Place Mexican Officials at '85 Killing
Top officials of the Mexican Government were present at a ranch outside Guadalajara when a United States narcotics agent was tortured and killed there, according to testimony today at the trial of two men accused of assisting the killing.
A witness, Rene Lopez Romero, told a spellbound courtroom audience that two members of the Mexican Cabinet at the time -- Defense Minister Juan Arevalo Gardoqui and Interior Minister Manuel Bartlett Diaz -- were among a group of political leaders, law-enforcement officials and drug traffickers who had gathered at the ranch where Enrique Camarena Salazar an American drug agent was tortured.
Governor Named
Mr.
Lopez, who said he was a bodyguard for a Mexican drug dealer, Ernesto Fonseca, was the second Government witness so far to tie Mr.
Barlett Diaz and Mr.
Gardoqui to the February 1985 torture death.


Calendar: Plants, Crafts And Judaica
Women's Work  Cooper-Hewitt Museum, 2 East 91st Street; (212) 860-6862.


Holyfield Says Once More He Will Retire
EVANDER HOLYFIELD, the former heavyweight champion, says he has fought his last fight.
In a telephone interview Tuesday from Los Angeles, Holyfield told The Atlanta Journal-Constitution that he is quitting boxing.
He had said the same thing immediately after his heavyweight title loss to RIDDICK BOWE three weeks ago, but two weeks ago changed his mind and said he was seeking a rematch with Bowe.
Now he says: "So many people were telling me, 'Evander, please don't quit.' It felt good. But after seeing what I said when the paper came out, I realized I'm not a hungry person."


Astronauts Land, but Exit Is Delayed by Fumes


Vincent Gardenia, Character Actor, Is Dead at 71
Vincent Gardenia, a character actor known for his work in theater and television and his supporting roles in the films "Bang the Drum Slowly" and "Moonstruck," was found dead yesterday in his hotel room in Philadelphia.
He was 71 years old and lived in Bensonhurst, Brooklyn.
He died of a heart attack after appearing in a preview performance of the play "Breaking Legs," which is on tour, said Jeffrey Richards, the publicity agent for the play.


SERBS FREE ROAD TO BOSNIA AIRPORT
Serbian nationalists besieging Sarajevo ceded control of its vital airport road today to United Nations troops, ending a 24-hour period in which the Serbs had effectively sealed off the Bosnian capital and cut off all international relief supplies.
French Marines advancing down the road from a garrison at the airport found the route clear and re-established a United Nations checkpoint at the point where it reaches the city.
Serbian tanks that had seized the road on Tuesday, and fired on French units that challenged them, pulled back today into an adjacent area.


Review/Rock; Breaking Through Barriers
White musicians' attraction to the blues has always carried traces of guilty magic, like Prometheus stealing fire.
And post-punk ironists approach the blues with less reverence than did the baby boomers, dismantling the legacy instead of worshiping it.
At CBGB's on Sunday night, two bands proved the genre's enduring lure, even as they ripped its elements to shreds.
The Jon Spencer Blues Explosion was more successful, because of the group's willingness to thoroughly challenge the music's norms.
Mr.
Spencer, formerly of Pussy Galore, led his trio through a set of clanking musical pull-aparts grounded in the sleazy rhythms of 1960's garage punk.
Looking like a Wall Street trader gone hopelessly awry, Mr.
Spencer yelped and groaned and spat out cliched lyrics about rambling, being spooky and getting down.
Each element of the Blues Explosions' songs fell away into separate strands, as did Mr.
Spencer's vocals, which often dissolved into phonetic play.
This chaos revealed the blues' bare bones, as if the genre's flesh had been blasted away.


A Grand Relic of the Romantic Era Sings Out Again at Notre Dame
French cultural politics are characterized not just by an enormous amount of national subsidy and a comprehensive effort to spend that money in intelligent ways.
When the French achieve some cultural goal, they also celebrate it, and themselves, with a lavish spectacle.
The latest example of both tendencies took place on Friday night, as thousands of invited guests crowded Notre Dame Cathedral to see and hear the re-inauguration of its Grand Organ, the largest in France with more than 8,000 pipes.


Review/Music; The Eclectic Stravinsky
Stravinsky's "Apollo" and "Oedipus Rex" make a logical pair.
Both works date from the late 1920's, when Stravinsky was committing himself to an intricately meshed eclecticism that unobservant critics of the period termed Neo-Classical.
This music plays havoc with history, lulling us into nostalgia for one style and then shaking us with voices more contemporary or more ancient.
"Oedipus," in particular, is an unresolved conflict of the past and the present: by turns urbane and austere, it propels us assuredly toward a state of bewilderment, and, in the right circumstances, a cold sense of wonder.
On Tuesday night, Charles Dutoit and the Philadelphia Orchestra brushed against that wonder at times, but fell short in a smattering of crucial details.
"Apollo" is a fragrant and fragile idyll for string orchestra in which every turn of phrase must be exactly poised.
The Philadelphia strings made a wonderful sound for the most part, but went slightly out of focus during the closing "Apotheosis." The task of portraying the supple god fell to Normal Carol, the concertmaster, who did not quite project the part's imperious beauty.
But Mr.
Dutoit shaped the musical flow agreeably, avoiding the obvious trap of refined somnolence.


California to Investigate Laker Trainer
Los Angeles Lakers trainer GARY VITTI's failure to wear gloves as a precaution against AIDS transmission while treating a cut on MAGIC JOHNSON's forearm will be investigated by California's workplace-safety agency.
A Rhode Island doctor's complaint concerning Vitti's actions has been turned over to the state Occupational Safety and Health Administration by Federal O.S.H.A. officials, The Daily News of Los Angeles reported yesterday.


Bid Is Weighed to Make Sales Tax Rise Permanent in Suffolk
As Suffolk County lawmakers gave final approval today to a 5.8 percent increase in the property tax rate for 1993, Republican leaders raised the idea of making a temporary one-cent increase in the county sales tax into a permanent levy.
The Suffolk County Executive, Robert J. Gaffney, noting that the temporary sales tax increase was due to expire at the end of 1993, said he planned to ask state lawmakers to make most, if not all, of the tax increase permanent.
The additional penny on the dollar generates $120 million a year.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Television
Academy Times Square
TXT&gt;"You can see right through it," Tom Verlaine sang on Friday night, when the reunited Television played its second New York show at the Academy.
He was singing about a woman's dress, but he could have been describing the music of what was, and is, one of the greatest guitar bands in rock, a band that thrives on transparency.
Television, last heard from as a group in 1979, is no more fashionable now than it was when it released its first single in 1975.
As part of the nascent punk and new wave movement in New York, Television had a strategy for taking the bloat out of mainstream rock.
It pared its music down to the riffs and solos and exchanges of two guitars (played by Mr. Verlaine and Richard Lloyd), bass (Fred Smith) and drums (Billy Ficca), leaving plenty of space for clarity.
The music didn't pound; guitar lines overlapped or crisscrossed, bass parts stayed terse, and there was room for cymbal and snare-drum flourishes a step away from jazz.
The lyrics were elliptical, by turns playful and darkly allusive.
Television's songs were sparser and less naive than their psychedelic forebears; at the same time, they were as different from the fast, loud, blunt attack of punk-rock to come as they were from the pomp of Bad Company or Jefferson Starship.
As Mr.
Verlaine and Mr.
Lloyd went on to solo careers in the 1980's, Television's two albums, both commercial flops, gained in reputation and influence, affecting bands from Sonic Youth to the Only Ones to the Church.
Yet in 1992, when the metallic stomp and distortion of grunge-rock shares the charts with the overblown, synthetic pop of Michael Bolton and Whitney Houston, Television sounds light-fingered and almost ascetic.
At the Academy, the band ignored the bellows of fanatical fans and calmly played as if the 13-year break had lasted only a few days.
Mr.
Verlaine deadpanned his way through the lyrics; the real action, as always, was in the guitars.
Low, detached riffs interlocked with high floating chords; echoes of down-home blues and country brushed up against modal scales and quivering notes out of jazz and Indian raga.
The two guitars rang like distant bells, twanged like backwoods jokes, clinked like icicles, sighed and swaggered and wailed.
Mr.
Verlaine played leisurely solos, making notes sing and sting; Mr.
Lloyd filled his with nervous energy, moving from one firm note to the next by way of speedy squiggles.
Even during verses, the guitars were teasing one another, like lovers playing footsie at a dinner party.
Much of the set was drawn from the band's new album, "Television" (Capitol), though fans joyfully greeted 1970's songs including "Marquee Moon," "Prove It," "Venus," "Glory" and an attenuated version of "Little Johnny Jewel." Verbally, the new songs are more jovial than the old ones, not so ambitious about making big statements; in "Marquee Moon," Mr.
Verlaine sang, "What I want/I want now"; in the new "In World," he sang, "What I want/I just don't know." But the band knows exactly what it wants from its music: a lean, smart, witty, endlessly intriguing tangle.


Going Above and Beyond the Call
One is an obstetrical nurse whose grateful patients have named at least nine babies in her honor.
Another is a subway conductor whose cheerful patter leads passengers to applaud his arrival.
Still another is a principal who uses her own money to take her handicapped students on special trips.
From New York City's largely anonymous municipal work force of 200,000 employees, seven individuals were singled out this week for honors and $5,000 prizes for outstanding performance.


Books of The Times; The Trials and Errors of Making Objects Work
The Evolution of Useful Things By Henry Petroski Illustrated. 288 pages.
Alfred A. Knopf.
In his intermittently entertaining new book, "The Evolution of Useful Things," Henry Petroski elaborates on his previous history of a humble object, "The Pencil," by tracing the rise of everyday artifacts like forks and knives, pins and needles, buttons and zippers and soda bottles and beer cans.


Lockheed Makes Big Plane Deal
The post-cold-war consolidation of the American weapons industry continued today with the announcement that the Lockheed Corporation would acquire the General Dynamics Corporation's military aircraft division for $1.53 billion in cash.
The transaction puts Lockheed, based in Calabasas, Calif., neck and neck with the nation's largest military aircraft maker, the McDonnell Douglas Corporation.
It also further reduces the number of military contractors available to supply the Pentagon, concentrating a major jet fighter contract at one company.


Carl Barger, 62, Team President With Pirates and Florida Marlins
Carl F. Barger, the corporation lawyer and civic leader who played a pivotal role in keeping the Pirates in Pittsburgh in 1986 and was instrumental in establishing the new Florida Marlins franchise that will begin play in Miami next year, died yesterday.
He collapsed at baseball's winter meetings in Louisville, Ky., where he was representing the Marlins as the team's president and chief operating officer.
Mr.
Barger, a former president of the Pirates, was 62.
According to Dr.
Bob Fulton, a surgeon at Humana University Hospital, he died of internal bleeding after suffering a ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysm.


Hundreds Are Dead In Bolivia Mudslide
The number of dead and missing from a huge mudslide that buried a gold-mining town reached into the hundreds as the Bolivian Government struggled to send rescue workers, food and medical supplies into a remote area some 90 miles north of La Paz, the capital.
The Government said 153 people were confirmed dead or missing.
Many more are believed to be buried under the mudslide or swept away in the Tipuani River.


Woman Gives Her Account In Abuse Case
In a soft, childlike voice a mildly retarded 21-year-old woman testified today that she was sexually assaulted by four friends in Glen Ridge, N.J., in March 1989.
Before a hushed, packed courtroom, she answered questions with responses of only a few words, describing sex acts involving a stick, a bat and a broom.
Talking about the four young men who suggested the sex acts, she said at one point, "I still care about them."


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-19  FEWER WEAPONS IN MOGADISHU  The streets of Mogadishu were noticeably freer of weapons and armed vehicles as hundreds of local gunmen apparently decided not to risk a clash with the American marines who landed here overnight.
A1  The landing in Somalia proved the ultimate photo opportunity.
A18  French politicians sharply criticized the televised landing.
A18


AT WORK WITH Garry Shandling; Late-Night TV, Ever More Unreal
Garry Shandling slumps on a sofa, sipping Evian water.
He's wearing unfashionably baggy jeans ("I'm sorry about these jeans," he says), a floppy sweatshirt and sneakers.
The phone rings and he makes an appointment with a friend to go jogging.
"I've gained 12 pounds," he says miserably.
"I don't get out. I work. And work. I'm trying to jog every day now. Twelve pounds."


U.S. WILL NOT SEEK NEW INVESTIGATION ON LOANS TO IRAQ
Attorney General William P. Barr today rejected Congressional demands for an independent prosecutor to investigate whether the Government had committed a crime in a bank fraud case involving loans to Iraq.
He asserted that the Justice Department had acted properly in every aspect of the politically contentious case.
Mr.
Barr's refusal to seek a judicially appointed prosecutor in the case involving the Atlanta branch of the Banca Nazionale del Lavoro followed the recommendation of Frederick B. Lacey, his own counsel.
Judge Lacey had submitted a two-volume report that found "no reasonable grounds to believe further investigation is warranted with respect to the matters involved here." Calls Accusations 'Nonsense'
Saying the Justice Department had nothing to hide, Mr.
Barr said he fully agreed with Judge Lacey "and will not apply to the court for appointment of an independent counsel."


Home Video
For films worth preserving, television does part of the job but the details are inevitably different.
Last week the Library of Congress added "Bonnie and Clyde," "Nashville," "Paths of Glory" and 22 other movies to its National Film Registry, a list of notable works, some dating to the 1920's, judged worthy of preservation.
Of the 100 films named since the list was begun in 1989, perhaps 80 are or have been available on videocassette.
The registry has mixed feelings about that.


Harry A. Fagan, 52; Led Pastoral Causes
Harry A. Fagan, an advocate for social change and parish programs in the Roman Catholic Church in America, died yesterday at his Manhattan home at the age of 52.
He died of lung cancer, said an announcement from the National Pastoral Life Center.
He was a co-founder and the managing director of the center, which fosters pastoral and social ministries in the church.


Gunman Is Killed In a Holdup Attempt
A gunman was shot to death yesterday when he and two other men tried to rob the owner of a hardware store in Ridgewood, Queens, the police said.
The police said the three men entered the Seneca Hardware and Plumbing Supply store at 652 Seneca Avenue about 5 P.M. and one of them displayed a .25-caliber semiautomatic pistol and announced a holdup.


Hampton Can Run, But Can He Thrive?
Even Rodney Hampton, probably the Giants' best player, is unhappy, and not only because the Giants are struggling with a 5-8 record and four straight losses.
Hampton, in his third pro season, has become one of the National Football League's premier running backs, but he said today he was not getting the ball enough.
By almost anyone else's standards, Hampton is having a good year.
He has carried 215 times for 971 yards, a 4.5-yard per carry average.
His yardage is the fifth highest in the National Conference, eighth highest in the league.
He has accounted for 62 percent of the Giants' rushing yardage.


Clinton Team Is Urged to Reorganize Nation's Effort to Fight AIDS
A coalition of 150 AIDS groups and their allies met with an official of the Clinton transition team today and proposed a reorganization of the Federal Government's AIDS program.
The groups reached agreement on about three-dozen changes they said they would like to see in the program.
These were among their proposals:


Bill Shockley; Football Player, 55
Bill Shockley, the place-kicker who scored the first points for the New York Titans, now known as the New York Jets, died on Monday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 55, and his family said he died of cancer.
A graduate of West Chester State College in Pennsylvania, Mr.
Shockley joined the Titans of the new American Football League in 1960.


CLINTON TO LEAD TALKS ON ECONOMY
President-elect Bill Clinton will personally serve as the moderator for 12 hours of nationally televised talks on the economy here next week, to be attended by about 300 business men and women ranging from a South Dakota flower seller to the presidents of Xerox and Apple Computers.
What was originally conceived as a gathering of 25 to 30 business leaders to help form economic policy has ballooned into a full-blown spectacle, with 300 corporate executives, small-business people and economists now invited to take part in the two-day conference.
It will be held in the city's largest auditorium and televised live on C-SPAN, with large chunks also being broadcast by CNN and the three major television networks.


Easing Students' Pressure to Predict the Future
To the Editor:
Regarding "Making Skilled Workers Out of Teen-Agers" (news article, Nov. 26), it is important to note that only 27 percent of all high school students who train narrowly for a specific occupation ever work in a related field.
Yet low-income students in this country face earlier pressure than those from higher-income families to make such a prediction of their adult work.
This pressure results in tracking students by social class.
Like many other stratifying mechanisms in schools, it results in minimal academic learning for lower-income students.
Even 15-year-olds know this, though they would use different terms to describe it.


Foreign Affairs; Inside Bill's Head
The scene is the Governor's Mansion in Little Rock.
The time, 2:30 A.M.
President-elect Clinton sits alone, munching his second pizza of the evening.
He is in deep thought about his national security team.
His musings are known only to Hillary and a telepathic columnist, alone in his New York study, eating his third pizza of the night.


A Lecture on Harassment Don'ts
For the first time in its history, the New York State Assembly was ordered to the Capitol today for a cautionary lecture on sexual harassment: what it is and how to avoid it.
Usually at this time of the year, legislators would be preparing for next month's regular session, learning the arcana of transit financing or shoring up support for pet projects.
But with reports of sexual harassment in Albany and in Washington drawing attention to the problem, this year is different.


U.S. Still Holds Haitians With H.I.V. in Cuba
Despite warnings of a potential "public health disaster," the Government is still holding more than 200 Haitian refugees infected with the virus that causes AIDS at Guantanamo Naval Base in Cuba.
Officials of the Justice Department, which created a special camp for the infected refugees last spring, said it would remain in place until the incoming Clinton Administration decided what to do with them.


The Storybook Romance
On July 29, 1981, millions of Americans rose at dawn to watch a young woman who actually looked like a princess (golden hair, blue eyes and a whopper of a tiara) marry a prince who didn't exactly look like one (he's no Tom Cruise).
But what the heck.
The music was swell, St.
Paul's Cathedral never looked better and, all in all, it was the kind of wedding that even money can't buy.
The happy couple rode away from the ceremony in a golden coach, and before long had two children, traveled a lot and always looked really terrific.
Then, as the gossip columnists like to say, Splitsville!
Or something that looks a lot like Splitsville.
He was said to have something or somebody or whatever on the side; and she chose to tell Her Story through friends who told all to a London journalist; and the look on their faces whenever they were together was that of people sucking lemon drops.


Mafia Turncoat Testifies on Gotti Role in Crime Family Power Struggle
Salvatore (Sammy Bull) Gravano, the Mafia turncoat who helped prosecutors win conviction of John Gotti earlier this year, testified yesterday that Mr.
Gotti had supported efforts by Victor Orena to become the official boss of the Colombo crime family.
Returning to a Federal courtroom in Brooklyn, Mr.
Gravano identified Mr.
Orena, the defendant in a racketeering-murder trial.
The trial focuses on a power struggle that turned into a murderous conflict between two rival Colombo factions.


Iacocca Explores Possibility Of Taking Helm at T.W.A.
Lee A. Iacocca, who led Chrysler back to prosperity after it reached the brink of financial ruin, is being asked to do something similar for Trans World Airlines, which is now in bankruptcy.
Since August the 68-year-old Mr.
Iacocca, who plans to retire from the Chrysler Corporation at the end of this month, has been talking with Brian Freeman, an investment banker whom he got to know during the days of Chrysler's rescue through Federal loan guarantees, about assuming the chairmanship of T.W.A.


Incentives Help Retain A Company In Suffolk
Defying the trend of companies leaving the New York metropolitan area for the South and the West, a Long Island company announced yesterday that it was closing a factory in California and adding hundreds of jobs in Suffolk County.
But it took a package of $12 million in grants, low-interest loans and other financial incentives from New York State and Suffolk to persuade it not to leave.


Prototypes Of New Chip From Japan
Four Japanese companies have separately succeeded in producing the first prototypes of a memory chip with vast capacity that is likely to become the main means of storing information in computers around the turn of the century.
The silicon chip, known as a 256-megabit dynamic random access memory, or D-RAM, can store 256 million bits of information, the equivalent of 10,000 or more pages of typed text.
That is 64 times more capacity than that of the four-million-bit chip now commonly used in computers.


A Glare of Coverage And Then a Dispute
Although the Pentagon encouraged news coverage of the American landing in Somalia, it found itself with more than it had anticipated.
Afterward, a dispute took shape in Washington not over the rules for coverage but over a breakdown in arrangements.


Political Design? Well, Yes
DESIGN is not exactly at the vortex of American politics.
But as anyone who has shopped for a car or a VCR knows, a product's design, or lack of it, often determines whether a consumer chooses to buy.
The relationship between design and American economic competitiveness was the subject of a roundtable discussion yesterday afternoon before members of President-elect Bill Clinton's transition team in Little Rock, Ark.
A group of well-known designers and architects had been invited to Little Rock to share their views with Christopher S. Hyland, a deputy political director of the team.


Ex-Spy Chief Is Convicted of Lying To Congress on Iran-Contra Affair
A Federal jury today found Clair E. George, once a top Central Intelligence Agency official, guilty on two felony counts of lying to Congress about his knowledge of the Iran-contra scandal.
The jurors acquitted Mr.
George of five other counts of lying to Congress and investigators about the Reagan Administration's arms sales to Iran and its weapons pipeline to Central America.
The verdict came on the 11th day of deliberations in Mr.
George's second trial on the charges brought by the independent prosecutor for Iran-contra matters.
The first proceeding ended in a mistrial in August when the jury reported it was hopelessly deadlocked.


Edwin Kenney Jr., 50, Professor and Writer
Edwin J. Kenney Jr., a professor of English at Colby College in Waterville, Me., died on Tuesday at the Mid-Maine Medical Center in Waterville.
He was 50 years old and lived in China, Me.
He died of cancer, said Mary Ellen Matava, a college spokeswoman.


A Rape Victim's Desperate Trap
As a stranger repeatedly raped and sodomized her last February in a stairwell on the roof of her apartment building in Queens, the woman pleaded with him not to kill her.
"You're a nice man," the woman, who had moved from South Korea only two months before, told him in broken English, agreeing to his request to exchange names and telephone numbers.
When she returned to her apartment, her two elderly Korean roommates, suspicious, like her, of the American justice system, persuaded her not to call the police, telling her it could only bring more trouble and shame.
But the next day, determined to trap him, she called and arranged to meet him, later having sex in his apartment -- all part of what she later said was a ploy to lead him to the police.


How Skiers Make Points While Getting a Lift
Getting your money's worth from a lift ticket that sells for $30 to $40 is an elusive goal for most skiers; it takes a lot of trips up and down the mountain to make it seem like a good deal.
To offset high prices, ski areas have been offering discounts, special deals, frequent-skier programs and tickets for limited time periods on a limited number of lifts.


Books, Books and More Books: Clinton an Omnivorous Reader
If there is still considerable uncertainty about the changes President-elect Bill Clinton intends to make after his inauguration on Jan. 20, at least one is now virtually carved in mahogany: there will be more bookshelves in the White House.
After Barbara Bush gave Hillary Clinton a tour of the private quarters at 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue last month, Mrs.
Clinton exclaimed to her friends here: "There aren't enough bookshelves!" She vowed to correct the situation.


Nets' Bench Strength Is Merely a Weakness
When Chuck Daly was in Detroit, he had some of the best talent in the league on his bench.
If the Pistons were snoozing offensively, Daly could call on guard Vinnie Johnson and he was an instant slap in the face.
Now, after winning two championships with the Pistons, after winning an Olympic gold medal with perhaps the best bench ever assembled, Daly finds himself frustrated by his current bench.
Today, after the Nets players practiced for their Thursday night game against Mark Jackson and the Los Angeles Clippers, Daly talked like a man longing for the past.
Longing for the days when he could look left or right and get a player in the game who brings an automatic 12 points when the starters are in slow motion.


Medical Panel Says Most Sexual Impotence in Men Can Be Treated Without Surgery
Male sexual impotence can be treated successfully in the vast majority of cases, and the millions of men affected and their doctors should discuss the condition and its solutions more openly, a panel of experts said today.
The experts, called together by the National Institutes of Health for a three-day meeting on the problem, said that although impotence was widespread, few men knew that it could be treated, often without surgery.


Make It Snow, Make It Snow, Make It Snow


Suddenly, Momentum for Health
Two powerful opponents of health care reform have done a dramatic about-face.
The Health Insurance Association of America, comprising 270 commercial insurers, last week endorsed key principles of managed competition -- the wise reform plan advocated by President-elect Clinton.
Now the American Medical Association expresses guarded support for managed competition and for health maintenance organizations -- concepts it once denounced as heresy.
These endorsements are not quite as good as they look.
The new positions taken by insurers and doctors represent enlightened self-interest more than enlightenment.
Their support for reform is burdened with crippling contradictions.
But if these are remedied, managed competition, which a year ago was merely a utopian idea, could in the next year become monumentally important law.


Hafetz Hayim Journal; The Rabbis' Almanack of Seventh-Year Farming
Just as the calendar warned, belt-tightening has begun for the 500 members of this religious kibbutz sprawling across luxuriant fields 20 miles south of Tel Aviv.
They are planting less cotton, normally an important cash crop.
Instead, they are accumulating surpluses of wheat and corn so that there will be enough feed for the cattle and chickens to last for two years.


French Fault 'Circus' Coverage of the Arrival of U.S. Troops
As the first French troops arrived in Somalia to join the United States-led relief mission there, French politicians sharply criticized the televised landing of American marines near Mogadishu early today as a media event and "charity show."
French newspapers also said the decision to send 2,100 French troops to Somalia had divided the French Cabinet, with the Defense Minister, Pierre Joxe, opposing the move and President Francois Mitterrand finally coming down on the side of Bernard Kouchner, the Health and Humanitarian Affairs Minister.


Corrections
A picture caption on Monday with an article about vacated corporate buildings in the suburbs misidentified the picture at the left.
It showed a building built for GTE that now houses Stamford city offices.
A correction in this space yesterday referred incorrectly to the picture at the center.
It is the current GTE corporate headquarters in Stamford.


F.C.C. to Propose Incentives For Local Phone Companies
Hoping to spur investment in advanced telecommunications technology, the Federal Communications Commission will propose giving local telephone companies potentially lucrative incentives to invest in fiber optics and new computerized switches.
Under the proposals, which will be made on Thursday, telephone companies could depreciate their investment in old equipment more rapidly than is now allowed.
Because of the way local telephone prices are regulated, the rate at which a telephone company writes off its old investment can effectively translate into higher prices for interstate calls.


New York Incumbents: A Roll Call of Defeat
To the Editor:
Mark Green certainly overstated his case when he claimed that "no New York statewide official has lost a general election since Robert F. Kennedy defeated Kenneth Keating for the Senate in 1964 . . ." ("Let New Yorkers Heed the Lessons of the D'Amato Victory," letter, Nov. 15).
Incumbency was not enough for Senator Charles Goodell (1970), Gov.
Malcolm Wilson (1974), Senator James L. Buckley (1976) or Senator Jacob K. Javits (1980).
STEVE SLAVIN Brooklyn, Nov. 19, 1992


Board of Education Reinstates Rebels In Queens District
Overriding Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez, the New York City Board of Education reinstated a rebellious Queens school board last night but gave Mr.
Fernandez the authority to supersede its members if they continue to refuse to teach respect for gay people.
While a rebuff for Mr.
Fernandez, last night's action by the central board stopped short of a total rejection of his authority, something that might have forced Mr.
Fernandez to say that he would depart as Chancellor when his contract expires on June 30.


Home Improvement
FEW of a home's features draw more attention than a fireplace and mantelpiece; the elegance that radiates from them when they are clean and well maintained spreads throughout a room.
Cleaning a fireplace and mantelpiece can be a chore if it is not done fairly often, say two or three times during the winter if the fireplace is used frequently, with a final thorough cleaning in the spring.
Mantelpieces or surrounds may require weekly cleaning.


Dime Savings Is Granted Some Regulatory Leeway
The Dime Savings Bank of New York, which has slowly been recovering from heavy losses on defaulted home mortgages, was granted a little more breathing room yesterday by Federal regulators.
The slight easing in capital targets for Dime was a contrast to the tightening that has occurred throughout the banking system in the last few years.


William L. Schaaf, 94, Professor and Author
William L. Schaaf, a retired professor of mathematics education and textbook author, died yesterday at Delray Community Hospital in Delray Beach, Fla.
He was 94 and lived in Delray Beach, where he moved this year from Boca Raton.
Dr.
Schaaf taught at Brooklyn College from 1932-63 and wrote more than 20 books about math instruction from elementary to college levels.


MISSION TO SOMALIA: Somali Capital Mostly Peaceful; Gunmen Retreat From Marines; U.S. Sees Good Security
The chief of intelligence of the Joint Chiefs of Staff said today that while fighting in outlying towns in Somalia was being closely monitored, it appeared "the security at those airfields and so on where we will go in future is beginning to resolve itself."
The officer, Rear Adm.
Michael W. Cramer, said at a Pentagon briefing that the rival clans were trying to maximize their gains before the United States Marines arrived, citing the heavy fighting in recent days in Baidoa, Bardera and Kismayu.
Some clan members have left Mogadishu and have been fighting north of the city, he said.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY BOARD SUSPENSION IS OVERRULED
Overriding Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez, the New York City Board of Education reinstated a rebellious Queens school board but gave Mr.
Fernandez the authority to supersede its members if they continue to refuse to teach respect for gay people.
While a rebuff for Mr.
Fernandez, the action stopped short of totally rejecting his authority, something that might have forced Mr.
Fernandez to say that he would depart as chancellor when his contract expires on June 30.
A1.


BRIEFS
Debt  *
Alcan Aluminum Corp., Cleveland, is offering $100 million in 7 1/4 percent notes due in 1999 priced at 99.513 to yield 7.34 percent through First Boston Corp.
The noncallable notes are rated A-2 by Moody's Investors Service Inc. and A- by Standard &amp; Poor's Corp. and Duff &amp; Phelps. *
Federal National Mortgage Association, Washington, priced $800 million in callable five-year debentures at par to yield 6.3 percent.
The series SM-1997-V securities are callable beginning Dec. 11, 1995.


MISSION TO SOMALIA: Somali Capital Mostly Peaceful; Gunmen Retreat From Marines; U.S. Sees Good Security
The chief of intelligence of the Joint Chiefs of Staff said today that while fighting in outlying towns in Somalia was being closely monitored, it appeared "the security at those airfields and so on where we will go in future is beginning to resolve itself."
The officer, Rear Adm.
Michael W. Cramer, said at a Pentagon briefing that the rival clans were trying to maximize their gains before the United States Marines arrived, citing the heavy fighting in recent days in Baidoa, Bardera and Kismayu.
Some clan members have left Mogadishu and have been fighting north of the city, he said.


Charles and Diana Are Separating 'Amicably'
Buckingham Palace wrote the unhappy ending today to a storybook marriage gone badly wrong, a seven-sentence-long announcement that Charles, the Prince of Wales and heir to the British throne, and Diana, the Princess of Wales, had agreed to separate after 11 years as husband and wife.
Prime Minister John Major, who broke the news in a nationally televised appearance before a hushed House of Commons, sought to cushion the blow by emphasizing that the royal couple did not intend to divorce and would continue to carry on their royal and constitutional duties separately as the future King and Queen of England.
Monarchy in Upheaval
"This decision has been reached amicably and they will both continue to participate fully in the upbringing of their children," Mr.
Major said, reading from the text.  [ Buckingham Palace's text, page A19. ]


Sexual Partners on Increase for Girls
Teen-age girls are becoming increasingly likely to have multiple sexual partners, according to a new study that is expected to heighten concern about sexually transmitted diseases.
The study, based largely on a 1988 survey of sexual behavior among women from 15 to 44 years old, found that 62 percent of sexually active adolescents had had two or more sexual partners.
Studies of adolescent sexual behavior in the 1970's found that 39 percent of sexually active adolescents had had multiple partners.


Events: Holiday Open Houses, Tours
Starting this week, open houses, seasonal displays and candlelight tours will be offered in museums and historic houses decorated in the styles of Christmases past.
Old Merchant's House
, 29 East
Fourth Street, between Lafayette Street and the Bowery; (212) 777-1089.


Egypt Tightens the Net Around Its Militant Opposition
The Government said today that it had sealed off a sprawling slum in Cairo and arrested 400 Islamic militants in the biggest crackdown on dissidents since the assassination of President Anwar el-Sadat in 1981.
The huge security operation began Tuesday morning when armored personnel carriers and troops armed with shotguns and automatic rifles tipped with bayonets blocked off dirt streets and ringed small sections of Imbaba, a stronghold of many Muslim fundamentalist groups.
The crackdown had been planned for several weeks, security officials said.


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L  Leafs' Power Display on Power Play
Toronto's power play was more efficient than Detroit's penalty killing and the result was a 5-3 victory by the Maple Leafs over the Red Wings last night in Toronto.
The Maple Leafs scored a season-high five power-play goals.
Mike Foligno, with a pair of goals, John Cullen, Dmitri Mironov and Doug Gilmour connected to help Toronto to its first victory in five games.
Mironov also had three assists and Gilmour two.
Steve Yzerman had a power-play goal for the Red Wings, who now have one victory in seven games.
Jimmy Carson and Gerrard Gallant were the only skaters to score with both teams at even strength.
Toronto wound up 5 for 9 with a man advantage and the Leafs killed off five of six minors they took.
The game also marked the return of Detroit's Bob Probert to an ice surface on Canadian soil in almost four years.
Until last Friday, when he received permission from United States immigration authorities to re-enter the United States, he'd been unable to cross the border since a March 1989 arrest on drug-possession charges. (AP) Sabres 5, Bruins 2: Aleksandr Mogilny scored three goals as Buffalo snapped a four-game streak without a victory by beating Boston.
The victory by the Sabres, whose only two victories in their last 13 games had come against the expansion Ottawa Senators, stopped the Bruins' winning streak at four games.
Mogilny's fourth career hat trick gave him 20 goals for the season. (AP)


Review/Theater; Melding Cocteau and Miles Davis
Robert Lepage's magical "Needles and Opium" begins in a Left Bank hotel in a room formerly occupied by celebrated French artists.
Playing himself as a visitor to Paris, Mr.
Lepage is facing a long sleepless night when his thoughts are invaded by the spirits of Jean Cocteau and Miles Davis.
From here the play embarks on a journey that is filled with indelible imagery and observations about Surrealism, existentialism and jazz.
The show, which opened on Tuesday as part of the Next Wave Festival at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, is a tour de force for Mr.
Lepage as playwright, director, designer and solo performer.
It is the opposite of his recent, aberrant version of "A Midsummer Night's Dream," staged in a sea of mud at Britain's National Theater.
In contrast to that sprawling Shakespearean oddity, "Needles and Opium" is a chamber work marked by its absolute precision.


Unilever Picks Chief For U.S. Unit
Unilever, the giant maker of consumer goods, said yesterday that it had named Charles B. Strauss, the American head of an important Unilever subsidiary in Germany, as the new president and chief executive of the Lever Brothers Company, the huge household-products company in the United States that makes Wisk detergent and Dove soap.
Mr.
Strauss, 49, succeeds David F. Webb, a 40-year Unilever employee who will retire at the end of the month.
Mr.
Webb has been president and chief executive for the last five years.


When a 'Toy' Won't Do: Gifts for the Pre-Teen Set
WHEN 9-year-old Ben Tejblum was browsing in a toy store recently, he was asked what he wanted for the holidays.
He shrugged and pointed at a puppet stage and miniature knights.
Ben, who lives in Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y., said that if he's bored, he looks around his bedroom, "finds something to play with" and life's O.K. again.
When 8-year-old Julia Braczyk of Manhattan was asked what she wanted, she gave a more definite, but still nonchalant shrug.
"I guess crafts stuff," said Monica Bernier, Julia's mother.


Pop and Jazz in Review
John Cale
Eisner and Lubin Auditorium New York University
TXT&gt;In another era he might have been called a generalist with a penchant for elegance and esoterica.
But these days people are expected to settle into narrower cubbyholes, so John Cale is viewed as a rocker with pretentious leanings.
Since co-founding the Velvet Underground in 1963, Mr.
Cale has never quite settled into a comfortable spot, either artistically or commercially, but he has gained a tenacious cult following happy to accompany him on his musical wanderings.
On Saturday evening, Mr.
Cale performed solo and with the Soldier Quartet and Sterling Morrison, the Velvet Underground's bassist.
Mr.
Cale has performed nearly the same set for years, often without inspiration.
But he has finally discovered a way to refresh his own familiar melodies, and his renditions of chestnuts like "Guts," "Buffalo Ballet" and "The Chinese Envoy" reached the songs' essential beauty, built of wonder, playfulness and sorrow's calm.
Starting with three songs based on Dylan Thomas poems, he worked through material from all phases of his career.
The influence of Tin Pan Alley and the British music hall on Mr.
Cale was never clearer; as he banged out a boogie-woogie piano beat and crooned in his patented world-weary way, he seemed like an eccentric cousin of Cole Porter's.
Mr.
Cale's rock side emerged when he picked up an acoustic guitar and bashed through "The Ballad of Cable Hogue" as if he were thinking of a young Bob Dylan.
Mr.
Morrison and the Soldier String Quartet added horror-movie color to his trademark performance of "Heartbreak Hotel."
The evening's biggest treat came at the first encore, when Lou Reed strode onstage in suburban casuals, guitar strapped to his chest.
Mr.
Cale, Mr.
Reed and Mr.
Morrison launched into "Style It Takes," from "Songs for Drella," the 1990 Reed-Cale tribute to Andy Warhol.
Only the crucial absence of the drummer Maureen Tucker kept this from being a Velvet Underground reunion.
Mr.
Reed's aggressive playing dominated the proceedings, but the three men did listen to one another, building a fractured reflection of the foundational Velvet sound.
The trio continued with Mr.
Cale's song "Forever Changed." Then Mr.
Reed left the stage and the history-making was over for the night.
Mr.
Cale returned with everyone but Mr.
Reed, including the show's opening act, the talented experimental guitarist Michael Brook, for a rather anticlimactic rendition of Leonard Cohen's "Hallelujah." Then he returned alone to perform two of his most poignant ballads, "The Thoughtless Kind" and "Close Watch." As he sang of love lost and friendship restored, his appropriate role became obvious.
He is avant-garde pop's great sentimentalist, relaying simple truths through lovely melodies.
As corny as it makes him seem sometimes, it's an honorable position.


Tersely, Witness Reveals Her World and Its Limits
It has been nearly four years since the afternoon in 1989 when she took off her clothes for the teen-age boys and did everything they asked, but the young retarded woman at the center of the Glen Ridge sex assault case still cannot face her mother.
When the young woman took the witness stand today to give her account of that afternoon, she did so only with the promise that her mother would stay away from the courtroom, a prosecutor said.
Although the woman, now 21 years old, still lives with her parents, she has never told them what happened.
It was not possible to know whether she believed that she had succeeded in keeping the details of her behavior from her parents, but in her testimony there was much to suggest that she has difficulty understanding the world and the people around her.
Her answers to questions from the lawyers and the judge rarely ran to more than a word or two.
She seemed incapable of offering any narrative or explanation.
But as she spoke about her life and about the boys she had thought were her friends, the boundaries of her world emerged.
First Confrontation
Plain and plump, she described how she had gone to a park on March 1, 1989, to play basketball alone.
There she met some boys she knew and followed them to one of their homes, where she took off her clothes and performed and submitted to a range of sexual acts that the boys suggested.
She had been told, she said, that one of the boys would take her out on a date that night if she cooperated.
The boy never did.
Her appearance in court today was the first time the jurors in the nine-week-old trial had seen the woman, whom defense lawyers have suggested is an aggressive temptress who engaged in sex because she enjoyed it.
It was also the first time since the incident that she has faced the four young men accused of sexually assaulting her.
A fifth defendant is to be tried separately.
The contrast between the woman and the four defendants was stark as they sat about 30 feet apart in the courtroom.
The young men, once popular high school athletes, sat stiffly in gray suits, staring at her impassively as she spoke.
Fidgeting and squirming on the witness stand, the young woman rarely glanced in their direction.
Exasperation at some questions that seemed to baffle her gave way to an occasional pout.
Indeed, whether the young woman could be considered intelligent enough to testify at all was not resolved until Judge R. Benjamin Cohen ruled this morning that she understood the difference between the truth and a lie.
Fantasy and Reality
"If I say my robe is black, is that the truth?" the judge asked.
"Yes," the woman replied.
"If I say I'm standing up, is that the truth?" he asked.
"No," she said. "You're sitting down."
Such interviews are normally reserved for very young children whose grasp of reality is in doubt.
Testimony at the trial has indicated that the woman has an I.Q. of only 64 and sometimes has difficulty distinguishing fantasy from reality.
In her testimony, she seemed to bolster that assessment.
When a prosecutor showed her a baseball bat that she had recently helped to purchase for use at the trial, she said that it was the one the boys had inserted in her vagina nearly four years ago.
She seemed to find no contradiction in her statements about the bat, which she also acknowledged helping to buy.
Her answers to questions about the incident and its aftermath were straight-forward, but she acknowledged toward the end of the day that she "might have messed up a little" when she described performing oral sex on some of the boys.
Instead, she said, she thought she had used her hands to sexually arouse them.
Only once did she become squeamish.
When asked by Robert D. Laurino, one of the prosecutors, to describe how she felt physically after the incident, she hid her face in her hands and refused to answer.
"It's embarrassing," she moaned.
Speaking slowly and gently, as if to a young child, Mr.
Laurino said: "I know it's embarrassing, but we're all adults here. You can tell us."
After a time she looked up and responded: "It hurt. It hurt when I went to the bathroom."
Prosecutors have attempted to cast the young woman as a lonely teen-ager who would do nearly anything to win the friendship and affection of others.
Today she said that if her friends asked her to do something she would do it.
But she no longer considers the boys her friends, she added.
But her reassessment of the relationship was slow in coming.
After the boys had finished with her, she said, and she had put on her clothes she remained at the house in the hope of winning a date with one of them.
"I thought he might still want to go out with me," she said.
"Had he ever gone out with you before?" Mr. Laurino asked.
"No," she whispered.
"Did he go out with you that night?"
"No."
She was placed on birth control pills after the incident, according to earlier testimony.
Now, the young woman said, she sometimes baby-sits for relatives and plays the piano, which she learned by ear.
And she has a job in a Head Start preschool program.
"I work with little children," she said. "I play with them."


Trevino Postpones His Retirement
LEE TREVINO, facing hand surgery that will sideline him for at least three months, said yesterday that he has changed his mind about retiring and will come back.
The season-ending Seniors Tour Championship, which begins tomorrow at the Dorado Beach resort in Puerto Rico, will be Trevino's last start until at least March, possibly April.
He is scheduled for reconstructive surgery to repair damaged ligaments in his left thumb Tuesday in Hartford.
For the last three seasons, he had insisted 1992 would be his last full year of competition; that he would play a restricted schedule starting next year. (AP)


Accounts
*
Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, New York, to Bennett Book Advertising, New York, to handle the book publisher's account previously at Della Femina, McNamee, New York.
Billings were not disclosed.


Corrections
The Personal Health column on Nov. 18 about lead poisoning misstated a level at which children were formerly considered to be poisoned.
It was 25 or more micrograms of lead per deciliter of blood.
As the article stated, the level at which children are now considered poisoned is 10 micrograms per deciliter.


Nassau Aide Admits Lying in Estate Feud
A top North Hempstead official pleaded guilty today to paying a witness $1,500 to sign a false affidavit in a bitterly contested family dispute over a $5 million estate.
The official, Richard Middlemark, is the executive assistant to the North Hempstead Supervisor, Benjamin Zwirn.
The case could have political repercussions for Mr.
Zwirn, who has relied heavily on his aide for budget advice.
Mr.
Zwirn, a Democrat, is considered a likely candidate in next year's race for county executive, and some politicians speculated today on the political impact of keeping or losing his executive assistant.


Editorial Notebook; The Biggest Mall of All
It was a dark and stormy night.
Truly.
The wind was strong and the moon was hiding behind the clouds that had dumped snow on the city earlier that day.
This was no time for travelers, but never mind; the highway was clotted with cars and buses.
It was the fourth of December, and everybody was going to the mall.
The mall.
The mall that measures over four million square feet and has a theme park, Knott's Camp Snoopy, at its center.
The mall that, on Friday nights at least, becomes a nursery for countless Minnesota babies -- zipped into their fuzzy suits, strapped into their strollers and snoozing their way through hundreds of shops.
The Mall of America, which opened a few months ago in Bloomington, Minn., and is still growing.


American Vows Millions to Ex-Soviet Science
An American financier with a philanthropic specialty in post-Communist transitions announced today that he would give $100 million over the next two years in direct research grants to keep former Soviet scientists working in a time of economic crisis.
The pledge by the American, George Soros, is by far the largest gift, government or private, received so far for the support of fundamental science in Russia, Boris Saltykov, Minister of Science and Technology, said at a news conference here today.


Teen-Ager Who Left Baby Is Given Custody of Her
A New Haven teen-ager who left her baby at birth and then had a change of heart can keep the child, Connecticut's highest court ruled today.
The 3-to-2 decision was a blow to a New Britain couple, Cindy and Jerry LaFlamme, with whom the child had been placed and who had been told by state officials that they would be able to adopt her.


Essay; Iraqgate Whitewash
In the first week of October, the refusal to name an independent counsel in the Iraqgate scandal was becoming an issue in the Presidential campaign.
To take off the heat, Attorney General William Barr asked former Federal Judge Harold Tyler if he would serve as a "special" -- not independent -- counsel.
The timing of the assignment was fishy.
"He didn't seem to be in that much of a hurry," recalls Judge Tyler.
Mr.
Barr wanted a report delayed until after the election, well into December -- when the act authorizing special prosecutors was to expire.
Judge Tyler wisely ducked.


DEATH TOLL SOARS IN BOLIVIAN TOWN
The number of dead and missing from a huge mudslide that buried a gold mining town reached into the hundreds today as the Bolivian Government struggled to send rescue workers, food and medical supplies into the remote area some 90 miles north of the capital city of La Paz.
The Government said that 153 people were confirmed dead or missing.
Many more are believed to be buried under the mudslide or to have been swept away in the Tipuani River running next to the camp.
Officials said there were as many as 130 injured.


TV Army on the Beach Took U.S. by Surprise
For a military establishment acutely conscious of its vulnerability to post-cold-war budget cutters, the landing at Mogadishu was the ultimate photo opportunity.
But having finally secured an elusive spotlight, the marines discovered that they had too much of a good thing.
As Navy Seals and Marine reconnaissance teams came shore under the glare of television lights, the spotlights and flash attachments gave away their positions, interfered with their sophisticated night-vision equipment and gave night blindness to commandos who wanted to have their eyes fully adjusted to darkness in case they were attacked from the dunes and scrub.


Ex-Hoyas Face Off: Ewing vs. Mourning
Patrick Ewing and Alonzo Mourning have spent many summer afternoons playing against each other in Georgetown University's gymnasium.
That friendly rivalry will be renewed Thursday night, when Ewing and Mourning meet for the first time in a National Basketball Association game.
"I'm looking forward to playing against him," said Ewing after today's practice, looking ahead to the Knicks' home game against the Charlotte Hornets.
"We worked out together all summer. I was telling everybody that he was going to be a great player. I'm proud of him.


Hindu-Muslim Riots Intensify; Troops Fire at Crowds
India was rocked today by a third day of rioting as security forces fired on Muslim crowds who violently protested the destruction of a 16th-century mosque by militant Hindus.
By late this evening, the official death toll in three days of riots nationwide rose past 700, but the actual number was thought to be much higher.


Jets' Byrd Is Transferred To Mt. Sinai for Therapy
Jets defensive end Dennis Byrd, whose legs are paralyzed from a broken neck he sustained in a game on Nov. 29, was moved from Lenox Hill Hospital to the Spinal Cord Injury and Rehabilitation unit at Mount Sinai Hospital in Manhattan this morning to start his long-term physical therapy program.
During a news conference at the Jets' training facility here, Dr.
Elliott Hershman, the Jets' orthopedist, said that Byrd will undergo physical, occupational and recreational therapy as well as psychological counseling and group therapy.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Saturday about a $13.4 million whistle-blower award to a former employee of the General Electric Company misidentified the nonprofit group that will share in the award.
It is Taxpayers Against Fraud.


Somali Capital Mostly Peaceful; Gunmen Retreat From Marines
The streets of this city were noticeably freer of weapons and armed vehicles today as hundreds of local gunmen apparently decided not to risk a clash with the United States Marines who had landed here overnight.
But some sporadic shooting was reported in Mogadishu, and sharper clashes between rival Somali clans were reported in outlying cities where American commanders plan to create protected centers for the distribution of food and other relief supplies to this war- and famine-ravaged nation.


Jordan Leads Bulls Past Cavs
Bulls 108, Cavaliers 91
CHICAGO, Dec. 9 (AP) -- Michael Jordan had 28 points, 11 rebounds and 10 assists tonight to pace the Chicago Bulls to an easy 108-91 victory over the Cleveland Cavaliers.
The triple-double was the 24th of Jordan's career but his first this season.
B.
J.
Armstrong added a season-high 20 points for Chicago, which had dropped three of five games coming in.
Celtics 129, Nuggets 119


The Rally Wall St. Hardly Noticed
It has happened quietly, without the flash and drama that made Wall Street what it was in the 1980's.
But over the course of the last three months, stock prices have moved to record highs.
The relative lack of attention to the latest bull market may be because of the relatively poor performance of the 30 issues that make up the most famous and widely watched index of stock market performance, the Dow Jones industrial average.
At 3,323.81, the Dow is up 4.89 percent this year, but still well below the record 3,413.21 it reached on June 1.


Frail Social Compact Is Broken in Bombay
The trouble in the Dharavi district began Monday morning, as word spread through Muslim sections of one of Asia's largest slums that a mob of militant Hindus had destroyed a mosque in northern India the previous day.
In the two days since, waves of shootings, stabbings and arson have left several dozen people dead in Dharavi, a vast stretch of interconnected shacks and alleyways near the international airport.
There, hundreds of thousands of the desperately poor of India's biggest commercial city are crowded together, living almost impossibly close to each other.


King Lights a Fire on Miami Ice
Steven King doesn't know if he's here to light a fire, then leave, or if he really has a chance to win an everyday job.
And it doesn't really matter.
He knew when he arrived that the Rangers were slumping, and he and three other players from Binghamton -- Aleksei Kovalev, Sergei Zubov and Corey Hirsch -- were supposed to add a little zest.
That was his assignment.
He's doing his job.
With 2 minutes 42 seconds to play in the game tonight at Miami Arena, King scored his second goal in as many games to give the Rangers a desperately needed victory, by 6-5, over the expansion Tampa Bay Lightning.
Add in a 6-0 shutout over the Maple Leafs on Sunday, and the Rangers have now won back-to-back games for the first time since Buffalo and Philadelphia visited the Garden in the first week of November.


Borland to Lay Off 15% of Its Work Force
Borland International Inc. said today that it would reduce its worldwide work force by 15 percent, or about 350 of its 2,200 employees.
The company said the layoffs were part of a restructuring that would result in a charge against earnings of up to $35 million in the quarter ending Dec. 31 and a loss for the quarter.
Borland shares fell $1.50 today, to $21.50, in over-the-counter trading.
While details of the restructuring were announced after the close of the market, several analysts issued cautionary reports following a speech Tuesday by Philippe Kahn, Borland's chairman, president and chief executive, at the Technologic Partners PC Outlook conference here.


S.E.C. Studying Trades In Bank That Won Bid
The Securities and Exchange Commission is investigating what appears to be insider trading in the stock of DS Bancor that began the day the bank holding company won a competitive bid for the assets of a failed savings institution.
Volume in the stock of DS Bancor, which is based in Derby, Conn., soared on Dec. 1, the day its bid was selected by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and continued up to the public disclosure last Friday.
Trading began to taper off yesterday.
Cooperating With Inquiry
The deal for the $260 million in assets of the failed institution, the Burritt Interfinancial Corporation of New Britain, Conn., increased the total assets of Derby by more than 25 percent, to a total of more than $1.2 billion.
Such huge growth in assets makes the bank much more valuable as an investment.


Packer Defensive Back Suspended
Defensive back LeROY BUTLER of the Green Bay Packers was suspended for one game by the league yesterday for hitting Detroit Lions quarterback ANDRE WARE in the head during Sunday's 38-10 victory in Milwaukee.
It was the first suspension of a player for on-field action since 1988, when Miami's MARK BROWN was set down for one game for a nearly identical hit. (AP)


Museum of Natural History Opens a New Library


Grim to Giddy: Dining Out Is In
The mood these days at the Four Seasons, one of New York's landmark restaurants, is positively giddy.
In the evening, the restaurant's clubby Grill Room now welcomes a capacity crowd of around 140 guests a night, who order from a new, lower-priced prix fixe menu, instead of the lonely 6 to 10 who dined there earlier in the year.
Reservations in the soaring Pool Room have also risen by about 10 percent in the last month.
"Everything had been in a decline or flat," said Alex Von Bidder, the general manager.
"Then it just exploded."


Review/Music; Out of West Africa, a Powerful Voice
Kandia Kouyate, a singer from Mali, has the charisma and vocal power of the most commanding American soul singers, even though the traditional West African music she performs is only tangentially related to modern soul.
The singer, who appeared at Symphony Space on Tuesday evening as part of the World Music Institute's program "Griots of West Africa," made a splash three years ago when she appeared in the touring revue "Africa Oye" on Broadway.
One of the most famous singers of the Mandinka people, she was presented on Tuesday by Papa Susso, a master of the kora, a 21-string African instrument that is a cross between a harp and a lute.


Jazz Group, a Guest of High Art, Seems Lost on a Trail It Blazed
It's very possible that the single most important political event in recent jazz history has been its invitation into such landmarks of high art as Lincoln Center, Carnegie Hall and the Smithsonian.
If that's true, then the American Jazz Orchestra, which is giving what may be its last performance tonight at Cooper Union, should get most of the credit.
Founded in 1986 by Gary Giddins, the jazz critic at The Village Voice, the ensemble developed the notion of permanently basing a jazz orchestra at an institution.
It has always been a struggle, however.
Short on money, the 16-piece band could rarely afford advertising.
And its venue, the Great Hall at Cooper Union, is not only uncomfortable but also has poor sight lines, which did not encourage repeat customers.


Some Companies Awarded Lemons, Others Get Carrots
A HANDFUL of consumer, environmental and health advocacy groups gather in Washington every December for what has become a familiar ritual: Doling out their so-called Harlan Page Hubbard Lemon Awards for the advertisements they consider the most deceptive and irresponsible.
In turn, the companies and advertising agencies that garner the Lemons typically say their work has been misinterpreted or unfairly maligned.
But surely these advocacy groups also believe that there are some praiseworthy advertisements in their field of interest.


Watchdog Group Asks for Inquiry Into Gramm Deal With Contractor
The head of a public-interest group today demanded an investigation of Senator Phil Gramm, the Texas Republican who paid just over half the costs of completing construction on his vacation home and then helped the contractor deal with Federal savings and loan regulators.
Fred Wertheimer, the president of Common Cause, asked the Senate Ethics Committee to conduct a full-fledged investigation and to hire an outside counsel to run it.
In 1990 the Ethics Committee told Mr.
Gramm he did not owe the contractor the full $117,000 the construction had cost but only the $63,343 that Mr.
Gramm had earlier agreed to pay for the job.


Parent &amp; Child
WHEN Karen Hanson recently asked her cooking students how they felt about their families' coming holiday celebrations, their responses were full of dread.
"All 18 were anticipating family complaints about where the gatherings took place, who did the cooking or who was consulted about the menu," said Ms.
Hanson, a caterer in Ridgefield, Conn., who teaches at the New School for Social Research in Manhattan.
Their anxieties were predictable.
While the holiday season is heralded as a time of joy, many family gatherings are peppered with feelings of anger, resentment and unmet expectations.
Young children become overexcited.
Adults regress into immature, dependent or antagonistic relationships with other family members.
Grandparents treat their grown-up children as if they were adolescents.


HOUSE DELEGATES GET NEW POWERS
House Democrats have granted enhanced voting powers to the delegates representing the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico and three territories, a change in House rules that Republicans criticized today as a naked grab for power.
Beginning in January the five delegates, all Democrats, will be able to vote on amendments to bills and virtually all other matters on the House floor with the exception of final passage of legislation.
They are not likely to make a substantial difference on legislation, but the Republicans said the move has the effect of negating half of the 10 seats they picked up in the November elections.


Fast Start Boosts No. 5 North Carolina
North Carolina 78 Virginia Tech 62
ROANOKE, Va., Dec. 9 (AP) -- A local favorite, George Lynch, scored 18 points tonight as No. 5 North Carolina took a 14-0 lead and coasted to a 78-62 victory over Virginia Tech.
Lynch, a senior who played most of his high school ball in Roanoke, delighted the home crowd by grabbing 11 rebounds and adding 3 assists.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Lockheed will acquire the military aircraft division of General Dynamics for $1.53 billion in cash.
The transaction reduces the number of contractors available to supply the Pentagon.  [ Page D1. ]
Lee A. Iacocca has been talking with representatives of T.W.A. about assuming the chairmanship of the struggling airline.
He will retire as head of Chrysler at the end of the month.  [ D1. ]


Economic Scene; With Friends Like These . . .
THE push and shove over public policy is usually about who gets the license, the subsidy, the tax break.
Occasionally ideology intrudes, as in "less government the better." But the battle over environmental policy within the Clinton transition team is about something more elusive -- call it sensibility.
And the first casualty may be Lawrence H. Summers, an economics superstar whose impolitic pronouncements on the environment could cost him a post in the Clinton White House.
On one side are Vice President-elect Al Gore's senior advisers, spiritually committed environmentalists eager to move global warming and rain forest preservation to the top of the national agenda.
On the other are economists and their fellow travelers, policy wonks never at a loss for a clever solution.
And while there is no inherent conflict, the chemistry between the two groups is wretched.
In fact, the infighting could leave President Clinton with a least-common-denominator environmental policy of good intentions and little effective action.


'Managed Competition' Is Not Healthy Answer; Stop Picking on Doctors
To the Editor:
In your editorial "More Bureaucrats Won't Cut Health Costs," (Nov. 22), I was struck by your endorsement of the Garamendi plan.
What was most striking to me were not the specific provisions of the plan but that, as usual, physicians are treated as the third person invisible.


East Side Liquor Clerk Wounded As Police Free Holdup Hostages
A holdup gone awry ended last night with a dozen police officers charging into an Upper East Side liquor store last night and freeing three hostages.
A clerk was critically wounded in the incident.
Lieut.
Donald Stephenson of the Police Department's Crime Scene Unit said that about 9:30 P.M., two homicide detectives driving by the store at 77th Street and Third Avenue spotted two men apparently preparing to rob it.


Free Agents Remain Anything but Free
In a frenzy unprecedented in the 17-year history of free agency, clubs have signed 35 free agents in three days to contracts worth $225 million.
After 10 free agents signed on Monday and 16 on Tuesday, nine more signed today.
Greg Maddux, the latest pitcher to spurn the Yankees, led the third-day parade, agreeing to a five-year, $28 million deal with the Atlanta Braves tonight.
Among the free agents who joined him, Andre Dawson marched to Boston for two years and $9.3 million; Todd Worrell to Los Angeles for three years and $9.5 million; Mike Moore to Detroit for three years and $10 million, and Randy Myers to the Chicago Cubs for three years and $11 million.


Richard Avedon Is Named New Yorker Photographer
The New Yorker has hired its first staff photographer: Richard Avedon, whose portraits and fashion photographs have appeared in magazines for 45 years.
Under his contract with the magazine, announced yesterday by Tina Brown, the magazine's editor since this fall, Mr.
Avedon, 69, will produce 50 black-and-white full-page photographs for The New Yorker in the next year and will not take photo assignments from any other magazine.


Bridge
For a bridge gift matching high quality with a low price, consider "The Best of Robert Gray, Book Two." This is the most recent of a series of booklets ($5.50 each, including mailing) with material reprinted from The Bridge World, 39 West 94th Street, New York, N.Y. 10025.
Gray reports a sad story involving a fictional lady named Margaret, who was playing in a Scottish women's event.
She held the East cards and found herself defending a contract of six diamonds, played from the South position after a response to Blackwood put the long diamonds into the dummy.


'Managed Competition' Is Not Healthy Answer; Private Sector Success
To the Editor:
I was glad to see your two editorials on managed competition.
I, too, believe the concept is the solution for the U.S. health care system and for many who are poorly served today -- the uninsured, small groups, the individually insured.
However, you describe a method for achieving managed competition that requires a lot of government activity.
Just setting up the playing field to allow your version to work will take years.


Britons Doubt Charles and Diana Will Ever Rule
Conservative members of Parliament, newspaper editorialists and even avid royalists voiced skepticism today that the Prince and Princess of Wales would be able to fulfill their intended future roles as King and Queen now that they have separated as husband and wife.
One day after Britain was stunned by the announcement that the royal couple intended to break up but not to divorce, the Government's insistence that the arrangement would not impair the monarchy or the succession to the throne appeared to do little to quiet doubters.


Survey Finds Women Face Sex Bias in British Bar
A survey by the bar in England has concluded that women face discrimination at every stage of their careers in the legal profession.
The survey, published two weeks ago, showed that 60 percent of female barristers, who argue cases in the high courts, said they had been victims of sexual discrimination.
They said they had had difficulty finding pupillages, the mandatory yearlong training positions with barristers, as well as finding tenancies, permanent positions as barristers.
They also reported discrimination in promotion to Queen's Counsel, the senior rank that multiplies their income and moves them to the head of the list for judicial appointments.


A Theater Is Selected for 'Angels in America'
After weeks of agonizing by the playwright, feverish competition from theater owners and Kremlinology-like speculation by the theater world at large, the New York fate of Tony Kushner's two-part AIDS epic, "Angels in America: A Gay Fantasia on National Themes," has finally been determined.
It was announced yesterday by Mr.
Kushner and the play's producers, Jujamcyn Theaters and the Center Theater Group of Los Angeles, in association with the New York Shakespeare Festival, that the four-hour first part of the play, "Millennium Approaches," will open on April 25 at the Walter Kerr Theater on West 48th Street.
The production, to be directed by George C. Wolfe, will thus bypass a previously announced Off Broadway engagement at the Joseph Papp Public Theater.
A Run in Los Angeles
The second part, "Perestroika," which Mr.
Kushner is still revising, is to follow at an unspecified date.
The entire play recently completed a successful run at the Mark Taper Forum in Los Angeles, where the schedule included both marathon single-day performances and consecutive-night performances.
The producers said the scheduling was undecided for New York.


Seasonal Favorites From Critics' CD Shelves
"MESSIAH" demonstrates the difficulty in choosing a favorite version of a great work.
In space-saving purges, I've weeded out versions that seemed expendable, and I still have more than a dozen I would hate to part with.
Of course, "Messiah" is a special case: Handel revised it frequently, and listeners interested in the these reworkings will want to hear Nicholas McGegan's recording (Harmonia Mundi), which includes the major variants in a handy appendix at the end of each CD.
But the performance I play most is Christopher Hogwood's account of Handel's 1754 revision, a salient feature of which is the soprano version of "But who made abide," sung exquisitely by Emma Kirkby.
The cast is well matched, and the choral and instrumental performances are thrillingly transparent.
For a solid modern alternative, try Andrew Davis's unabashedly Romantic account, with Kathleen Battle and Samuel Ramey among the soloists (EMI/Angel).


Archbishop May, 70, Resigns As Chief Prelate in St. Louis
Pope John Paul II has accepted the resignation of Archbishop John L. May of St.
Louis, the National Conference of Catholic Bishops announced Wednesday.
Archbishop May, who is 70, has been under treatment for cancer after surgery to remove a malignant brain tumor last July.
Besides heading the Archdiocese of St.
Louis for almost 13 years, he served as president of the National Conference of Catholic Bishops from 1986 to 1989.


Brady Urges Tax Changes
Comparing the current tax system to a sinking ship, Nicholas F. Brady, Secretary of the Treasury, recommended yesterday that it be completely overhauled, and issued a report on what should be done to simplify the system as well as to encourage savings and investment.
Mr. Brady outlined the Treasury "options" in a speech at Columbia University.


Metropolitan Opera
The Metropolitan Opera is to present the first performance this season of Wagner's "Walkure" at 7 P.M. tomorrow.
The cast includes Gwyneth Jones as Brunhilde, Jessye Norman as Sieglinde, Hanna Schwarz as Fricka, Gary Lakes as Siegmund, James Morris as Wotan and Aage Haugland as Hunding.
James Levine conducts.
Tickets are $21 to $117.
Information: (212) 362-6000.


Books of The Times; Stories That Range From Bleak to Bleaker
Jesus' Son  Stories
By Denis Johnson
160 pages. Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $19.


Seasonal Favorites From Critics' CD Shelves
YEAR-END holidays are invitations to wallow in tradition, which may explain my preference here for old (or old-fashioned) performances over trendier newcomers.
I pick Sir Georg Solti's "Messiah" because I have never felt comfortable with modern countertenors hooting the solo alto arias, and because Sir Georg's interpretation sounds warm and reassuring yet plausibly lean (unlike Sir Thomas Beecham's amusingly over-the-top account).
If the first Hermann Scherchen "Messiah" recording were in print, I'd probably still opt for it: this was the performance, comparable in impact to Glenn Gould's first "Goldberg Variations," that more than any other inaugurated the 1950's Baroque revival.


Times and a Union Have Tentative Pact
The New York Times and District 15 of the International Association of Machinists, whose members maintain and repair the newspaper's production equipment, reached a tentative contract agreement yesterday.
A spokeswoman for The Times, Nancy Nielsen, said the agreement, which is subject to ratification by the union's membership, is similar to those already approved by five other production unions at the paper.
Details of the pact were not disclosed.


Fastest Growing Economies Cut Tax Subsidies; Debtors' Folly
To the Editor:
In "Bad Breaks" (Op-Ed, Nov. 18) Ann Crittenden proposes levying a 5 percent "tax" on interest paid to foreigners on "investments" here.
Interest is paid only to foreign lenders, not owners of real American assets.
The latter are taxed here.
"Taxing" foreign lenders would be like my trying to tax the bank that finances my house or car.
The bank, of course, would simply not make the loan unless I agreed to increase the interest rate to cover any present or future such "tax."
Debt securities trade publicly in increments of .01 percent.
A 5 percent "tax" would be 500 times this determining market measure.
In real life it would function as a protective tariff, keeping most foreign loan funds out of the U.S., driving up domestic rates and collecting little revenue.


'Teach Us How to Be Good Doctors'
Last week a group of families met in Minneapolis to talk about their struggles to help loved ones die, with little help from physicians.
Joe and Julia Quinlan were there, remembering their daughter, Karen Ann, who died nine years after her removal from a respirator.
Pat Brophy was there, the widow of a firefighter who lived for three years in a vegetative state.
So were the parents and sister of Nancy Cruzan, who was also in a vegetative state and whose "right to die" was supported by the Supreme Court.


THE TRANSITION: A Cabinet Begins to Take Shape; CLINTON TEAM TAKES SHAPE WITH BENTSEN AND 4 OTHERS NAMED TO ECONOMIC POSTS
President-elect Bill Clinton began to give shape to his Cabinet today with the appointment of an economic team of old hands from Washington and Wall Street to help him fulfill his campaign promise of fundamental economic change.
The distinctly mainstream array of advisers that Mr.
Clinton introduced at the old Arkansas State House, led by Senator Lloyd Bentsen of Texas as Treasury Secretary, seemed intended to mobilize lawmakers and executives behind his economic program, and to signal that the Clinton Administration will be as serious about reducing the deficit as about any new spending programs.
Diversity in Jobs
Along with Senator Bentsen, Mr.
Clinton named Representative Leon E. Panetta of California, the chairman of the House Budget Committee, as director of the White House's Office of Management and Budget, M. Alice Rivlin, the former director of the Congressional Budget Office, as Mr.
Panetta's deputy, Roger C. Altman, an investment banker, as Deputy Treasury Secretary, and Robert E. Rubin, the co-chairman of Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company, as senior economic adviser.


2 Somalis Killed in Clash
Two Somalis were killed and seven ere wounded today in a gunbattle at a French military checkpoint here, the first deaths of the two-day-old American-led military mission.
Maj.
Gerard Massot of the French Foreign Legion said that the clash took place at 6:45 P.M., when a truck sped up at a French checkpoint and opened fire.
The French troops returned fire, he said, killing two Somalis.
Five others were wounded by bullets or injured when the truck crashed.


First Proposal On Cable Prices
The Federal Communications Commission today proposed regulating cable television prices by measuring them against one of several possible benchmarks for reasonableness.
The move marks an opening round in the complex job of actually putting in effect the cable television law passed by Congress in October.
The F.C.C. is drafting dozens of proposed regulations to put the law into effect; the issue of rate regulation is a central issue.


A History of Hitting the Snooze Button
So what's to be done about Magic and Marge, two entertainers who seem to have worn out their welcomes?
An odd pairing, perhaps, this ebullient, beloved, stricken former basketball star and this cranky, lonely, narrow-minded baseball owner.
Perhaps not.
A year ago, when Magic Johnson announced that he had tested positive for the virus that causes AIDS, he sounded a wake-up call to the insulated subculture of SportsWorld: Athletes, owners, fans had better start making the connections between their sweaty Oz and the "real" world, change behavior, take precautions, above all use the sports industry's enormous energy and reach for something more than pushing beer and sneakers.


Rockefeller Center Trust to Cut Dividend
Rockefeller Center Properties Inc., the real estate investment trust that holds the mortgage on Rockefeller Center, said yesterday that it would cut its fourth-quarter dividend.
The dividend, payable on Dec. 30, was cut to 25 cents a share, from 48 cents the previous quarter.
The board of the trust cited the "unfavorable real estate climate in midtown Manhattan" as a main reason behind the move.


Somali Welcome Aside, The Marines Are Jittery
Peering out under his wet, sand-encrusted helmet, Cpl.
Tony Storey glanced at the crowds lining the streets in a light rain here today, then suddenly barked, "Hey! Watch those guys up on that water tower!"
"We heard this would be a benign environment, but you never know when someone might pop up from behind a wall and take a shot at you or lob a grenade," said Corporal Storey, a sunburned 21-year-old mortar operator from Canal Winchester, Ohio, never taking his eye off the two unarmed men 200 yards away.


Jolly Old Elves Toiling in December's Dream Factory
"DID I wake you up last year?"
The little head shook.
"Are you sure?"


INDIA ISSUES A BAN ON 5 RIVAL GROUPS
The Indian Government announced a ban on five powerful Hindu and Muslim fundamentalist organizations tonight as the death toll in rioting and clashes with security forces rose to 950.
Bombay, Calcutta and parts of Northern India were hit by violence for the fifth straight day after the demolition of a 16th-century mosque at Ayodhya by Hindus.
The actual death toll is thought to be much higher than official figures.


Review/Art; Wolfing Down Modernism Whole
Countless catalogues are available on contemporary artists who have barely reached mid-career, but books on American modernists of the inter-war years are few and far between.
The names of John Sennhauser, Werner Drewes, Albert Swinden, Gertrude Greene and Charles Shaw, all leading members of an American avant-garde 60 years ago, have scant recognition value today.
One hopes this is changing, because they're an impressive group.
Typically born sometime around the turn of the century, most of them were academically trained, but early on gravitated to the Continental styles, first Cubism, then Neo-Plasticism and finally Surrealism.
Or at least that was the order in which these movements appeared in Europe.
In America they arrived, mail-order fashion, a little late and a bit scrambled.
If the careers of American modernists start off looking choppy, it's because the artists were trying to digest three decades of imported styles in a hectic few years.


On My Mind; Dinkins and Hasidim
What do the Jews of Crown Heights want of this man, this Mayor so civilized, so gentlemanly, that for millions of New Yorkers the words decent and Dinkins go together?
What could cool their anger at him -- and assuage their fears, which is a lot more important?


U.N. Wants Somalia Disarmed Before U.S. Leaves
The United Nations Secretary General, Boutros Boutros-Ghali, has told the United States that its troops should stay in Somalia until they disarm the country's warlords, remove mines in the north, train a military police force and restore order, senior Administration officials said today.
Only then, he said, would the United Nations be prepared to send a peace force into the famine-stricken country.


New Jersey Teaches Motorists Common-Sense Approach Against Carjacking


HOSPITALITY FRANCHISE STOCK RISES 17% ON ITS FIRST DAY
In its first day of trading, the stock of Hospitality Franchise Systems Inc. closed yesterday at 18 3/4, up 2 3/4, or 17 percent, from the price of its initial public offering on Wednesday.
Volume was 2.8 million shares.
Of the six million common shares in the offering, the largest block was sold by Buckhead America Inc., a bankrupt concern from which Hospitality bought the Days Inn chain early this year.
Other sellers of Hospitality stock were Buckhead creditors, a lawyer representing Hospitality, James E. Buckman, said.
Only 503,000 were sold directly by Hospitality Franchise, and no shares were sold by the company's chairman, Henry Silverman, or by other insiders, he said.


No Headline
"I have heard all those stories about my being an insider. Let me tell you I felt like an outsider for 12 years, and I'm tired of the gridlock." -- LLOYD BENTSEN, chosen as Treasury Secretary by President-elect Clinton.  [ A36:5. ]


INSIDE
Clue to Tumors' Power
Scientists say cancer cells may release a potent molecule into the bloodstream, crippling the immune system, but the surprising finding has yet to be confirmed.
Page A30.
India Bans 5 Militant Groups
India outlawed five powerful Hindu and Muslim militant groups as the death toll rose in rioting and clashes with security forces.
Hundreds of towns were under curfew.
Page A11.
Dinkins Names a New Deputy
After his first choice was derailed by sexual-harassment charges, Mayor Dinkins appointed a new deputy mayor to promote his initiatives.
Page B1.
Hockey in Disneyland
The National Hockey League voted to expand to Miami and Anaheim, Calif.
The Walt Disney Company will own the Anaheim franchise.
Page B7.


Defense Attacks Mafia Turncoat's Credibility
A defense lawyer attacked the credibility of Salvatore (Sammy Bull) Gravano yesterday, stressing that there were no written reports or taped conversations to support much of his testimony against Victor Orena, the reputed acting boss of the Colombo crime family.
The lawyer, Gustave H. Newman, suggested that agents of the Federal Bureau of Investigation would have taken notes if Mr.
Gravano, a Mafia underboss who turned informer, gave them significant information about a reputed Colombo leader.


Allstate's Storm Loss Rises 40%
The Allstate Insurance Company yesterday increased its estimated losses from Hurricane Andrew by more than 40 percent, to $2.5 billion.
The news appeared to portend even bleaker hurricane losses for the property casualty industry.
The Allstate move prompted Moody's Investors Service Inc. to lower its financial strength ratings for Allstate and some credit ratings for Allstate's parent company, Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company.


U.N. Seeks Wider Role for U.S.
The Secretary General wants U.S. troops to stay in Somalia until they disarm the warlords, remove mines, and restore order.
Page A23.


CHRONICLE
LORD ROTHSCHILD has been named president of the Institute of Jewish Affairs, the research arm of the World Jewish Congress.
He succeeds EDGAR M. BRONFMAN, the president of the congress.
The 56-year-old Lord Rothschild has long been involved in Jewish affairs, mainly in Israel, where his family's philanthropy supports 20 projects and recently built a new Supreme Court building.
But he had never agreed to be the head of any group in Britain before.


Piermont Prospers From Makeover on the Hudson; Location, Location, Woody and Mia Aid Transformation From Factories to Galleries
Howard Brawner vividly remembers the day in 1983 when he pointed his camera out his living-room window and captured Mia Farrow daubing on some makeup outside his family's home on Piermont Avenue.
Oddly enough, he may have recorded a pivotal moment in the comeback of this tiny Rockland County village.


Clinton Says He'll Consider Inquiry Into Bank Case Involving Iraq
President-elect Bill Clinton said today that despite a Bush Administration investigation that found no criminal wrongdoing in a bank fraud case involving loans to Iraq he still believed that there was more to be discovered about what happened.
Mr.
Clinton said that after he took office he would consult with his attorney general to decide whether to ask the courts to name an independent prosecutor to examine allegations that Bush Administration officials covered up efforts to help Iraq build up its military in the years before the invasion of Kuwait.
The law that provides for the appointment of such special prosecutors expires next week, and Mr.
Clinton said today he would support its early re-enactment, making it a virtual certainty.


Review/Opera; Probing A Woman's Madness
In her 1892 novella, "The Yellow Wallpaper," Charlotte Perkins Gilman described her own experiences with a peculiar rest cure, developed by Dr.
Silas Weir Mitchell and thought to be the answer to all manner of feminine nervous disorders.
The cure involved restricted reading and conversation, and a prohibition against creative work.
Some women apparently responded well, but others -- including Gilman, who was treated for a nervous breakdown -- were driven from boredom to near-madness.
Gilman, however, recorded her response to the regimen in a secret journal, which became the basis of her book.
Ronald Perera's new opera, with a libretto by Constance Congdon -- at least the third operatic setting of this story since 1986 -- had its New York premiere on Wednesday evening at the Manhattan School of Music (120 Claremont Avenue, Morningside Heights), where it is to be repeated tonight and tomorrow.
Opera composers have long been drawn to stories in which women go mad, an attraction less misogynistic than opportunistic.
Mad scenes, traditionally, mean flighty, virtuosic soprano writing, and under the right conditions that means show-stopping applause.
But more can be less: the Gilman story is a single extended mad scene, unrelieved by the romance and backstairs scheming that surround the mad scene in (to take the most famous example) "Lucia di Lammermoor."


Attacker in Howard Beach Case to Be Freed
Jason Ladone, one of three men convicted in the Howard Beach racial attack six years ago, will be released from prison in February after serving the minimum five years of a 5- to 15-year sentence, the State Parole Board announced yesterday.
A three-member panel of the board voted 2 to 1 to grant parole to Mr.
Ladone, one of a group of teen-agers that chased and beat three black men in Howard Beach, Queens.
One of the victims, Michael Griffith, fled onto a highway and was struck and killed by a car.


The Art Market
Warhol Money Troubles
On Tuesday, the troubled Andy Warhol Foundation voted Anthony M. Solomon, the former president and chief executive officer of the Federal Reserve Bank, to be its eighth board member.
"We had been wanting to add someone with a strong business background," said Archibald L. Gillies, the president of the foundation.


Budget Option Would Raise Gas Tax in '96
The New Jersey Legislature and the Florio administration are studying a proposal to divert hundreds of millions of dollars from the state's Transportation Trust Fund over the next five years to balance the budget.
The plan would require a 4.5-cent increase in the gasoline tax in 1996.
The proposal is the latest in a series of moves to divert money to the general fund to meet budget shortfalls without appearing to raise taxes, by tapping the bonding authority of various funds.


Tan Bien Journal; Hanoi to Show Tourists Hideout That Eluded U.S.
Deep in the steamy, malarial jungles of southwestern Vietnam, an army of teen-age laborers too young to remember the Vietnam War are redigging collapsed dirt tunnels and rebuilding the bamboo huts in which Communist rebels once planned the overthrow of the South Vietnamese Government and the humiliation of its American backers.
If there was an enemy outpost that American military commanders most wanted to find and destroy during the war, this was it -- the secret headquarters of the South Vietnamese Communists -- the Vietcong -- and a major terminus of the North Vietnamese supply line known as the Ho Chi Minh Trail.


Municipal Bond Volume to Set Mark
The dollar value of new municipal bond issues will set a record this year, the Public Securities Association said yesterday.
The volume of long-term tax-exempt bonds issued by state and local governments and authorities is projected to reach $233 billion by the end of the year.
This is an increase of 36 percent from $171 billion in 1991.


Also Jazz, Dance, Drama
Here is a sampling of holiday celebrations, including jazz, dance and drama events, in New York City.
Admission is free unless otherwise noted (churches accept donations).
Today


THE TRANSITION: A Cabinet Begins to Take Shape; Excerpts From Clinton's Announcement of Appointments to Economic Posts
Following are excerpts from a news conference yesterday in which President-elect Bill Clinton announced the appointment of Senator Lloyd Bentsen as Secretary of the Treasury and named other economic advisers, as recorded by News Transcripts Inc., a private transcription service:


A Curious Approach to Cone
No free-agent negotiations went well for the Yankees here.
One set of talks, however, was colored by a unique peculiarity.
The Yankees, after making a respectable initial offer to David Cone, steadily shrank the financial dimensions of their proposal until it was too late.
According to a person familiar with the chronology and specifics of the negotiations, the Yankees opened talks with Cone with a three-year, $17.1 million offer.
It was then yanked off the table in 16 hours.
The Yankees said they were upset by Cone's inability to answer.
Cone's side was shocked by General Manager Gene Michael's impatience.


Defense Dept. Warns on Shoreham Exports
The Department of Defense has warned that exporting radioactive nuclear fuel from the Shoreham nuclear power plant could threaten national security, which has set off an unusual dispute between Federal agencies, threatening to delay the final cleanup of the plant.
The state agency that paid $1 for the $5.5 billion plant so it could demolish it is seeking approval to export 560 slightly used nuclear fuel rods from Long Island to a plant in France for reprocessing.


Czechs and Slovaks Divide Up Assets on Brink of Separation
Like all 136,000 men and women in Czechoslovakia's armed forces, Lieut.
Col.
Peter Fuzak must choose between serving in the future Czech or Slovak Army after the country splits up on January 1.
"I am neither a good Slovak nor a bad Slovak," said Lieutenant Colonel Fuzak, an officer from Slovakia who has been stationed in the Czech lands for 18 years.
"I'm an army officer. My wife and children are Czech. It makes no sense for me to return to Slovakia."


On Stage, and Off
Casting Crunch for a New Rabe Play
For four years now, ever since he finished it, David Rabe has been trying to cast his four-character play "Those the River Keeps" in a way that would make it viable for a Broadway production.
Now it looks as though he's about to give up, making the possible Broadway run of a major work by a major playwright a casualty of star-system economics.


Seasonal Favorites From Critics' CD Shelves
SIR THOMAS BEECHAM'S rendering of "Messiah" is unlikely to please those the conductor called "drowsy armchair purists," but it is unquestionably the grandest recorded version of a work that aims for grandeur above all.
The stupendous singing of Jon Vickers gives the performance a visionary edge.
RCA has updated the sturdy 1959 sound handsomely.
By way of contrast, John Eliot Gardiner directs an impeccably swift, pungent and authentic "Christmas Oratorio," one of the highlights of his continuing survey of choral classics for Deutsche Grammophon.
There is outstanding solo work by Anthony Rolfe Johnson, Anne Sofie von Otter and the trumpeter Crispian Steele Perkins.


Review/Film; Two Marines and Their Code on Trial
The role doesn't have to be big, but if it's good, and if the actor playing it is great, the results can be magically transforming.
Witness Jack Nicholson's vicious, funny, superbly reptilian turn in Rob Reiner's entertaining "A Few Good Men," adapted by Aaron Sorkin from his hit Broadway courtroom drama.
Mr.
Nicholson doesn't steal the film, which would mean that he somehow separates himself from everybody else in it.
Rather, in the course of only a handful of scenes, he seems to suffuse the entire production, giving it a weight, density and point that might not otherwise be apparent.


Sports of The Times; Say This For N.H.L.: Goofy, Eh?
WAYNE Gretzky was once moved to describe the New Jersey Devils as a "Mickey Mouse franchise." Needless to say, the next time his Edmonton team went gliding onto the ice in the Meadowlands, he was greeted with thousands of locals wearing little black ears.
The Great One need only look southward, under his rocking chair in Los Angeles.
Coming soon to an arena near Wayne is the latest in Mickey Mouse franchises.
The National Hockey League, which has added three teams in the last two seasons, is making loud noises about expanding again.


Company News: Flights of Fancy?; In Continental Auction, Fliers Can Blaze a Trail
Some lucky high flier will have a chance to get an acting career off the ground.
Another veteran of the skies can spend seven days riding a prairie schooner along the Oregon Trail or four days riding a wagon train in Arizona.
These are among the 40 experiences Continental Airlines is inviting its One Pass frequent-flier members to vie for in an auction involving not money but frequent-flier mileage.


Norway Lets Crown Float, Adding to Strains in Europe
Norway today abandoned its long battle to maintain the value of its currency and allowed the crown to float, putting new strains on Europe's monetary system.
Norway's decision came as leaders of the European Community prepared to gather for a two-day summit meeting in Scotland, starting on Friday, at which they will try to salvage their plans for greater political and economic cooperation, including the creation of a single currency.


Music in Churches and Concert Halls; Oratorios in Abundance
Here is a sampling of performances of Handel's "Messiah" and other oratorios in New York City.
Admission is free unless otherwise noted.
Today


Mr. Barr's Cloud: Growing Darker
Could Attorney General William Barr be trusted to produce a credible examination of his own Administration's possibly criminal aid to Iraq before the Persian Gulf war?
That didn't seem likely two months ago when he appointed Frederick Lacey, a former Federal judge, to conduct an ostensibly independent investigation.
Judge Lacey has now issued his report and the answer is worse than no.
Not only is Judge Lacey incredible.
He, and his sponsor, seem far more interested in finding scapegoats than in finding facts.
Far from allaying public doubts about Bush Administration improprieties, this squalid exercise inflames them.


Somali Gunmen, Pushed Away From Capital, Take Terror Inland
Gunmen, some of them flushed from Mogadishu by the arrival of American troops, have terrorized this town at the epicenter of the Somali famine in the last few days, killing, looting and preventing relief agencies from feeding the hungry.
Local people, more afraid than usual, said food was of secondary importance.
They wanted the guns confiscated.


California Retailer Settles Suit on Customer Privacy
Shoppers at Mervyn's department stores in California may be eligible for nearly $6 million worth of vouchers because of a settlement of a lawsuit that contended that the retailer had violated a privacy statute.
Under the proposed settlement, announced on Wednesday, Mervyn's has agreed to pay $6 million to its customers who used Visa, Mastercard, American Express or Discover credit cards between Jan. 1 and Sept. 30 of last year.
Mervyn's officials estimated five million transactions had been made with the cards during that period.


4th Guilty Plea Entered in Officer's Slaying
Four people have pleaded guilty, the final one yesterday, to taking part last December in a robbery at an automated bank teller in Manhattan that led to the slaying of an off-duty police sergeant.
Michael Alston, 35 years old, pleaded guilty to second-degree murder yesterday in State Supreme Court in Manhattan, admitting that he fired the shots that killed Sgt.
Keith R. Levine.
In exchange, prosecutors have agreed that he will be sentenced next month to 15 years to life in prison, compared with a maximum possible sentence of 25 years to life.


THE TRANSITION: A Cabinet Begins to Take Shape; CLINTON TEAM TAKES SHAPE WITH BENTSEN AND 4 OTHERS NAMED TO ECONOMIC POSTS
President-elect Bill Clinton began to give shape to his Cabinet today with the appointment of an economic team of old hands from Washington and Wall Street to help him fulfill his campaign promise of fundamental economic change.
The distinctly mainstream array of advisers that Mr.
Clinton introduced at the old Arkansas State House, led by Senator Lloyd Bentsen of Texas as Treasury Secretary, seemed intended to mobilize lawmakers and executives behind his economic program, and to signal that the Clinton Administration will be as serious about reducing the deficit as about any new spending programs.
Diversity in Jobs
Along with Senator Bentsen, Mr.
Clinton named Representative Leon E. Panetta of California, the chairman of the House Budget Committee, as director of the White House's Office of Management and Budget, M. Alice Rivlin, the former director of the Congressional Budget Office, as Mr.
Panetta's deputy, Roger C. Altman, an investment banker, as Deputy Treasury Secretary, and Robert E. Rubin, the co-chairman of Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company, as senior economic adviser.


Coach to Be Exonerated
Drug possession charges against ARNOLD JETER, an assistant football coach at Rutgers, are expected to be dropped, the Middlesex County, N.J., prosecutor's office said yesterday.


Son Is Insider in MCA Case, S.E.C. Says
It was September 1990, and Hollywood was about to be shaken by the news that the Matsushita Electric Industrial Company of Japan was buying MCA Inc., the entertainment industry giant, whose president was the blunt, bare-knuckled Sidney Sheinberg.
On the evening of Sept. 21, 1990, with the pending purchase still secret, Mr.
Sheinberg's son, Jonathan, visited the family home and heard his father discussing the deal on the telephone.
That overheard conversation formed the basis for civil insider-trading charges filed yesterday by the Securities and Exchange Commission against Jonathan Sheinberg, who is 34 years old, and three other men.
Father's Warning to Son


The Packwood Problem
By acknowledging the truth of charges that he had sexually harassed female aides, Senator Bob Packwood may have hoped to contain the scandal that now threatens his career.
But his apology, however sincere, cannot excuse his abuse of office or his maligning of his accusers to hold off news coverage of the damaging facts until after his narrow victory in the November elections.
A Washington Post story last month detailed a disturbing pattern of unwanted sexual advances by Senator Packwood over a 20-year period.
Ten former women staff members and lobbyists told similar stories of offensive behavior.
The Senator, it was said, arranged to get women alone, then clumsily restrained them to kiss and fondle them -- sometimes chasing them around the office and, in at least one woman's case, trying to remove her clothing.
Several others have since come forward to tell of troubling encounters with Mr.
Packwood, including a reporter who received an unwelcome kiss on the lips.


Fastest Growing Economies Cut Tax Subsidies; Advertising Body Blow
To the Editor:
President-elect Clinton is getting lots of "free advice" about how to lower the deficit and get the economy moving again.
And some of it is worth about as much as it costs: while the suggestion of Ann Crittenden in "Bad Breaks" (Op-Ed, Nov. 18) to change the tax deduction for advertising costs was "free," such a policy shift would be terribly expensive for the economy and the American public.
Businesses rely heavily on advertising to compete and grow in a diverse marketplace.
The last thing that American companies need, particularly during a recession, are tax changes that make it more costly and less efficient to communicate with consumers.


Art in Review
The Bernard H. Breslauer Collection of Manuscript Illuminations  Pierpont Morgan Library  29 East 36th Street  Manhattan  Through April 4


Walker Leaves Team; UConn Pummels Yale
Toraino Walker, the co-captain of the Connecticut team, said today he had had enough basketball and would not rejoin the Huskies.
No matter; they seem to be getting along well enough without the 6-foot-7-inch senior forward-center.
At the Civic Center tonight, Connecticut defeated Yale, 65-38, for its third straight victory following a season-opening loss to Purdue in the TipOff Classic at Springfield, Mass.
That was Walker's last game.
He had been scolded by the coach, Jim Calhoun, for some indifferent play and failed to show up for practice the following week.
Three days later he was suspended from the squad by Calhoun.


Seasonal Favorites From Critics' CD Shelves
MORE enchanting than any of my official choices is "A Met Messiah" (Metropolitan Opera), a disk of excerpts drawn, like the Met Christmas album, from commercial recordings made by company stars over the century.
It consists of vocal solos, from Herbert Witherspoon's starchy "The Trumpet Shall Sound" of 1909 to Stuart Burrows's melting "Ev'ry Valley" of 1984.
The only chorus included is (what else?) "Hallelujah," from the 1988 Pinnock version.
"Christmas at the Met" (Metropolitan Opera MET 212) also offers splendid vocalism in both standard and out-of-the-way seasonal fare, some of it couched in harmlessly kitschy arrangements.
Highlights of both disks are gripping numbers by Jon Vickers from the 1959 Beecham "Messiah" (BMG/RCA), which must be appended here in its entirety for its sheer thrilling perversity.
Beecham revels in the Goossens orchestration, and "Hallelujah" fairly explodes with cymbals and glistens with triangle.


At Issue in School Battle: the Chancellor Himself
What began as a provincial battle over what is taught about homosexuality in a small patch of Queens has mushroomed into a battle over the survival of the Chancellor and perhaps the way New York City governs its schools.
On Wednesday night, in its harshest rebuff ever of Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez, the seven-member Board of Education, by a surprising 6-to-0 vote, reinstated a Queens school board that had adamantly refused to adopt any multicultural curriculum that promotes respect and appreciation of gay people.


Seasonal Favorites From Critics' CD Shelves
FOR the Christmas celebrator, being reverent and having fun is enough of a juggling act as it is.
Add in the pressure to be cultural, and it makes one long for the bleak empty spaces of January.
Record companies offer a way out.
Wishing you a tasteful, leisure-intensive Christmas are singers like Kathleen Battle and Thomas Hampson resonating those old familiar carols on compact disk and in a way you never heard them around the tree at home.
Why brutalize "Silent Night" with your less-than-appealing baritone when for under $20 you can hire surrogates to be artistic for you?
Ms.
Battle's "Christmas Celebration" is on EMI/Angel (CDC 7 47587 2), "Christmas With Thomas Hampson" on Teldec (73135-2).


Imcera Group President Resigns in a Shake-Up
The Imcera Group announced a shake-up today of its top management and warned that its earnings growth might not meet expectations.
The company said M. Blake Ingle, its president and chief executive, and Boyd D. Wainscott, head of Pitman-Moore Inc., its troubled animal health-care subsidiary, had resigned.
C.
Ray Holman, head of the company's thriving Mallinckrodt Medical subsidiary, was named to Mr.
Ingle's posts, and William J. Mercer, who had been a senior vice president under Mr.
Holman at Mallinckrodt, took over for Mr.
Wainscott.


Review/Film; Michelle Pfeiffer in a Tale of a 1960's Interracial Friendship
"Love Field," a gentle, involving film about interracial friendship, begins with a very broad stroke in the form of Lurene Hallett (Michelle Pfeiffer), a blond bombshell who feels a special psychic bond with Jacqueline Kennedy.
The year is 1963, the President has just been assassinated and Lurene feels duty bound to take the bus from Dallas to Washington to attend the funeral.
"What I want is to go to that rotunda and file past that caisson or cortege or whatever it is and pay my respects," Lurene says, savoring the important-sounding words that make her think she has a mission.
For Lurene, feeling closely involved in this national tragedy amounts to a kind of character trait.
Defining herself visibly in terms of Mrs.
Kennedy's appeal, she boards the bus wearing a homemade lavender suit in the Kennedy style and sporting a bouffant hairdo that happens to be platinum blond.
"Love Field," which opens today at the New York Twin, takes its title from the Dallas airport where Lurene turns up, early in the story, to catch a glimpse of the Presidential plane.


Britons Doubt Charles and Diana Will Ever Rule
Conservative members of Parliament, newspaper editorialists and even avid royalists voiced skepticism today that the Prince and Princess of Wales would be able to fulfill their intended future roles as King and Queen now that they have separated as husband and wife.
One day after Britain was stunned by the announcement that the royal couple intended to break up but not to divorce, the Government's insistence that the arrangement would not impair the monarchy or the succession to the throne appeared to do little to quiet doubters.


A Housing Project for the Formerly Homeless Opens in Brooklyn


Yankees Finally Get It Right and Land a Lefty
The Yankees finally did it.
After a dreadful experience at the winter meetings, where they unsuccessfully chased expensive free agents, they finally signed a pitcher on their wish list last night as Jimmy Key agreed to a four-year contract worth $17 million.
Key, who is represented by his wife, Cindy, responded to the lucrative proposal from a cruise ship where he is on a weeklong vacation.
The Yankees' managing partner, Joseph Molloy, personally wooed Key as the team's chief negotiator.


EUROPEANS TRYING TO RESCUE TREATY
With hopes for European unity clouded by an economic slowdown, squabbles between governments and waning public enthusiasm, European Community leaders are to meet here on Friday to try to rescue an ambitious blueprint for the future that they agreed on only 12 months ago.
Their challenge is to convince skeptical Europeans that they still share a common vision of how Europe should look at the end of this century and that regional economic and political unity will bring prosperity without undermining democracy and traditions in individual countries.


N.H.L. Is Going to Disneyland, and South Florida, Too
The National Hockey League voted unanimously today to expand to Miami and Anaheim, Calif., a bold move for a sport that only months ago was in such disarray that its players went on strike for the first time and its longtime president was forced to resign.
At an upbeat news conference that featured a podium decorated with stuffed dolls of Mickey Mouse and Minnie Mouse holding a videotape of hockey highlights, the new and high-profile owners were introduced.


Wounded Plainclothes Officer Plans to Sue
Lawyers for the plainclothes transit police officer who was shot and critically wounded by fellow officers in Brooklyn last month said yesterday that he planned to file a $50 million lawsuit against New York City and the transit police.
Arthur M. Luxenberg, one of Officer Derwin Pannell's lawyers, said the officer's right arm was paralyzed and that he had limited movement in his legs.
He also said that the officer was "emotionally traumatized" by the shooting and had said that his account of the incident differed markedly from the version given by the other officers involved.
The lawyer would not say exactly how it differed.


Helen St. Aubin, 69, Athlete Who Inspired Film
Helen Callaghan Candaele St.
Aubin, the speedy outfielder whose swing won one batting title and inspired two movies about the All-American Girls Professional Baseball League, died Tuesday night at Cottage Hospital in Santa Barbara, Calif., at age 69.
She died of breast cancer, according to her son Kelly Candaele, whose 1988 documentary about his mother's career, "A League of Their Own," inspired last summer's movie of the same name.
During her four seasons in the women's league that was formed in 1943 as a wartime alternative to the talent-depleted men's league, Mrs.
St.
Aubin, who played under her original name, Helen Callaghan, batted .257 and stole 354 bases in 388 games.


For Children
'Hansel and Gretel'
Promenade Theater  2162 Broadway  (at 76th Street)  (212) 677-5959  Recommended ages: 5 and up  Through Jan. 3


Music in Churches and Concert Halls
This is a sampling of musical presentations planned for the holiday season at churches and concert halls in New York City.
All are free unless otherwise noted (churches accept donations).
This selection, compiled by Allan Kozinn, represents what caught this critic's eye and excited his expectations.
Today


At the Bar
There are not many memorable moments in his 25 years in the Manhattan Surrogate's Court that Nathaniel Weiss has failed to record.
Whether art experts were testifying in the Estate of Mark Rothko, or Al Pacino was testifying in the Estate of Lee Strasberg, or 15 workers were disrupting Estate of J. Seward Johnson, Mr.
Weiss, his fingers dancing over the keyboard of his trusty stenograph, got it down.
Last May, however, something occurred that even Mr.
Weiss missed documenting.
In a cost-cutting measure, Matthew Crosson, chief administrator of New York's courts, replaced Mr.
Weiss and 36 other court reporters in the state's Surrogates Courts with tape recorders.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League


San Antonio Journal; Ancient Ritual for a Modern Casualty
Other businesses just go bankrupt or close down, but journalists like to say that newspapers die when they cease publication.
At The San Antonio Light, which executives have said will either be closed or sold this month, all the anger and sadness of mourning have found expression in a custom as old as the Aztecs.
Amid the drab cubicles and computer terminals of The Light's newsroom there is something that looks at first glance like a pile of litter.
Wilted flowers, photographs, scraps of paper and odd trinkets, like a tiny football helmet, are heaped on two desks.
Blinking Christmas lights have been strung haphazardly along with some garish plastic garlands.


Review/Photography; Paris in Its Prime, Posing for Classic Images
Paris in all its romantic glory is the subject of a fascinating show at the Houk Friedman Gallery.
Under the cumbersome title "De l'Ancien Regime aux Temps Modernes: Paris et ses Environs," the gallery has assembled a diverse and often beautiful selection of photographs of the city in its heyday.
Most of the pictures in the show, which includes classics by Man Ray, Brassai, Henri Cartier-Bresson, Robert Doisneau and many others, are from the period between the two world wars, when artists and writers flocked to Paris, drawn by its atmosphere of creativity and freedom.
By the time much of the work shown here was made, the great artistic achievements that earned the city its reputation were largely in the past.
French society, too, was undergoing changes, which World War II would accelerate.
But the point of the show is to record not the Paris of history but the mythical city, the Paris of "La Boheme" and Balzac.


Market Place; Here's a Pitch To Hang Up On
PSST.
Lean in close.
Here's a sure winner of a stock tip.
Big company, its shares selling for a couple of bucks, and it's ready to go gangbusters.
Lee A. Iacocca, that fella who turned around Chrysler?
Well, he's been asked to take over this place.
Not only that, but this company -- one of the nation's biggest airlines, mind you -- is listed on the New York Stock Exchange, and everybody knows that means financial strength.
The company's name?
Trans World Airlines.
If anybody makes this pitch -- which appears to have been done a lot in recent days -- forget pleasantries and hang up the phone.
Potential investors are being asked to throw away their money on a worthless security.
And too many of them are rushing to comply, bringing days of hectic trading.


THE TRANSITION: A Cabinet Begins to Take Shape; Excerpts From Clinton's Announcement of Appointments to Economic Posts
Following are excerpts from a news conference yesterday in which President-elect Bill Clinton announced the appointment of Senator Lloyd Bentsen as Secretary of the Treasury and named other economic advisers, as recorded by News Transcripts Inc., a private transcription service:


Bolivians May Never Know Rock Slide's Toll
The faces of the Andean Indians who work these gold mines are stoic or despondent.
A woman with a felt hat and a long dark braid wept as she climbed over boulders and rubble in search of her three children.
A man who had lost his wife and three children squatted quietly under a thatched shelter waiting for a bulldozer to uncover bodies.
Children who had lost their parents wandered the camp stunned.
Two days after this gold mining camp of 12,000 was buried by thousands of tons of rock and mud in the early morning, supplies and other help from the Bolivian Government had not yet arrived.
Though only 90 miles away by plane, Llipi is a 15- to 20-hour drive overland from La Paz.
A caravan of four army trucks was making its way along the dangerous high mountain roads to Llipi.


One Good Half Ends 23-Game Frustration
Fordham turned back St. John's and the clock last night. Way back.
Buoyed by a 14-point lead at halftime, the Rams went on to beat the Redmen, 60-55, ending a 23-game losing streak.


COMPANY NEWS
AMERICAN GENERAL LIFE INSURANCE CO., Houston, agreed to acquire the insurance assets and liabilities of New Jersey Life Insurance Co., Paramus, N.J.
AMERICAN TELEPHONE AND TELEGRAPH CO.  introduced technology aimed at eliminating eavesdropping on cellular-phone conversations.
DIVERSICARE CORP.
OF AMERICA, Franklin, Tenn., said a unit bought Duracare Medical Equipment of Tempe, Ariz.
PROCTER &amp; GAMBLE CO., Cincinnati, said it was reviewing operations and may cut its workforce, which currently numbers 106,000 employees worldwide.


ERICSSON AND HEWLETT-PACKARD PHONE-SYSTEM VENTURE
The Hewlett-Packard Company, the third-largest American computer maker, and L. M. Ericsson, a top maker of telecommunications equipment, said yesterday that they planned a venture in the increasingly complex and lucrative market for managing large corporations' telephone systems.
Ericsson Hewlett-Packard Telecommunications A.B. will be owned 60 percent by Ericsson and 40 percent by Hewlett, and based, like Ericsson, in Stockholm.
The amounts invested in the venture were not disclosed.
The venture, employing 350 workers, is to begin operating in the first quarter.


The Clinton Anti-Gridlock Team
Teamwork.
Coordination.
Words like these dominated President-elect Clinton's news conference yesterday because they govern his choice of five top economic officials.
All five are cut from the same fiscally conservative cloth; they should have little trouble working together.
They are also smart, experienced professionals who will pack clout in Congress and on Wall Street.
That's Mr.
Clinton's way of telling voters: No more gridlock.


CHRONICLE
Truman Capote loved the East End of Long Island, and in 1961 he bought a compound in Sagaponack that he later gave to Jack Dunphy, his companion of 35 years.
Capote died in 1984, Dunphy in April, and last week the property, which includes two houses on four acres near the ocean, was put up for sale.
The asking price: $1.25 million.
"Jack was always concerned about what to do with the property," said GERALD CLARKE, the executor of his estate and the author of "Capote," a best-selling 1988 biography.


Port Authority Budget Averts Rise in Fares
The Port Authority of New York and New Jersey approved yesterday a $2.7 billion budget for 1993 that it said insures that fares on the PATH system and tolls on the authority's six bridges and tunnels will not increase for at least two years.
The budget reflects concerns that the region's economy will be stagnant for much of next year and represents the latest effort by the authority to address criticisms that its spending has been too luxurious in lean times.


New Cable Venture
The former head of Fox television plans a cable venture featuring shop-at-home and pay-per-view services.
Page D1.


Croats Return To Stronghold On Adriatic
A Croatian Government official nodded approvingly today as he gazed out across the choppy waters at the mouth of Kotor Bay.
"Isn't it a wonderful view?," the official said, coatless, but seemingly oblivious to the winter rain.
The landscape around the bay, which encloses the last port still available to the Yugoslav Navy, is as engaging as any along the Dalmatian coast.
But it was not so much the mountains plunging to the sea, nor the old Montenegrin town of Herzeg Novi across the bay, that took the fancy of Croatian officials who traveled down the narrow mountain roads to the Prevlaka Peninsula.


Fernandez Tells Rebels Deadline Is Today
A day after the Board of Education overturned the suspension of a defiant school board in Queens, Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez and the local board clashed again yesterday over a curriculum that includes lessons about gay families.
In a letter to the board members of District 24, Mr.
Fernandez said that he would override them and impose the curriculum if they did not meet with him today.


Diller Acquires QVC Stake
Barry Diller, who resigned as chairman of Fox Inc. earlier this year to start his own company, has agreed to acquire a stake in QVC Network Inc., a shopping channel, in hopes of forming a new cable venture that would be at the forefront in using new television technology.
People who know Mr.
Diller and are familiar with the deal said that with the help of QVC's two largest shareholders he plans to turn the shopping channel into an on-line entertainment and merchandising service in which the subscriber and the cable company can freely interact.


At Issue in School Battle: the Chancellor Himself
What began as a provincial battle over what is taught about homosexuality in a small patch of Queens has mushroomed into a battle over the survival of the Chancellor and perhaps the way New York City governs its schools.
On Wednesday night, in its harshest rebuff ever of Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez, the seven-member Board of Education, by a surprising 6-to-0 vote, reinstated a Queens school board that had adamantly refused to adopt any multicultural curriculum that promotes respect and appreciation of gay people.


EXXON WILL SELL A BIG NEW JERSEY REFINERY TO TOSCO
The Exxon Corporation said yesterday that it had agreed to sell its Bayway refinery in Linden, N.J., one of the largest refineries on the East Coast, to the Tosco Corporation for $175 million.
The disclosure came just two days after Exxon executives had threatened to shut the refinery, which employs 950 people, because of a dispute with the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection and Energy.
Bayway can process 200,000 barrels of crude oil a day.
The companies expect to close the deal by April 1.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-23  YELTSIN DENOUNCES CRITICS
President Yeltsin angrily accused his critics in the Russian Congress of carrying out a "creeping coup" and said he was finished making concessions to "conservative and reactionary forces." A1  TERROR IN A SOMALI TOWN
Gunmen have terrorized a town at the epicenter of the famine, killing, looting and preventing relief agencies from feeding the hungry.
A1
Crowds of Somalis cheered the arrival of American marines.  A22
News analysis: Facing a variety of enemies.  A22
The U.N. chief is seeking a wider mandate for the U.S.  A23  RISING DOUBTS IN BRITAIN
Skepticism in Britain is growing about the prospect that the Prince and Princess of Wales will be able to fulfill their intended future roles as King and Queen.
A3
Two bombings wound eight people in London.  A3  EUROPEANS TO MEET ON UNITY
European Community leaders are to meet in Scotland to try to rescue a blueprint for the future that they agreed on only 12 months ago.
A6
Britain, Germany, Italy and Spain agreed to a smaller jet project.
A7  INDIA BANS 5 RELIGIOUS GROUPS
The Indian Government announced a ban on five powerful Hindu and Muslim fundamentalist organizations as the death toll in rioting and clashes rose.
A11
News analysis: The Hindus are not a persecuted minority.
A10  LITHUANIA BANKS ON TECHNOLOGY
Scientists, engineers and would-be business leaders are gambling on advanced technology to gain entry to the industrialized world.
A13  GERMANY BANS 2D NEO-NAZI GROUP
Germany's parliamentary leaders closed ranks to condemn the rising violence against foreigners, and the Government banned a second neo-Nazi party and started a wave of house searches and arrests.
A15  NEW DETAILS ABOUT PERU COUP
A coup attempt in Peru last month so rattled the President that he took refuge in the residence of the Japanese Ambassador, indicating that the conspiracy was more serious than first believed.
A16  A Bolivian town may never know the death toll from a rock slides.
A17  Czechs and Slovaks are working to divide the country's property.
A8  Croats have returned to a stronghold on the Adriatic.
A9  A Guatemalan Indian advocate accepted the Nobel Peace Prize.
A14  Tan Bien Journal: Putting a Vietcong hideout on display.
A4  National A24-37  THE NEW ECONOMIC TEAM
President-elect Bill Clinton's domestic-policy team took shape as he turned to Capitol Hill to fill key economic posts.
As expected, he named Senator Lloyd Bentsen of Texas as Treasury Secretary and Representative Leon Panetta of California to head the Office of management and Budget.
A1
News analysis: What does it all mean for economic policy?  A1
The budget office will play a top role in one of Mr. Clinton's goals.  A37
Man in the News: Just who is Lloyd Bentsen?  A37  MORE TO BE FOUND?
President-elect Bill Clinton said he thinks that, despite the Justice Department's decision not to seek an independent prosecutor in a bank-fraud case involving loans to Iraq, there is more to be learned.
A32  TESTING FOR ALCOHOL
The Transportation Department wants to require testing for seven million workers.
A35  PACKWOOD IS SORRY
The Oregon Senator accepted responsibility for offensive treatment of female aides, although he said he had no recollection of it.
A24  WATER, WATER, WATER
Tackling a dispute of many years, authorities in California moved to protect the water supply of 20 million urban Californians.
A28  LACK OF EVIDENCE
A Federal judge may dismiss the case against a Mexican doctor on trial in the 1985 torture and murder of a United States narcotics agent, because of a lack of evidence.
A25  NOT DOING THE JOB?
The $6.2 billion Federal education program that provides remedial academic help to poor children needs to be overhauled, says a report by an independent group.
A24
An educator wants to bridge the gap between lab and market.  A28  TUMOR MYSTERIES
In a potentially far-reaching discovery, scientists say cancer cells may release a potent molecule into the bloodstream that cripples the immune system.
A30  In The San Antonio Light newsroom, offerings for the dead.
A24  The Missouri State Attorney General is accused of improprieties.
A34  Law Page D18  A court hearing on a Du Pont heir's role in the LaRouche organization.
Concern rises about sexual discrimination at the Bar in England.
Metro Digest B1  IMMIGRANTS FEELING HOSTILITY
Across the country, immigrants say they are feeling the brunt of a growing and complex hostility.
Even New York, which proudly defines itself as a haven for immigrants, has seen evidence of the discord.
A1  SCOPE OF SCHOOL BATTLE GROWS
News analysis: What began as a provincial battle over what is taught about homosexuality in a small patch of Queens has mushroomed into a battle over the survival of Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez and perhaps the way New York City governs its schools.
A1  Neediest Cases B6  Business Digest D1  Weekend C1-39  Bargains on Chambers Street.
C1  Critics select seasonal CD's.
C1  Theater chosen for "Angels in America." C3  Theater: "My Favorite Year." C1  Film: "Love Field." C6  "A Few Good Men." C20  Dance: Ailey season begins.
C3  Sports B7-13  Baseball: Yankees sign Jimmy Key for four years.
B7  Basketball: Knicks lose first home game of season.
B7  Nets defeat Clippers.
B8  Columns: Vecsey on the "goofy" N.H.L.
B7  Lipsyte on Magic and Marge, AIDS and racism.
B9  Football: The Heisman and the other Torretta.
B7  Hockey: N.H.L. votes to expand to Miami and Anaheim, Calif.
B7  Obituaries D19  Editorials/Op-Ed A38-39  Editorials  The Clinton anti-gridlock team.
Mr.
Barr's cloud: growing darker.
"Teach us to be good doctors."  The Packwood problem.
Letters  A. M. Rosenthal: Dinkins and Hasidim.
Anthony Lewis: An international pariah.
Shashi Tharoor: The revenge of history.
Alan M. Stahl: White-faced greenbacks.


Art in Review
Pat Steir
Robert Miller Gallery  40 East 57th Street  Mid-Manhattan  Through Dec. 31


Chambers Street: Bargains and Bagels
SHAKESPEARE said the human drive to consume is incurable.
Herbert Marcuse went a step further, suggesting that modern man finds his soul in possessions.
Well, of course!
Go downtown and the thesis will be forever proven.
Chambers Street in lower Manhattan and the unprepossessing area around it are a sort of shopper's heaven, though a decidedly different sort of paradise from the Fifth Avenue of collective nostalgia.
This is New York City's bargain basement: a place of outlet and damaged-goods stores, establishments where everything is said to cost 99 cents but then somehow doesn't, no-frills department stores chock-full of designer clothing, quixotic hat shops, pushy sidewalk peddlers, a magnificently shared conviction that only idiots pay retail.


Review/Theater; Being Gay And Naked In America
During one section of his new, uninhibited monologue, "My Queer Body," Tim Miller is naked to the world, or rather to the 93 people who by his count fill the seats at Performance Space 122.
Unabashed if a bit self-conscious, he is determined to talk to the audience as freely and openly as possible.
After all, his life is on the line.
In this and other shows, Mr.
Miller specializes in self-exposure, and the approach is emotional as well as physical.
For all his candor and his outrage about homophobia and AIDS, he has a nonthreatening presence.
With some accuracy he has characterized himself as "the all-American queer Jimmy Stewart." If he had his way, his would be a more wonderful life.


New Disclosures in Peru Show Plot's Wide Web
A coup attempt here last month so rattled President Alberto K. Fujimori that he took refuge for three hours in the residence of the Japanese Ambassador.
The admission by Mr.
Fujimori that he fled Peru's presidential palace and took refuge in the embassy of his ancestors indicates that the conspiracy behind the coup attempt on Nov. 13 was more serious than first believed.
Further underscoring the plot's danger, new details reveal the participation of civilians and of a clandestine movement of young officers.


Packwood Offers Apology Without Saying for What
Senator Bob Packwood said today that he took "full responsibility" for his "unwelcome and offensive" sexual advances toward female aides, but declined repeatedly to describe his behavior.
Moreover, the 60-year-old Oregon Republican, who was elected to his fifth term last month, declared at a news conference that he would not resign.
"I'm not going to resign under any circumstances," he said.


Review/Dance; Ailey Season Begins
For the first time in years, the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater opened without its customary and highly festive gala.
Not to worry: there will be two such benefits in a season that also features an unusually large number of premieres (four) and stretches through Jan. 3.
The company's opening on Wednesday night at the City Center (131 West 55th Street, Manhattan) was thus relatively subdued with respect to the atmosphere in the house.
But the dancing was hilariously hot in "District Storyville," Donald McKayle's distilled view of New Orleans bordello life, and the program was completed by two major Ailey works, "Revelations" and a revival of the "The River."


Is Iacocca Just a Local Favorite or a World-Class Brand?
ONLY time will tell how well Lee A. Iacocca travels.
Should he move to a different company when he retires from the Chrysler Corporation in a few weeks -- he has been talking with the machinists' union at Trans World Airlines about becoming the airline's chairman -- would the charisma he brought to 61 Chrysler commercials carry over?
Noel Penrose, an executive vice president at the New York office of the London-based Interbrand Group consulting firm, was asked to evaluate Mr.
Iacocca as if he were a brand, perhaps a product that T.W.A. might choose off a crowded shelf.


For Crown Hts. Figure, a Life on Streets
Ralph Nimmons is missing.
But for the 25-year-old man at the center of the Crown Heights beating case, that is nothing new.
Mr.
Nimmons, whose absence has threatened the grand jury investigation into his beating by Hasidim, has long drifted on the streets into and out of sight, his wife, Debbie, said the day he was beaten.
Jobless and unable to support his family, he makes money by foraging for discarded clothing, bottles and cans, visiting his wife's home in Queens occasionally to change his clothing and then leaving again for days.


Restaurants
The holidays are a time for guilt-free indulgence -- of self and others -- and it often involves frequenting one of New York City's more luxurious restaurants.
One that is always high on a wish list is Le Perigord on East 52d Street, where the French Provencal food lifts the soul and spirits soar higher than the Christmas tree at Rockefeller Center.
Le Perigord marked its 28th anniversary this year, with Antoine Bouterin at the gastronomic helm for the last decade.
Mr.
Bouterin is a Provence native who turns out what might be called grandmother haute cuisine: robust, generous and seductive fare straight from the heart.
This and a warm and welcoming staff under Georges Briguet, the owner, have kept Le Perigord buzzing while so many luxury dining rooms have withered in the last five years.


Review/Theater; A Rosy View of a Golden Age
WHO wouldn't want to go back to the New York City of 1954, the year celebrated in the new musical "My Favorite Year"?
As Benjy Stone (Evan Pappas), the show's young hero, reminds the audience, 1954 was the time of beefy Buicks and a hit parade dominated by Kitty Kallen.
A time when Fifth Avenue was a two-way street and "everything had chlorophyll in it." Most of all, as far as "My Favorite Year" is concerned, it was the Golden Age of live television, as exemplified by "The King Kaiser Comedy Cavalcade," a weekly 90-minute NBC variety show that resembles Sid Caesar's "Your Show of Shows" and for which Benjy is the bright-eyed freshman gag writer.
"My Favorite Year," which opened last night at the Vivian Beaumont Theater, not only wants to re-create that halcyon time, from its Breck girls to its Formica decor, but it also wants to do so in the wonderfully retro Broadway musical-comedy style of the same period.
Nineteen-fifty-four was also the year of "The Pajama Game," whose Bob Fosse choreography this show passingly mocks.
From its opening number, a sort of "Comedy Tonight" set in a television studio, "My Favorite Year" offers the happy promise of a new musical in the hilarious manner of "Pajama Game" successors like "Bye Bye Birdie" and "Little Me" written by "Show of Shows" alumni.


Pop/Jazz; A Voice Born of Emotion and a Painstaking Approach
Slowly, with almost excruciating attentiveness and care, the singer Jimmy Scott is applying himself to a task at hand.
What he's been asked to do is simple enough: a publicity agent for his record label, Sire/Warner Brothers, has handed him a couple of black-and-white glossy press photos and requested that he sign them.
But these few words have become a consuming labor for Mr.
Scott.
Left-handed, hunched over an office conference table, he writes each stroke and letter with an individual and painstaking precision.
His concentration nearly stills the air.
Several minutes later, he leans back with a slight smile and scrutinizes his work: "To Ron, may we always be friends, Jimmy Scott." To something most performers accomplish in a few seconds, with minimal thought and effort, Mr.
Scott has devoted himself, body and soul.
His singing is the same way.
Not a note or a breath comes easily; no phrase, verse or sentiment is given over casually or lightly.
Mr.
Scott's voice does in fact possess the power to turn the world around him into silence.
Unusually high without being a falsetto, it at first seems more like a woman's voice; his extremely unconventional phrasing extends some words and clips others, sometimes rewriting portions of a song's melody.
But what is most potent about Mr.
Scott's voice is the emotion that comes through it.
Like the great blues-rooted jazz singers, from Billie Holiday to Louis Armstrong to Dinah Washington, he uses technique as a means to individual expression.
When Mr.
Scott touches a song, its story is begun anew.


Fire Guts St. Agnes, a Historic Manhattan Church
A four-alarm fire of unknown origin roared through the historic Church of St.
Agnes near Grand Central Terminal yesterday afternoon, destroying one of midtown Manhattan's most notable architectural treasures and an oasis of serenity in the heart of a frenzied city.
The blaze gutted the elaborately carved wooden interior of the 115-year-old Roman Catholic Church at 141 East 43d Street, between Lexington and Third Avenues, forced an overnight closing of its adjacent center for the homeless and turned heavy pre-Christmas traffic across much the city into a nightmare through the evening rush period.


SEASONAL FAVORITES FROM CRITICS' CD SHELVES
CHRISTMAS is the musical holiday par excellence.
To complement the rich and ancient song traditions of many nations, most of the great composers of the West have taken musical note of the season, some of them in a big way.
As usual, this year brought a few new recordings of "Messiah" (no matter, any longer, that it was originally performed during the Easter season), a few more of "The Nutcracker" and a flood of Christmas albums.
To help the prospective reveler sort through these and other recordings appropriate to the season, the classical-music critics of The New York Times have noted on page C33 their current favorite versions of four works in the standard Christmas repertory as well as a favorite seasonal collection. ("Favorite," please note; no claims are made for "best.")


Review/Film; Kermit, Etc. Do Dickens Up Green
"The Muppet Christmas Carol" is not one of those clever children's films that keep adult escorts from gazing longingly at the exit signs.
What you expect -- Muppets -- is pretty much what you get.
There's no great show of wit or tunefulness here, and the ingenious cross-generational touches are fairly rare.
But there
is
a lively kiddie version of the Dickens tale, one that very young viewers ought to understand.
Michael Caine stars as Scrooge, playing the role enthusiastically and well. (It can't have been easy to smile tearfully and sing "wherever you find love it feels like Christmas" in the midst of a Muppet crowd.) But when this film's target audience watches the opening credits, don't be surprised if Fozzie Bear gets a bigger hand than any grown-up could.
The Muppets, undertaking their first major acting assignment, are so scene-stealing that when they turn up within the familiar story they assume the status of celebrity guests.
The Great Gonzo narrates the film as Charles Dickens, and that suspiciously green-looking Bob Cratchit is Kermit the Frog.


A 10th Anniversary
The New York Philharmonic Ensembles will celebrate their 10th anniversary, as well as the New York Philharmonic Orchestra's 150th year, on Sunday at 3 P.M. at the 92d Street Y, at Lexington Avenue.
The program includes Wagner's "Siegfried Idyll," Schoenberg's "Verklarte Nacht," Copland's "Appalachian Spring" and R. Strauss-Hasenhorl's "Till Eulenspiegel Einmal Anders." More than 90 percent of the orchestra's members have played in the Philharmonic Ensembles since they were founded by Zubin Mehta in 1984.
Tickets are $20 and $22.50.
Information: (212) 996-1100.


Rhetoric Aimed at Dinkins on Race Relations Offends Decency
To the Editor:
The level of rhetoric regarding Mayor David N. Dinkins's handling of black-Jewish relations in New York City on the heels of recent events in Crown Heights has now transgressed all bounds of decency.
The confrontation between Jewish activists and the Mayor at a local Democratic club in Queens was beyond the pale (news article, Dec. 4).
I am a partner of the law firm that last year represented the Hasidic driver of the car that accidentally killed young Gavin Cato, and which presently represents the interests of the Lubavitch community with respect to the investigation into the beating of Ralph Nimmons.
I am also the longtime friend and constituent of, as well as lawyer for Rabbi Avi Weiss, who has been one of Mayor Dinkins's most vocal critics.


The Hatreds of India; Hindu Memory Scarred by Centuries Of Sometimes Despotic Islamic Rule
When Hindus destroyed a 16th-century mosque in a remote northern town on Sunday, they touched off four days of rioting in which hundreds were killed as Muslims protested against what they saw as persecution.
Hindu leaders said the militants were trying to sweep away deep feelings of inferiority and were asserting the dominance of Hinduism in Indian society, culture and politics.


A Shaky Start Isn't Surprising


University Seeks a Laboratory-Marketplace Link
The president of the University of California today proposed the creation of a for-profit corporation to help bridge the gap between the laboratory and marketplace for technology developed by university researchers.
Under the proposal, the university's Board of Regents would control a 51 percent stake in the for-profit company.
The remaining shares would be sold to corporate and individual investors.
The university would contribute technology, and money would come from foundation grants, gifts and outside investors.


Business Digest
The Economy
Regulators said 1992 will be the most profitable year ever for the banking industry, contrary to expectations of 12 months ago.
As a result, fewer institutions will fail in 1993 than expected.  [ D1. ]
Prices received by producers of finished goods fell 0.2 percent in November as energy and food declined.
It was the best monthly inflation report since January.  [ D2. ]  First-time claims for unemployment benefits fell for the eighth time in 10 weeks.  [ D2. ] Companies


A New Microwave System Poses Threat to Cable TV
The Federal Communications Commission approved a new microwave technology today to transmit simultaneously dozens of channels of television, telephone calls and large amounts of data.
The system, which would use superhigh-frequency radio signals to deliver up to 49 television channels, could pose a threat to the virtual monopoly that cable television systems enjoy today in most cities.
The system was recently introduced, on an experimental basis, to homes in Brighton Beach, Brooklyn.


YELTSIN DECLARES POLITICAL IMPASSE ON ECONOMIC PLAN
In an abrupt shift from his conciliatory approach to opponents of his economic program, President Boris N. Yeltsin today angrily accused his critics in the Russian Congress of carrying out a "creeping coup" and said he was finished making concessions to what he called a "fortress of conservative and reactionary forces."
"To reject, destroy and silence those who disagree -- such is the atmosphere at the Congress," he thundered.
"It has become impossible to continue to work with such a Congress."


U.S. Seeks to Make Transit Workers Take Breath Tests for Alcohol
The Transportation Department today proposed new regulations that would make seven million transportation workers subject to on-the-job breath tests for alcohol use and expand existing drug tests to include mass transit workers.
The new testing program, by far the largest of its kind in the United States, was mandated by Congress last year in response to a series of accidents involving alcohol.
Among them were the Exxon Valdez oil spill in 1989, which was partly attributed to the captain's drinking, and the derailment of a subway train in New York City in 1991 that killed five people.
The motorman's drinking was blamed for the crash.


Stanley Friedman, 64, Founder of Law Firm
Stanley J. Friedman, a founder and senior partner of the Manhattan law firm of Shereff Friedman Hoffman &amp; Goodman, died on Wednesday at his home in Riverdale, the Bronx.
He was 64.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


Is He Gone? As the Giants Drop Games, Handley Has Dropped Hints
Publicly, Ray Handley refuses to discuss his job security.
But privately, Giants players say, their beleaguered head coach has given mixed signals to them.
They said he delivered these messages after losing games in which the Giants played poorly:
*After the loss on Oct. 4 to the Los Angeles Raiders: "You guys might think I'm not going to be here. Get it off your mind, because I'm going to be here. If you're not getting the job done, I'm not going to keep you around for another coach."


John A. Corbett, 69, Buffalo Broadcaster
John A. Corbett, a longtime radio and television broadcaster in Buffalo, died on Monday at Sarasota Memorial Hospital in Sarasota, Fla., where he lived.
He was 69.
He died of cancer, his family said.


Hemophilia Drug Approved
Genetics Institute Inc. and the Baxter Healthcare Corporation's Hyland division said today that the Food and Drug Administration had approved Recombinate, the first genetically engineered drug for the treatment of hemophilia A, the most common type of hemophilia.
Recombinate replaces a protein, factor VIII, that causes normal blood clotting and that is missing or deficient in the blood of hemophiliacs.


Neediest Offers Help To the Deaf
When Christina Dunams ventures onto the playground of her elementary school, she is often greeted by taunts instead of invitations to join games of tag or hopscotch.
Other children tease her about her hearing aid, mimic her when she uses sign language or parrot her speech.
But twice a month Christina retreats from a world where she often feels unwelcome to take part in a program that tries to reduce the isolation of children who are deaf or hard of hearing.
The program at the Rhinelander Center gives the children a chance to learn and play with others like themselves in the kind of nurturing atmosphere that may be absent from their homes, schools or neighborhoods.


AIDS Panel Urges Condoms for Students
If New Jersey wants to slow the spread of AIDS, condoms should be made available to all students beginning in the ninth grade and hypodermic needles should be sold over the counter, an advisory panel will tell Gov.
Jim Florio on Friday.
The report, from a panel appointed by Mr.
Florio a year ago, calls on the Governor to "become the leader we lack" to educate and galvanize the state to action.


Corrections
An article on Nov. 26 under the heading "New England Journal," about the resurgence of wild turkeys in New England, misstated the history of turkeys bred to be eaten.
They are descended from turkeys domesticated by Aztecs in Mexico, not by the Incas, whose homeland was Peru.
The article also misidentified the period in which turkeys were introduced to Europe by returning Spanish explorers.
It was the 1500's, not the 1300's.


Accounts
*
Fila U.S.A.
Inc., New York, to FCB/ Leber Katz Partners, New York, to handle the athletic footwear and apparel manufacturer's $12 million account, previously handled by an undisclosed shop on a project basis.
*
Sprint Local Telecommunications division, a unit of Sprint Corp., Kansas City, Mo., to Carmichael Lynch Advertising , Minneapolis, as the first agency to handle the creative portion of the company's systemwide residential custom-calling account.
Billings were not disclosed.


Top Award to Stallings
Alabama Coach GENE STALLINGS, who played for Bear Bryant at Texas A&amp;M and was his assistant at Alabama, won the Bear Bryant Award last night in Houston as the college football coach of the year. (AP)


Mears Says He Will Retire
The four-time Indianapolis 500 winner RICK MEARS surprised the racing world last night by announcing his retirement as a competitive driver at the age of 41.
Mears, who had surgery on Aug. 19 to repair a broken wrist suffered in crashes before and during the Indianapolis 500 in May, drove his last race Aug. 2, finishing 16th in the Marlboro 500 at Michigan International Speedway. (AP)


Bush Never Ignored the 25th Amendment
To the Editor:
Dr.
Herbert L. Abrams makes the charge that President Bush ignored the 25th Amendment -- dealing with power transfer in case of temporary Presidential disability -- when he was elected to the Presidency in 1988 ("If Clinton Is Disabled," Op-Ed, Dec. 3).
By printing this article without comment, you appear to corroborate that charge.
Nothing could be further from the truth.
George Bush asked me in December 1988 to take charge of the White House Medical Office.
We discussed the 25th Amendment at that time.
During the first weeks of George Bush's Presidency we reviewed every detail of that amendment with the chief of staff, John Sununu; the President's legal counsel, C. Boyden Gray, and with Vice President Quayle.
All key personnel in the Military Office were included in these discussions.
The President acceded to all of our recommendations without hesitation or delay.


Reflections in an Unflinching Eye: C-SPAN Meets Baseball
It's too bad C-SPAN could not provide coverage of yesterday's United States Senate hearings into baseball's antitrust exemption the way ESPN would do it.
Where was the video?
The replays of inflammatory comments?
The studio analysis?
We know C-SPAN merely flips the camera on and leaves it alone until the hearing ends.
That's fine for an arcane hearing on Keynesian economics as it relates to Federal Reserve monetary policy.
But over five or six hours of baseball testimony, a dose of Chris Berman narrating dramatic video and the career stats of the antitrust subcommittee's chairman, Sen.
Howard Metzenbaum, Democrat from Ohio, would have been mighty welcome.


Julian Roth, 91, Dies; Architectural Designer
Julian Roth, the retired partner of a New York architectural firm that helped to design the World Trade Center towers and other Manhattan skyscrapers, died on Wednesday at New York University Hospital.
He was 91 years old and lived in Manhattan.
Mr.
Roth and his brother, Richard, were senior partners in Emery Roth &amp; Sons.
During their tenure, the firm helped to design more than 200 office towers, apartment buildings and hotels in New York.


Review/Film; Enough True Love For Two
Love as a terrifically intense if farcical learning experience is the subtext of Chantal Akerman's "Night and Day," an elegant and stylish new French comedy that's as subversively funny as its two very young lovers are self-absorbed and humorless.
The film, opening today at the Joseph Papp Public Theater, is the Belgian-born Ms.
Akerman's post-modern take on "Jules and Jim," with a little bit of "The Captain's Paradise" thrown in.
Julie (Guilaine Londez) is not conventionally pretty: her hair is sort of stringy and her nose is too big for the rest of her face.
Yet she has a great body that expresses feelings not easily articulated in speech.
At the beginning of "Night and Day," Julie and Jack (Thomas Langmann), a skinny taxi driver who never smiles, are living only for each other in a large, sparsely furnished flat in the vicinity of the Boulevard Sebastapol on the Right Bank of Paris.


Lithuania Seeks a Niche in High Technology
Under the eyes of Russia's 107th Division and beset by countless other unwelcome remnants of the Soviet era, Lithuanian scientists, engineers and would-be business leaders are gambling on advanced technology to gain entrance to the industrialized world.
Once a major supplier of specialized military and industrial technology to the Soviet Union, Lithuania has lost most of its traditional Soviet-bloc markets while being forced to pay skyrocketing prices for oil, natural gas and other essentials.


Francis Brennan, 82, Retired Art Director
Francis E. Brennan, a retired art director and a cartoonist, died yesterday at New York Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 82 and lived in Queens.
He died of a stroke, his family said.


Harry Ellerbe, Actor and Director, 91
Harry Ellerbe, an actor and director who worked on Broadway, in regional theater and in films, died on Dec. 3 at the A. G. Rhodes Nursing Home in Marietta, Ga.
He was 91 years old.
Mr.
Ellerbe appeared on Broadway in Ibsen's "Ghosts" and "Hedda Gabler," with the Russian actress Alla Nazimova.
He also appeared on Broadway in "Man on Stilts," "Junior Miss,"


Metro Digest
BREATH TESTS AIMED AT TRANSIT WORKERS
The Transportation Department proposed new regulations that would make seven million transportation workers subject to on-the-job breath tests for alcohol and expand existing drug tests to include mass-transit workers.
The program was mandated by Congress last year in response to a series of accidents involving alcohol, including a subway derailment in New York City in 1991 that killed five.
A35.
NEW YORK CITY  IMMIGRANTS MEET GROWING RESENTMENT


Next Goal for the Military: Dealing With Realities
It is said around the Pentagon that no military plan survives contact with the enemy.
Already that piece of accepted wisdom is starting to come true in Somalia.
In Somalia the "enemy" is not an opposing army.
Rather it is the imposing logistical burdens, factional fighting and torrential rains.


Producer Prices Fell 0.2% Last Month
In the best monthly inflation report since January, prices received by producers of finished goods fell two-tenths of 1 percent in November as energy and food unwound earlier increases, the Labor Department reported today.
At the same time, the department disclosed that first-time claims for unemployment benefits fell for the eighth time in 10 weeks, achieving the lowest level on a four-week average since the latest recession -- still not officially declared over -- began in July 1990.


Money Fund Assets Fall
The total assets of the nation's 615 retail money market mutual funds decreased $351.3 million, to $387.52 billion, for the week ended Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
The assets of the 384 taxable retail money market funds were down $1 billion, to $307.33 billion, while the assets of the 231 retail tax-exempt funds increased $653.1 million, to $80.18 billion.


A DuPont Family Father-Son Fight Goes to Court
Edgar Newbold Smith has spent the last seven years trying to extricate his son, an heir to the Du Pont chemical fortune, from the extremist political organization of Lyndon H. LaRouche Jr.
But Mr.
Smith, a securities analyst here, has little to show for his efforts, apart from his son's enmity.
And now Mr.
Smith is scheduled to stand trial in Alexandria, Va., on Federal charges that he conspired with cult specialists to kidnap his 36-year-old son, Lewis duPont Smith, so the son could be "deprogrammed," or freed from Mr.
LaRouche's influence.


Across the U.S., Immigrants Find the Land of Resentment
On her way home from school recently, a Chinese immigrant girl was attacked by other teen-agers who spray-painted her face black.
She and her guidance counselors at the Seward Park High School in lower Manhattan were horrified, but they were not shocked.
Attacks on newly arrived immigrants are a routine occurrence at their school, they said.
Similarly, a Salvadoran dishwasher, assaulted and robbed recently on his way into a money-transfer agency in Hempstead, L.I., was frightened but not surprised by the message of his assailants, who were black: "You steal our jobs, we steal your money." Tensions had been building between the entrenched black community and the Central American newcomers to the town.


School Adopts Bid to Leave City College
Faculty members at City College's School of Engineering voted yesterday to seek the secession of the school from the college, a move that has been brewing for years but was accelerated by release of a report this week that calls for a major overhaul of academic programs throughout City University's 19 colleges.
The proposed reorganization, which calls for the consolidation or elimination of some programs so that others can be expanded, also prompted a letter of protest yesterday from the City College faculty senate, which represents 700 instructors at the college in Harlem.
The senate wrote the university's Chancellor, W. Ann Reynolds, who commissioned the report on the reorganization, that faculty members fear it will lead to trustees making curriculum changes, which they said are the prerogative of the faculty.


Stock Falls At a Maker Of Chips
Reflecting a large one-time gain from patent licensing fees, the National Semiconductor Corporation today reported its best quarterly earnings in the last eight years.
Without the nonrecurring items, however, the company disappointed Wall Street analysts, who had expected stronger results.
National Semiconductor shares plunged $2.625 today, to $10.625, as almost 5.5 million of its shares were traded on the New York Stock Exchange.
The company's 19.8 percent decline was the worst of the day on the Big Board.


Nicholas L. King, 68, Press Center Director
Nicholas LeRoy King, the managing director of the Federal Government's New York Foreign Press Center since 1981, died on Wednesday in his Manhattan office.
He was 68.
He died of what was apparently a heart attack, his family said.


Defense Cross-Examines Woman in Assault Case
Defense lawyers in the Glen Ridge sexual-assault trial cross-examined a 21-year-old mentally retarded woman today, trying to show that the four defendants did not force her to perform sex acts nearly four years ago.
They brought out the fact that she visited the courtroom with prosecutors to rehearse about a week before she took the stand.
They caught her in some inconsistencies.
And she contradicted some earlier witnesses, including her mother and a detective who played a major role in investigating the case. 2 Lawyers, 2 Approaches
She was questioned today by two defense lawyers, who approached their task with different styles.


The Transition: An Eye Toward Wall Street and Capitol Hill; Promises Before Policies
With the choices he announced today, President-elect Bill Clinton indicated that the main responsibility of the top economic policy officials in his Administration would be not so much to develop new policy as to get his campaign promises enacted quickly.
Senator Lloyd Bentsen and Representative Leon E. Panetta have mastered tax and budget policy like few others in public life.
The high regard with which they are held by their peers in Congress should prove invaluable to Mr.
Clinton, who says he is determined to break the deadlock between the White House and Capitol.


Dinkins Picks An Educator As a Deputy
Two months after his first choice was derailed by sexual-harassment charges, Mayor David N. Dinkins yesterday appointed a new deputy mayor to promote and publicize his initiatives despite criticism from political rivals that the job is mainly an arm of the Mayor's re-election effort.
The appointment of Joyce F. Brown, a 46-year-old educator and close political ally, comes at a crucial time for the Mayor, who is under fire for his handling of racial disturbances in Crown Heights.
One of Ms.
Brown's jobs will be to coordinate the administration's efforts to ease racial tensions in New York City's neighborhoods.


How Censorship Efforts by Religious Right Disrupt Education
To the Editor:
Your recent articles on the religious right (e.g., front page, Nov. 21) give an excellent overview of its agenda and modus operandi.
The National Coalition Against Censorship has continuous and intense experience in numerous communities with attacks by the group's adherents on art, movies, music, books, magazines and a broad range of ideas.
Since every idea the religious right does not support is anathema to them and since their beliefs are so narrow and unambiguous -- unlike real life -- they target many of the most important institutions in American life, including libraries, art museums and public schools.
It is truly, as they have declared it, a culture war, and it is pervasive.


Abroad at Home; An International Pariah
The world's diplomats have tried over many months to end Serbian aggression in Bosnia by talking with Serbia's President, Slobodan Milosevic.
Such distinguished figures as Cyrus Vance, Lord Carrington and Lord Owen have been involved.
Cease-fires and other steps toward peace have been repeatedly promised -- and forgotten.
Now the time has come to realize that Mr.
Milosevic is using all the diplomatic attention to gain legitimacy for himself at home.
It is time for the United Nations and others to stop trying to wheedle him and instead to condemn his Government unequivocally as a genocidal threat to peace and security.


N.F.L. and Players Move Closer to an Agreement
The National Football League and its players have taken a giant step toward settling their dispute over free agency, but just enough tricky baby steps remain to keep either side from proclaiming that a settlement is at hand.
The breakthrough came at an eight-hour meeting on Wednesday, when, in what one participant described as the first real movement since the talks began several months ago, the two sides agreed to the outlines of a settlement.
The agreement would give players unrestricted free agency after five years in the league and give the owners, who had been pressing for free agency after six years, a provisional salary cap, something the players had been resisting.


Investigation in Beating To Continue, Says Hynes
The Brooklyn District Attorney's office said yesterday that a grand jury would continue to investigate the case of a homeless black man who said he was beaten by Hasidic Jews in Crown Heights and whose lawyer says the man cannot now be found.
But privately, law-enforcement officials said the case would almost certainly be scrapped unless the man, Ralph Nimmons, resurfaces and agrees to testify.
His lawyer, Michael W. Warren, and supporters repeated yesterday that even if Mr.
Nimmons came forward, they would advise him not to cooperate with the investigation unless a special prosecutor is appointed to replace the Brooklyn District Attorney, Charles J. Hynes, in the inquiry.


Georgetown Alumni Clash at The Garden
Patrick Ewing poked his head into the Charlotte Hornets' locker room early last night and spotted Larry Johnson sitting near the door.
As this was a Georgetown University kind of night at Madison Square Garden, Ewing couldn't resist replaying the old college game.
"Larry, what happened the last time Georgetown played U.N.L.V.?" Ewing asked rhetorically.


Pirates' Hurley Finds A Mammoth Opening
On an evening of frigid winds and cold rain, Seton Hall learned a small lesson about weathering storms tonight.
Playing without its starting point guard and a top reserve, the Pirates held off pesky Iona in the first half and then pulled away for a 75-61 victory at the Westchester County Center.


People
*
John Kallir, 68, chairman and founder of Kallir, Philips, Ross Inc., New York, announced plans to retire, effective Dec. 31, though he will remain with the agency as chairman emeritus.
Norman Cooper, 61, president and chief executive of the health-care agency, was named to succeed Mr.
Kallir as chairman.


Diner's Journal
Restaurant Two Two Two
West 79th Street is hardly a gastronomic aorta in Manhattan, so anytime something new and promising opens there it is worth investigating.
In the case of Restaurant Two Two Two, at 222 West 79th Street, sparks of potential can be seen.
The restaurant is owned by Frank Valenza (who had the ultra-expensive Palace in the late 1970's, later Giorgio, on Park Avenue South), along with Emil Talel, a real-estate developer, and the chef, Frank Dalla Riva.


Torretta's No. 1 Backup: the Older Brother Who Went Before at Miami
This weekend, Geoff Torretta will make his second trip to the Downtown Athletic Club for a Heisman Trophy presentation, a remarkable achievement for a former quarterback whose major-college career consisted of 75 passes.
His first trip, six years ago, came at the end of his senior season at the University of Miami, when his roommate, Vinny Testaverde, became the winner.
This week, he might have a chance to watch the life of his younger brother, Gino, change forever.


California Moves to Revitalize San Francisco Bay
After years of dispute, the state of California moved today to repair one of the worst environmental calamities in the American West: the degradation of San Francisco Bay and its estuary, which supplies drinking water to 20 million urban Californians and irrigation for millions of acres of farms.
The State Water Resources Control Board in Sacramento ordered a series of new pumping rules and water standards for the pivotal region, which is the very heart of California, spurting water across the state through massive aortic pumps.


Seasonal Favorites From Critics' CD Shelves
REJOICE, rejoice greatly.
When it comes to music associated with Christmas, the recorded blessings are, if anything, too plentiful.
For Bach's "Christmas Oratorio," I have restricted myself to pre-1970 recordings.
This music's grandeur was once given a different texture from contemporary "authentic" performances.
Karl Munchinger, an old-fashioned exponent of pre-authentic, post-scholarly Bach, deserves more credit than he has recently received.
His leading of the Stuttgart Chamber Orchestra, with the soloists Elly Ameling, Helen Watts, Peter Pears and Tom Krause, has its flaws, but it shows a master of Bachian solemnity at work.





Art in Review
Richard Onyango
Salvatore Ala Gallery  560 Broadway (near Prince Street)  SoHo  Through Dec. 31


It's Winter, but Steinbrenner Is Warming Up
Less than four months from being reinstated to his position as the owner who runs the Yankees, George Steinbrenner spoke out yesterday in defense of his team, his city and his "people."
Steinbrenner, who could not officially participate in the owner's meetings in Louisville, Ky., because of the ban from baseball he agreed to in August of 1990, watched disdainfully as Greg Maddux snubbed the Yankees for the Braves and a contract that was worth $6 million less than the Yankee offer.
And he bristled as Barry Bonds said the Giants were more committed to winning than the Yankees, and as New York was cast as a place where players do not want to play.


Anderson Puts in Triple Time
Kenny Anderson and Mark Jackson are friends.
Off the court.
On it, no two players could be more competitive.
They don't talk trash to each other, Jackson said, they just make jokes.
After the 111-105 victory by Anderson's Nets over Jackson's Los Angeles Clippers tonight, Anderson is entitled to the last laugh after achieving his first career triple-double as a pro.


4 European Nations to Build a Lower-Cost Jet Fighter Plane
Britain, Germany, Italy and Spain agreed today to produce a less expensive version of Europe's most ambitious defense-industry project, the European Fighter Aircraft.
Germany's rejection of the original plane, which Bonn said cost too much for the post-cold-war era, had put the project in jeopardy.
Defense ministers from the four countries, attending a NATO meeting in Brussels, approved plans for a new fighter that is to cost 30 percent less.
The original plan, conceived in 1984, had called for spending of $38 billion.


American Express: Substance Over Style?
They couldn't be more different: James D. Robinson 3d, the patrician, Harvard-educated son of a leading Atlanta banking executive who spent a lifetime honing his manners, his image and his physique, and Harvey Golub, the bearish, chain-smoking son of a struggling small-business owner who once flunked out of college but parlayed street smarts, moxie and hands-on dexterity into a career as a corporate repairman, always on call.
If Mr.
Robinson is the master of the mansion, the sleek personification of American Express, Mr.
Golub is the plumber he frantically dials when all the pipes burst in subzero weather at 3 A.M.
But now that a once-docile board has decided to usher Mr.
Robinson out as chairman and chief executive of the American Express Company, with the stock price and earnings depressed, Mr.
Golub, the company's president of 16 months, is the leading candidate to take over the whole estate.
The apparent favorite of Mr.
Robinson, who is at least nominally leading the search, Mr.
Golub has also won the allegiance of Wall Street.
Some analysts there are prodding the board to crown him right away instead of implying, by a prolonged search, that Mr.
Golub is not quite good enough.


Clinton's Other Run
To the Editor:
In a Nov. 27 news article, you characterize President-elect Clinton's race time of 24:16 in a five-kilometer run as "fair at best" and "a mediocre jog." His pace per mile was 7 minutes 50 seconds.
I have been running for 20 years, and can assure you that a 7:50 pace is quite respectable and certainly not mediocre.
To paraphrase Vice President Quayle, "if Bill Clinton can govern as well as he jogs, we'll be all right."  EDWIN A. SALSITZ New York, Nov. 30, 1992


Judge May Dismiss Case in Drug Agent's Torture
A Federal judge said today that he would consider dismissing the case against a Mexican doctor on trial in the 1985 torture and murder of a United States narcotics agent, saying there was a lack of direct evidence.
The startling announcement came after the prosecution rested its case against Dr.
Humberto Alvarez Machain and Ruben Zuno Arce after less than two weeks of testimony.
Prosecutors earlier estimated the trial would last up to six weeks, but it now appears the case could go to the jury much earlier, if at all.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
7.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
4.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.06
3.30
4.62
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.21
3.22
4.16
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.35
3.33
4.17
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.37
6.38
6.69
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.42
7.43
7.75
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.40
8.45
8.78
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.36
6.38
6.84
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Morgan Harris Jr., 60, An Executive Recruiter
Morgan Hovey Harris Jr., who retired two years ago as managing partner of Korn Ferry International, the worldwide executive recruiting agency, died Tuesday on his 60th birthday at St.
John's Hospital in Santa Monica, Calif.
He was most recently a resident of Los Angeles.
He died from cancer, his family said.


THE TRANSITION: Man in the News -- Lloyd Millard Bentsen Jr.; Insider for the Treasury
Lloyd Bentsen is almost everything Bill Clinton is not.
He is a multimillionaire, languid and almost aloof, calm and not intensely driven.
He got his political start proclaiming his record as a decorated bomber pilot.
Even their respective morning running routines reflect the basic symbolic difference between them.
The President-elect jogs on the streets.
The Secretary of the Treasury-designate stays indoors, on a treadmill.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Exit Mr. McEnroe


Tumors May Suppress Immune Cells That Fight Cancer, Study Finds
Cancer cells may release a potent molecule into the bloodstream that cripples the immune system, scientists report.
If confirmed, the surprising and potentially far-reaching discovery could cast light on the longstanding mystery of why so many tumors defy rejection by the body's immune defenses.
Scientists stressed that the work must be repeated and extended before its full significance can be gauged.


Mets Try Ancient Remedy
The Mets' quest for a durable fifth starting pitcher ended yesterday when the club came to terms with Frank Tanana, a 39-year-old left-hander with surprising staying power.
Tanana, who agreed to a $1.3 million one-year contract with enough incentives to boost his earnings to the $1.7 million he made with the Tigers last season, was just what the Mets had been looking for, said General Manager Al Harazin.


Hornets Pick The Lock At Garden
The Knicks suffered their first home loss of the season last night in overtime when the Charlotte Hornets made crucial plays that New York could not match.
The Knicks had a chance to win on the final possession of regulation, but their designed play broke down.
They had a chance to win in overtime, but Charlotte dominated the extra 5 minutes.
And New York had a 10-point lead in the first half, but they failed to kick the Hornets when they were down.


TV Weekend; Imagining the Details Of the Royal Troubles
American television's fascination with Britain's royal family lurches forward yet again this weekend as ABC presents "Charles and Diana: Unhappily Ever After" on Sunday at 9 P.M.
From the coronation of Queen Elizabeth II in 1953 through various royal romances and weddings, lavishly dramatized in earlier movies, television has exploited the supposed fairy-tale aspects of life at Buckingham Palace.
Now it's time to dig into the subsequent scandals and divorces.
Viewers may have a problem deciding whether to laugh or cry.
The title and titled roles are played this time by Roger Rees ("Cheers") and Catherine Oxenberg ("Dynasty").
He's too skinny and she's not skinny enough; both are a touch too old. (Ms. Oxenberg played the Princess in the 1983 television movie "The Royal Romance of Charles and Diana.") But the performances are solid and intelligent, lending this peekaboo excursion into royal matters a bit more substance than most.


Fastest Growing Economies Cut Tax Subsidies
To the Editor:
Ann Crittenden uses the terms tax subsidy and tax deduction/credit synonymously when arguing for the Federal Government to eliminate "unproductive tax subsidies" ("Bad Breaks," Op-Ed, Nov. 18).
The terms are anything but similar.
A tax subsidy is a government grant collected from taxpayers and then given out to certain private groups.
Tax deductions and credits are accounting mechanisms that reduce the individual taxpayer's liability.
They do not at all involve the transfer of tax dollars to other groups as does a tax subsidy.


Don't Equate Syphilis With Invaders' Ills
To the Editor:
As you perceptively note in "Clues Etched in Bone Debunk Theory of a Plague's Spread" (Science Times, Nov. 17), the controversial theory that syphilis originated in the Americas owes much of its fascination to a desire for "a kind of rough justice" to compensate for the devastating toll European diseases like smallpox took on the Native Americans.
But even if syphilis did originate here, these two disasters should not be equated medically or morally.
European diseases caused a vastly greater cultural and demographic catastrophe for the Native Americans than that which resulted from syphilis in Europe.


Baseball Executives Are Taken To Task
One day after Bud Selig said major league baseball was running more smoothly than it is generally given credit for, baseball's top executive and five of his fellow club owners listened to a host of United States Senators and Representatives strongly disagree.
Instead of hearing endorsements of the game's recent actions, baseball owners, here to attend the Senate's Antitrust Subcommittee hearing on professional baseball's antitrust exemption, were systematically taken to task.
At issue was their apparent dilution of the commissioner's power, their seemingly arbitrary approval or veto of franchise moves and their hiring policies involving minorities.


Pena to the Pirates
The Pittsburgh Pirates signed right-hander ALEJANDRO PENA to a one-year contract for $1.35 million.
Pena, 33, was 1-6 for the Braves with 15 saves and a 4.07 earned run average last season, when he missed most of September with tendinitis in his right shoulder. (AP)


School Program for Poor Is Failing, a Panel Says
The Federal Government's main program for helping improve the basic academic skills of poor children is failing those students and needs to be overhauled, a report by an independent commission said yesterday.
The $6.1 billion program, known as Chapter 1, accounts for nearly one-fifth of the Federal education budget and sends money to about two-thirds of the nation's schools as part of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965.
Congress will vote on reauthorizing that legislation next year, as it does every five years, and the report is expected to influence how the Chapter 1 section of the Act is revised.


Bonds to Wear No. 25
BARRY BONDS, who joined the San Francisco Giants for $43.75 million earlier this week, decided to turn down godfather WILLIE MAYS's offer to unretire his No. 24 jersey so Bonds could have the number he wore for six years as a Pittsburgh Pirate.
Instead, Bonds will wear No. 25, the number his father, BOBBY, wore for the Giants from 1968-1974. (AP)


A Record-Breaking Year for Bank Profits
Signaling a dramatic turnaround for the banking industry from the gloomy forecasts of just 12 months ago, Federal regulators said today that 1992 would be the most profitable year ever for the nation's banks.
As a consequence, they said, fewer institutions would fail in 1993 than had been expected, even though new regulations that go into effect next week require officials to seize weak, but solvent, institutions.


BMW to Modify Lease Ads After an Abrams Complaint
BMW of North America was reprimanded yesterday by Attorney General Robert Abrams of New York for advertisements promoting lease deals.
He said the advertisements were misleading because they "bury" information in small print about down payments needed to produce the relatively low monthly payments that are more prominently advertised.
The Attorney General's office said it also planned to take action against 14 other auto makers and New York-area dealer associations unless they changed their ads.


Corrections
A report by Bloomberg Business News in the Company News column of Business Day yesterday about a stock offering by Hospitality Franchise Systems Inc. described the involvement of an executive, Henry Silverman, incorrectly.
Mr.
Silverman did not sell any shares as part of the offering.
The report also misstated the amount of the Blackstone Group's investment in parts of the company two years ago.
It was $120 million.
Because of an editing error, the report also misstated Mr.
Silverman's title.
He is chairman and chief executive.


Corrections
An obituary on Sunday about one of the first female lawyers in New Jersey rendered her last name incorrectly in some editions.
She was Fannie Bear Besser.


Tom Cunningham, 32, Worker With the Deaf
Tom Cunningham, a social worker who helped deaf people and others with disabilities and a was leader in AIDS organizations, died on Wednesday at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center in Manhattan.
He was 32.
He died of complications from AIDS, his family said.


THE TRANSITION: An Eye Toward Wall Street and Capitol Hill; Clinton's Budget Office Will Differ From Bush's in Both Style and Substance
The Office of Management and Budget may remain an army of bean counters with eye shades under Leon E. Panetta and Alice M. Rivlin, President-elect Bill Clinton's choices as budget director and deputy budget director.
But it will be a far different place than it was under the current budget director, Richard G. Darman.
For all his talk about the evils of the Federal deficit, Mr.
Darman presided over years of record deficits.
Mr.
Panetta and Ms.
Rivlin are known as deficit hawks.
Indeed, during the campaign each criticized Mr.
Clinton's budget plan as not being tough enough on the string of $300 billion deficits projected for the years ahead.


A Daughter, Redemption And Smiles In 1 Package
"I LOVE you, you love me, we're a happy family," sang Kendra Vance, repeating words she learned from Barney the Dinosaur on television.
The child, who will be 3 in March, laughed and danced and hugged her father in their East Harlem apartment.
It was a happy scene, not particularly remarkable if you did not know that the little girl was conceived when her parents were crack addicts living in parks and subway stations, that her mother still lives that way and that the child, adored and secure, had redeemed her 43-year-old father.


COMPANY BRIEFS
ABLE TELECOM HOLDING CORP., Deerfield Beach, Fla., announced that Able Telcom's Venezuelan subsidiaries had received contracts to expand their service work for Cantv into Maracaibo and Valencia.
BALL CORP., Muncie, Ind., announced that its Airlink satellite communication high-gain antenna subsystem had been selected by British Airways for its fleet of 30 Boeing 777 aircraft.
The Ball Airlink antenna will be integrated with the Collins Avionics Satcom 906 system consisting of the satellite data unit and high-power amplifer unit.
WISCONSIN PHARMACAL CO., announced that the obstetrics and gynecology devices panel of the Food and Drug Administration yesterday unanimously recommended that its Reality female condom be approved by the F.D.A.
Reality will be the first of a new class of products approved by the F.D.A. to help prevent the spread of AIDS.


An Unorthodox Choice For Economic Adviser
The new chairwoman of the Council of Economic Advisers, Laura D'Andrea Tyson, a professor at the University of California at Berkeley, is a decidedly unorthodox choice.
And least of all because she is the first woman to head the council since it was created just after World War II.
The head of the President's Council of Economic Advisers has historically been the most mainstream of mainstream economists, hewing to an economic middleground.
Yet Professor Tyson, a prolific author who is 45 and has a Ph.D. from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, says the United States is "teetering on the abyss of economic decline." She is almost certainly the first person to head the council who believes that managed trade is often preferable to free trade and that industrial policy works.


Q &amp; A
Paying State Taxes  Q I am starting a new job in Connecticut and will continue to reside in New York.
Do I have to pay taxes to both states?
ELLEN FAITH HURWITCH, REGO PARK, N.Y.
A You must pay income tax to Connecticut on the wages you earn in the state at the same rate that residents of Connecticut pay, said Richard Nicholson, legal director of the Connecticut Department of Revenue Services.
However, income is not taxed independently by both states.


It Was Not a Hurricane, But a Heck of an Impostor
The storm that soaked and battered the New York area yesterday looked and acted much like a hurricane.
But it was really a northeaster -- a winter storm with winds off the Atlantic.
It began the week as a spawner of tornados in the Los Angeles basin and ended it as part of an extraordinary confluence of atmospheric forces that produced one of the worst December storms on record in the Northeast.
Tides jumped 3 to 5 feet above normal in the New York area yesterday, according to the National Weather Service, rivaling those of the worst northeaster on record in 1950.


Orioles Get Reynolds
Second baseman HAROLD REYNOLDS yesterday agreed to a one-year, $1.65 million contract with the Baltimore Orioles, who in turn placed BILL RIPKEN on unconditional-release waivers.
Reynolds, a 32-year-old switch hitter, has a .260 career average in 10 seasons, all with Seattle.


Cabre Exploration reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


A Homeowner Challenges an Inflated Tax Assessment, and Wins
In December 1990, John Castellano, 37, bought a two-bedroom townhouse condominium in Verona, N.J., for $160,000.
He is a partner in the real estate development company that built the condominium complex.
Similar units had sold for about $200,000 in 1987, before the real estate market flattened.
Based on the higher sales price, his townhouse was assessed at $97,500; property tax was $4,299.
Believing the assessment represented considerably more than the townhouse was worth in today's market, Mr.
Castellano filed an appeal for an adjustment.
Here is how he and his lawyer challenged the assessment, lowered his property tax and managed to avoid a costly court fight.


Corrections
An article in The Home Section on Thursday about home security systems misstated the telephone number for the National Burglar and Fire Alarm Association, a trade group.
The number is (301) 907-3202.


Dart Group reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


More on the Storm
Other reports on the storm in the New York region and its aftermath are on pages 25-28.


Boitano's Return to the Future
There are sensible reasons why Brian Boitano should not be skating so resolutely toward the 1994 Winter Olympics in Lillehammer, Norway.
The stress. The commitment. The potential disappointment. Successful and 29
He already has a gold medal, from the Olympics at Calgary, Alberta, in 1988.
He is a successful professional, a touring and television star.
He is 29 years old, and doctors argue with him about cutting away a loose tendon in his right knee.
What if he falls in Lillehammer?
What if the international judges don't like the idea of a professional returning to skate with younger amateurs?
Boitano knows all this.
Yet he is here at the World Professional Figure Skating Championships, at the Capital Centre, to unveil on Saturday what is to become his Olympic program.
It includes six triple jumps, to Ferde Grofe's "Grand Canyon Suite." Two more triples will be added over the next few months.
Boitano has decided to go for it, and barring injury he will apply in April for reinstatement by the International Skating Union.
"You just don't decide you've been good enough for long enough," Boitano said.
"If you're a real skater, you wonder if you still have it. I would like to be known for skating when I die. I can't be, unless I put it all out there on the line."
Boitano, who has consistently been an outspoken proponent of open Olympic skating competition, might be the only professional skater in singles competition to go for broke, to seek reinstatement.
He dreads that distracting notion, but almost expects it.
Kristi Yamaguchi, who will make her professional debut here on Saturday in the women's competition, said again today that it was too early for her to make a decision about Lillehammer.
Her agent, Kevin Albrecht, said her decision would not affect earnings potential.
Boitano, like many others, thinks Yamaguchi, a gold-medal winner in the 1992 Winter Olympics, should not come back so soon.
"If I were her, why should I go back two years later?" Boitano said.
"She's got this great world to experience. After six years, she can still decide to come back for the next Olympics."
Despite the new, open era of figure skating, such long-range comebacks are no certainty.
Few professionals have maintained their technical skating at world-class level.
It is too easy to skip a difficult triple, to spin and smile instead of to jump.
Boitano has resisted such temptations.
"These last years, I've tripled, tripled, tripled my face off," he said.
Meanwhile, his sense of theater has advanced.
"I want to bring my skating two steps forward," he said.
"I want to skate more creatively. I want to skate a program that builds and builds, with no rest. If it was the same as last time, if it was the Napoleon program that won in 1988, I would never do it. There's got to be some risk."
He is inadvertently stepping on some sensitive toes.
Kurt Browning of Canada, a gold-medal threat and a skater Boitano considers a friend, has openly opposed the reinstatement of professionals.
In an awkward moment recently, Boitano walked in on a Browning television interview while the Canadian was complaining about Boitano's impending return.
"That's O.K.," Boitano said.
"As long as he doesn't say that I'm a terrible skater. I'm more concerned with the American skaters hating me."
That might come.
For now, the skating world is in such flux that it is as difficult to pin down animosity as anything else.
"Everybody wants something," said Linda Leaver, Boitano's coach.
"But nobody knows what it is."
The World Figure Skating Championships, produced by the former skating champion Dick Button, are a perfect example of both the sport's growing popularity and its ambiguity.
The event is not sanctioned by the United States Figure Skating Association, but has nonetheless been a showcase event since 1986.
And competing here will no longer disqualify skaters from seeking Olympic reinstatement.
Boitano, his fellow American Paul Wylie, Brian Orser of Canada and Viktor Petrenko of Ukraine will compete for a $40,000 first prize before a sellout crowd.
Arguably, subtracting Orser and adding Browning might produce the four best male skaters in the world.
The pairs and ice-dancing events are nearly as impressive, but Yamaguchi faces only nominal threats from Jill Trenary, Rosalynn Sumners, and Denise Biellmann of Switzerland.
Boitano, the three-time defending champion, will gauge the reaction of the crowd and the judges to his Olympic program.
"He doesn't need a reason for this comeback," Leaver said.
"It's just Brian. He sets his own mind."


METRO DIGEST
TAKING STOCK OF THE STORM'S HAVOC: DAMAGE, FLOODING, DISRUPTIONS
A huge prewinter storm packing gusts up to 90 miles an hour and heavy rains struck the New York metropolitan region, crippling transportation, commerce and education, flooding wide areas, knocking out power to hundreds of thousands of homes, damaging thousands of buildings and disrupting the lives of millions.
Page 1.
WORKADAY CARES, GONE WITH THE WIND
Across the region, the storm turned people from their workaday tasks, sending boat owners scrambling to secure their craft, forcing commuters stymied by power losses and mass-transit breakdowns into frantic logistical calculations, and rendering the careful child-care plans of working parents useless.
Page 1.


More on the Storm
Other reports on the storm in the New York region and its aftermath are on pages 25-28.


Review/Jazz; An Adventurous Farewell
The last piece of the American Jazz Orchestra's last concert, at Cooper Union on Thursday night, wasn't by David Murray, who was the guest composer, saxophonist and conductor.
It was Jimmy Lunceford's "Lunceford Special," but its performance showed exactly how distinct Mr.
Murray's work has become.
"Lunceford Special" is a sleek piece of writing and extremely hierarchical, with melodies and riffs all in proper order.
The solos were short and subordinated to the arrangement, and the piece existed as a concise whole, with riffs and written parts leading toward each other in a carefully conceived narrative.


Survey Doubles Hurricane Cost Estimate
One of the nation's top insurance rating agencies said yesterday that it expected insured losses from Hurricane Andrew eventually to reach $15 billion to $16.5 billion, more than twice the industry's original estimates.
Also yesterday, the State Farm Insurance Company, the nation's largest property casualty insurance company, said it was raising its estimate of Andrew-related losses to $3.4 billion from $2.1 billion estimated last October.


Allercare Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Home Shopping Network reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Lowe on the Way; King in a Replay
Today, after a labyrinthian process that involved a trade with the Edmonton Oilers, a pair of contract negotiations and some little-known and little-understood National Hockey regulations, Kevin Lowe became a Ranger.
After weeks of negotiations, Neil Smith, the club president, announced that the Rangers had officially acquired Lowe by giving the Edmonton Oilers a third-round draft pick in 1993 and forward Roman Okysuta, their 10th-round pick in 1989.


THE TRANSITION: Woman in the News; Emphasis On Action: Donna Edna Shalala
Dr.
Donna E. Shalala, an energetic, exuberant administrator who has never been shy about trumpeting her considerable achievements, is now going to tackle two of the most intractable problems in American society: health care and welfare.
Characteristically, she is almost unnervingly confident that she can make a difference as Secretary of Health and Human Services.


Review/Dance; An Ailey Tribute to Dizzy Gillespie
"The Winter in Lisbon" is the Alvin Ailey American Dance Company's heartfelt tribute to Dizzy Gillespie, a riot of color and rhythm that celebrates the jazz trumpeter and composer as what he has always been, a great entertainer.
The new work, choreographed by Billy Wilson mostly to music from a Gillespie album that has the same title as the ballet, was apparently done on assignment.
Opening the annual Ailey gala benefit on Thursday night, Judith Jamison, the troupe's artistic director, said that "the Gillespie people approached me about doing a ballet to his music and I said, I have the perfect choreographer."


Police Cadet Shot In Traffic Dispute
A New York City police cadet was shot and critically wounded during a fight following a traffic accident in Brooklyn last night, the police said.
A police spokesman, Sgt.
John McCluskey, said the accident took place about 8:05 P.M. at Rutland Road and Utica Avenue, in Crown Heights.
The cadet, whose identity was not released, was a passenger.


Big Jumps Are Posted For Sales
Reinvigorated shoppers drove up retail sales in November for the fifth straight month and spent at a much faster pace in October than previously estimated, the Government said today.
Analysts said the sales figures indicated that the economic recovery -- now more properly called an expansion, since ground lost during the recession has been totally recovered by most measures -- continued to gather momentum.


Novell Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Knicks' 2 Big Questions: Intensity and Smith
With or without Charles Smith, who has a sprained right ankle, the Knicks will try to recover from their first home loss of the season when they play host to the Detroit Pistons tonight.
Smith, who suffered his injury Thursday night during the Knicks' 110-103 overtime loss to the Charlotte Hornets at Madison Square Garden, did not practice yesterday, but his status is listed as day to day.
If Smith cannot play, Tony Campbell is likely to replace Smith in the starting lineup at small forward.


Islanders' Ferraro Breaks Leg
The Islanders, already limping along in last place in their division, absorbed a dual loss Thursday night in Chicago.
The team not only squandered a 3-2 third-period lead in a 5-3 defeat, but in the second period, veteran center Ray Ferraro took a tumble into the boards that resulted in a fractured right leg.
Ferraro's injury, and the time needed for his recovery, won't be evaluated by team orthopedists until today; the club remained in Chicago yesterday after the severe weather in New York caused the cancellation of their flight home.


Aid Officials in Somalia Take an Optimistic View
As the American-led military operation to help Somalis began three days ago, officials of Western aid agencies viewed it with skepticism.
But now, their attitude has switched to optimism and, for some, downright relief.
For months, hundreds of aid workers have struggled in an atmosphere of uncertainty, violence and chaos to feed the hungry, but the food often never made it out of the warehouses or into the refugee camps.
Now, with about 2,500 marines on the ground and dramatically fewer weapons visible on the street, aid officials believe they can finally begin to make a difference.


Greenwich Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bill Clinton's Pragmatists
President-elect Clinton's announcement of four more high-level appointments yesterday made it clear that he intends to run a problem-solving Administration -- creative but not ideological, energetic but not confrontational.
His managers, he said, must know "the limits of what government can do as well as what government must do."
Three of the four are women, reflecting Mr.
Clinton's pledge for a diversified Administration.
Laura Tyson, an economist at Berkeley, will head the Council of Economic Advisers.
Carol Browner, Florida's top environmental official and a protegee of Vice President-elect Al Gore, will run the Environmental Protection Agency.


S.I. Ferry Clock Would Overshadow the Battery
To the Editor:
Your editorial "The Big Clock" (Nov. 23), which followed Sunday's thoughtful critique by Herbert Muschamp in the Arts and Leisure section about the winning scheme for the New Staten Island Ferry Terminal, over-romanticizes an unnecessarily oversized design.


Halliburton Acts to Gain on Oilfield-Services Competitors
The Halliburton Company said today that it had agreed to acquire a specialized oilwell drillng unit from Smith International Inc. for $240 million in stock.
Analysts estimated that the directional drilling systems and services unit at Smith has barely turned a profit this year, as equipment rates plunged by as much as 25 percent in some areas.
But the Smith unit, with annual sales estimated at $160 million, should enable Halliburton to gain ground on two other giants in the oilfield services industry -- Schlumberger Ltd. and Baker Hughes Inc. -- by allowing it to offer a more complete line of drilling services to major oil companies. 'A Pre-emptory Move'
"This was a pre-emptory move that Halliburton had to make to keep up with the competition," said Bill Mankivsky, portfolio manager for a Fidelity mutual fund that invests in oilfield service companies.


THE STORM'S HAVOC: Commuting; Going From Point A To Point B Becomes A Mission of Chaos
Transportation officials blamed an almost freakish convergence of events for leaving hundreds of thousands of commuters delayed or stranded yesterday.
They described the disruptions as the worst they could recall from a single storm.
Flooding caused a power failure that rendered subway safety signals useless; high waves and high tides closed the Staten Island Ferry and flooded a runway at La Guardia Airport, shutting the airport; heavy winds toppled power lines that blocked commuter railroad tracks in Long Island.
The storm rattled tractor trailers on bridges, pitched a jetliner at Newark International Airport onto its side and left roads, runways and railroad tracks under water.


Eaton Vance reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Corrections
Excerpts yesterday from President-elect Bill Clinton's news conference omitted parts of two sentences in some copies.
Introducing Representative Leon E. Panetta, Mr.
Clinton said, "Finally, I have asked Robert Rubin to serve as assistant to the President for economic policy, and to help to coordinate and to direct our new Economic Council."


Florio's Panel Defends Plan To Slow AIDS
Gov.
Jim Florio received the recommendations of his Advisory Council on AIDS today, then left immediately to assess storm damage reports while panel members defended such recommendations as providing condoms to all high school students and prison inmates.
The chairman of the council, Paul W. Armstrong, said Mr.
Florio had embraced the idea that the "drastic measures" are required to curb the spread of AIDS and had endorsed the council's "non-moralistic approach" to dealing with the issue.


THE STORM'S HAVOC: New York City; For One Stormy Day, New York Was Not for the Blase
Drenched and befuddled, New Yorkers yesterday sloshed through puddles bordering on small lakes, dodged shattered windows and exploded umbrellas, watched their homes and businesses rudely invaded by water and sullenly improvised on their day as the rains kept tumbling down.
If you wanted to buy a Christmas tree, you needed a fishing rod.
Perseverance in the face of adversity is a requisite of New York City life, but many people groaned and moaned their way through the ferocious downpour and fierce winds that transformed the five boroughs into a place of treachery.
People who make a habit of being in a hurry had to learn to stand still.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-7  CLINTON FAVORS ACTION IN BOSNIA
President-elect Bill Clinton said the United States and its allies should do whatever it takes to enforce the ban on Serbian flights over Bosnia and Herzegovina.
His comments implied criticism of President Bush's policy and seemed to nudge the Administration toward a new United Nations resolution on enforcing the ban.  1  The Yugoslav Prime Minister campaigns against Serbia's leader.  7


Harvey Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


THE STORM'S HAVOC: Westchester; Day of Falling Limbs, Power Failures and Phone Disruptions
A combination of high winds and falling limbs summed up the problems of today's storm for Westchester County residents.
A 33-year-old Yonkers man was in critical condition after being hit by a tree outside a store where he had parked his car.
The man, Maximiliano Ramirez, was taken to St.
Joseph's Medical Center in Yonkers, where he was listed in stable condition with multiple injuries last night.


In a First, Duke U. Names a Woman President
Breaking with tradition, Duke University yesterday named one of the most prominent women in American higher education, Nannerl Overholser Keohane, the president of Wellesley College, as its next president.
When she takes office on July 1, Ms.
Keohane will become the first woman to serve as president of Duke and one of only a handful of women in the nation to have led a major research university.
Her appointment will take effect the day after another prominent woman, Hanna H. Gray, steps down as president of the University of Chicago.


Centel Holders Clear Merger With Sprint
The Centel Corporation said today that its merger with the Sprint Corporation had been narrowly approved, according to a preliminary tally of last week's votes by shareholders.
Dissident shareholders immediately announced plans to challenge the results.
Centel said 43.2 million, or 50.5 percent, of its 85.6 million shares outstanding had been cast in favor of the merger, which would create the nation's only telecommunications company with a significant stake in the cellular, local and long-distance businesses.
Led by institutional investors who said the $3 billion deal had undervalued Centel and would create a broadly based but weak company, nearly 35 percent of Centel's shares were voted no, 1 percent were voted as abstaining and proxies representing the rest of the shares were not returned. 'Unanswered Questions'
The merger requires the approval of a majority of Centel's total shares outstanding.
The margin of approval was just 385,000, less than the nearly 611,000 shares owned as of June 30 by Centel's executives and directors.


Orlando Magic: the Team That Fell to Earth


Review/Music; 'Don Pasquale' in Juilliard's Youthful Embrace
If there is a moral to the Juilliard Opera Center's new production of "Don Pasquale," it is this: Beware of delivering music that is vitally young into youthful hands.
By the final performance tomorrow afternoon, some of the tentativeness witnessed on Wednesday night at the Juilliard Theater will probably be resolved, but nothing will rescue the inappropriateness of this student cast and Moni Yakim's muddled conception to Donizetti's opera.
The overture, conducted by Hal France, was a harbinger of things to come.
Young players, all, I expect, dazzlingly at home with metric modulation, found themselves at sea with Donizetti's transparent melodiousness.
Within phrases, no sense of stress and release was evident.
Ensemble playing achieved a grudging consensus, not much more.


Fernandez and Board in Queens Exchange Invitations to Meet on Curriculum
New York City's Schools Chancellor, Joseph A. Fernandez, yesterday offered the members of a defiant school board in Queens more time to arrange a meeting with him to try to resolve their long, bitter dispute over a curriculum that teaches first graders to respect and appreciate gay people.
In a letter to the board members of District 24, the Chancellor delayed a deadline he had set for the end of the day yesterday, but he warned the board members that if they did not meet with him over the weekend at the Board of Education's headquarters in Brooklyn, he would override the board on Monday and impose the curriculum, "Children of the Rainbow."


Review/Performance Art; A Dream World Where Passion Rules
"I want to take you swimming in the dark," David Cale intones seductively, with a hint of menace.
"It's something you would never do. It's something you would like to do."
Mr.
Cale's invitation sets the tone of "Deep in a Dream of You," his wonderful 80-minute show of poetic monologues with music that concludes a three-night engagement at the Knitting Factory this evening.


Pacific Telesis Plans to Split in Two
The Pacific Telesis Group, whose markets for telephone services are the largest in the country, said yesterday that its board had unanimously voted to split the huge California-based carrier into a $9 billion traditional-telephone company and a nearly $1 billion wireless-phone company.
Since the breakup of the American Telephone and Telegraph Company in 1984, the resulting seven regional Bell companies have each had two major divisions.
One is the slow-growth monopoly business of providing local telephone service, in which profits are largely guaranteed by strict regulation.
The other is the lightly regulated high-growth businesses that provide cellular telephone and other services, like electronic paging.
Analysts say cellular, only slightly profitable now, will be highly lucrative soon.
Raising Company Value
A spinoff could raise the total value of Pacific Telesis's shares and free the company of strictures imposed by the A.T.&amp; T. breakup accord, including those that ban "Baby Bells" like Telesis from the lucrative equipment-manufacturing market.


S.I. Ferry Clock Would Overshadow the Battery; An Inappropriate Icon
To the Editor:
It was somewhat surprising to read your enthusiastic endorsement of "The Big Clock" proposed for the new Staten Island Ferry Terminal, especially in light of the popular dislike of the clock design as recently reported in your own pages.


2 at Store Charged in Attack on Customer
A woman shopping in a Korean grocery store in Flatbush, Brooklyn, was harassed and struck by two store workers after they accused her of trying to steal a bottle of juice, the police said yesterday.
The incident at Hong's Fruit and Grocery, at 1132 Flatbush Avenue, occurred just blocks away from a store where, in 1990, a clash between a black customer and a Korean greengrocer prompted a monthslong boycott by black residents.


Seems Like Old Times As Majors Rejoins Pitt
Nearly 20 years to the day after he was asked to rebuild a moribund program at Pittsburgh, JOHNNY MAJORSyesterday took on the same job under nearly the same circumstances.
The rebuilding job the 57-year-old Majors faces at Pitt will be nearly as challenging as the one he started in 1973, the year after the Panthers went 1-10.
Pitt was 3-9 this season -- its worst record since 1972.


T.W.A. SEES STOCK AS WORTHLESS UNDER BANKRUPTCY
T.W.A. said yesterday that its preferred and common stock would become worthless under a proposed bankruptcy reorganization.
The disclosure came in an announcement by the Trans World Airlines Corporation that it had asked a Federal bankruptcy court to approve this week's settlement among T.W.A., the Government's Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation, and Carl C. Icahn, the airline's owner.


Climbing His Way Back, With Help From Neediest
One day Larry K. was wearing expensive suits, hatching deals for a prominent brokerage firm and dating a woman he loved.
The next day he woke up in a mental hospital and his life began a seven-year plunge that left him an angry and confused man cut off from family and friends.
After that first breakdown, he wandered the country for years, working at menial jobs as a series of doctors tried to treat him.
"It was a tough time," he recalled the other day.
"I fought with everybody and I was always wrapped up in my head. I was a total basket case."


Huskies Investigation
University of Washington players are being investigated by the United States Secret Service in connection with the use of cellular phones altered to avoid billing, newspapers in Washington state reported yesterday.
BARBARA HEDGES, Washington's athletic director, confirmed the investigation.


BioSpecifics Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Judge Bars Broadcasters From Farrow-Allen Case
The battle between Woody Allen and Mia Farrow for custody of their three children, part of an already ugly and highly publicized clash between the couple, will not be played out on television and radio when it goes to court, a judge ruled yesterday.
In rejecting the arguments of broadcasters, Justice Stanley S. Ostrau cited the prospect that impending court hearings would involve an airing of Ms.
Farrow's charge that Mr.
Allen sexually molested their adopted daughter and discussion of the children's emotional condition.


G.M. DELAYS PRODUCTION OF ELECTRIC CAR
The General Motors Corporation has indefinitely delayed commercial production of its much publicized electric car, previously scheduled to begin in 1995.
John Williams, a G.M. spokesman, said hourly workers in Lansing, Mich., that had expected to build the car were notified of this yesterday morning.
Mr.
Williams said some workers at G.M.'s technical center in Warren, Mich. would also be affected.


Berlin Journal; A Look Into the Violent World of a Young Neo-Nazi
Neighbors describe Michael Peters as a school dropout who rarely worked, was often drunk and liked to give loud parties at his four-room apartment in the placid western German village of Gudow.
During those parties, the pulsating beat of racist and neo-Nazi rock music spilled from the apartment.
As guests staggered out before dawn, they often flashed the Nazi salute and shouted "Heil Hitler!" An old German war flag hung from the window, and empty canisters of gasoline sometimes littered the yard.


Woman Held In Slaying Of Relatives
There was something wrong, the police knew, in a home in Waldwick, N.J., because there were garbage bags full of rotting bones and flesh in a bedroom.
But Health Department officials decided that the bones were those of animals, and the police told William C. Kuchler to dispose of them.
That was in 1985 -- just weeks after his father and stepmother had disappeared.


Clinton Plans Early Meeting With Mexico's Leader
President-Elect Bill Clinton has told Democratic members of Congress that he plans to meet with President Carlos Salinas de Gortari of Mexico, quite possibly before Inauguration Day.
Mr.
Clinton told freshman House Democrats on Tuesday that Mr.
Salinas "may be the only foreign head of state that he meets before his inauguration," said Representative-elect Nathan Deal, Democrat of Georgia.


INSIDE
2 Somalis Reach a Truce Leaders of two powerful Somali factions agreed to halt hostilities and remove a dividing line in the capital.
But their pact had no immediate effect on fighting elsewhere.
Page 6.
Iran-Contra Charge Dropped
A judge threw out a charge against Caspar W. Weinberger that Republicans contended was brought four days before the election to hurt the Bush campaign.
Page 8.
A Trip Before Leaving
Before they leave their jobs next month, as many as three dozen Bush appointees will visit China at Government expense.
Page 11.
Woman Named to Head Duke
The head of Wellesley College has been named Duke University's new president, joining an elite group of women educators.
Page 12.


At Fire-Scarred Church, Hopes, but No Decisions
No Masses were celebrated yesterday at the Church of St.
Agnes in mid-Manhattan, but dozens of worshipers gathered outside anyway, peering out from under umbrellas at their fire-ravaged sanctuary, trying to glimpse the future.
"What am I going to do now?" asked Grace Nunez, an airline-reservations clerk who works across 43d Street in the Chrysler Building and had attended Mass at St.
Agnes only hours before a four-alarm fire swept through the 115-year-old structure on Thursday afternoon.


THE STORM'S HAVOC: Scenes; A Day the Sea Was More Than Just a View
Armand DeRose spent his day in Huntington, L.I., soaked to the bone yesterday, struggling to lash down 300 boats at the West Shore Marina so that they would not bob off in the crazy, wavy seas like so much flotsam.
Down by the water, there was more water than anyone could really remember: water in the sky, water on the land, water surging over docks and piers.
With the tide in Huntington standing well above its normal high at noon, the docks were submerged, and Mr.
DeRose had to move through the slashing winds from boat to boat -- by boat -- plunging his arms into the icy sea to refasten lines on submerged pilings that, on a normal day, would have been well above the high-tide mark.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
7.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
4.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.87
3.08
4.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.23
3.21
4.15
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.39
3.35
4.18
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.44
6.37
6.72
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.43
7.42
7.76
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.40
8.40
8.80
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
n.a.
6.36
6.83
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Corrections
An article yesterday about President-elect Bill Clinton's selection of his top economic officials rendered the name of his choice for deputy budget director incorrectly in some copies.
She is Alice M. Rivlin.
An accompanying article about the Office of Management and Budget misstated her alma mater.
It is Bryn Mawr College, not Radcliffe; she received her Ph.D. from Radcliffe.


Observer; Weave Me No Spell
The papers and the television keep repeating "storybook marriage." Eleven years ago with the same witless monotony they kept repeating "fairy-tale wedding."
What's a fairy-tale wedding?
A middle-aged bachelor and an up-to-the-minute version of one of Evelyn Waugh's bright young things taking the vows -- is that a fairy-tale wedding?


Doll Gives Identity to Down Syndrome Children
Diana Zernone's new doll is the first she's ever had that looks like her: The 14-year-old New City girl has Down syndrome, and so does Dolly Downs, a pigtailed blonde who went on the market last week, assembled by retarded and developmentally disabled workers at Camp Venture Inc.
Diana identified with the doll immediately, according to her mother, Fran Zernone.
"She set up all her other dolls around Dolly and was explaining her to them," Mrs.
Zernone said.
"She was saying Dolly's different than everybody else, even though she'd like to be the same, but it's O.K. to be different. She told them everybody's different in their own way."


The School Board's Confusing Signals
New York City's Central Board of Education has sent a muddled signal to combatants in the battle over a multicultural curriculum.
By reinstating obstinate Queens school board members who have refused to teach tolerance for gay families, the central board has undercut Chancellor Joseph Fernandez and encouraged further resistance.
Indeed, Mary Cummins, president of the recalcitrant District 24 board, expresses delight that Mr.
Fernandez had his nose "bloodied."


Decision Time For Tax Planners
Some simple steps taken before the yuear ends could bring big savings on 1992 and 1993 returns.
Page 36.  [ Drawing ]


Pentagon Says Killing of 2 Somalis May Have Been Accidental
One day after French and American troops shot and killed two Somalis in the belief that the Somalis were trying to run a roadblock in Mogadishu, the Pentagon said today that the episode might have been an accident.
According to the new account, the Somalis were riding in a van -- not, as the original version held, a truck.
They were not armed with guns, though some knives were found in the vehicle after the incident.


N.H.L. Goes to the Hoop for First Commissioner
The National Hockey League continued its expansive theme today by electing Gary Bettman as its first commissioner.
The league's owners would like to emulate the success of their pro basketball counterparts and they went to the source for a new leader, who will be challenged with securing labor peace and widening the sport's appeal and television exposure


Parole Order Faces Review By the State
A man convicted of manslaughter in the explosive Howard Beach racial attack in Queens has been granted parole even though he has served less than three years of his five-year minimum prison sentence, and a state official said yesterday that the parole decision would be reviewed.
The official, Richard H. Girgenti, the state's director of criminal justice, said the decision would also be reviewed because of the State Parole Division's possible failure to give the prosecutor in the case the required notice of the parole proceedings so that he could comment on whether parole should be granted.


PennCorp Financial Group Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


National Semiconductor reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 29


Bitter Feud Among Justices Rocks Pennsylvania Court
Two months ago a Pennsylvania Supreme Court justice was publicly reprimanded by his colleagues for violating judicial ethics by privately advising a trial judge about a pending case.
Two weeks ago the justice, Rolf Larsen, retaliated against the two justices who voted to censure him, accusing them in a sworn statement of fixing cases, accepting kickbacks and wearing "body wires" to illegally tape private conversations.


Environmental Truce Clears Smoke in Rice Fields
It is nearly winter in the wide, fertile valley of the Sacramento River in Northern California, a time when the poplars and willows turn golden and the rice farmers normally send up a ghastly pall of smoke over the valley as they burn the stubble of last season's crop.
But it will be different this winter.
More and more farmers, with the blessing of state and Federal water officials and environmentalists alike, will get rid of their stubble not with fire but with water, flooding their fields to rot the remaining straw.


No Headline
One minute it was dry and the next minute the ocean came in.
PATRICK COONEY, the owner of a restaurant in lower Manhattan.  [ 25:4. ]


Aaron Kellner, 78, Who Created A Blood-Supply Network, Is Dead
Aaron Kellner, who helped to create a reliable blood-supply system for transfusions for much of the New York region, died yesterday at his Upper East Side home.
He was 78.
He died of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, known as Lou Gehrig's disease, said the New York Blood Center, of which Dr.
Kellner was a founder.


William Sonenshine, Lawyer, 63
William Sonenshine, a New York criminal defense lawyer until his retirement in 1985, died yesterday at North Ridge Hospital in Fort Lauderdale, Fla.
He was 63 and lived in Pompano Beach, Fla.
He died after a long illness, his family said.


Clinton's Choice of Reich Hints at a Stepped-Up Role for Labor Department
President-elect Bill Clinton's choice for Labor Secretary, Robert B. Reich, brings a detailed and perhaps controversial agenda to an agency that has long been an administrative backwater.
Mr.
Reich's torrent of writings over the last decade makes clear that he will bring a commitment to the notion that America's work force can be made more productive through Government job-training and education programs.


Clinton Urges Stronger U.S. Stand On Enforcing Bosnia Flight Ban
President-elect Bill Clinton offered indirect criticism of President Bush's foreign policy today, nudging the Administration toward a new United Nations resolution enforcing the ban on Serbian flights over Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Mr.
Clinton, who had been deliberately circumspect until today when asked his views on the international crises he will inherit from Mr.
Bush, signaled that he would take a tougher approach toward the fighting in the Balkans.
He said the United States and its allies should do whatever it takes, apparently including air strikes, to enforce the flight ban.


Why Political Democracy Hurts Russia's Economic Freedom
To the Editor:
William Safire makes an important point about the need for Russia to push ahead with a comprehensive and not half-hearted economic reform program ("Visions in Collision," column, Dec. 3).
His second point, however, that Russia should reject the Chinese model of reform -- authoritarian political rule coupled with increasing economic freedom -- is more problematic.


Japan's Cabinet Is Shuffled Under Harsh New Spotlight
Struggling to quash a scandal that is threatening his tenure in office, Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa replaced a number of Cabinet members and top officials of the governing party today.
But he found his effort overshadowed by damaging new disclosures and factional infighting.
Hours before Mr.
Miyazawa named his new Cabinet tonight, the richest and most powerful faction in the Liberal Democratic Party, run by former Prime Minister Noboru Takeshita, split into two rival groups.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Retail sales rose for the fifth straight month in November, while consumer prices rose a modest 0.2 percent.
Last month's sales rise was 0.4 percent, but this was after October's gain of 0.9 percent was revised upward to 1.9 percent.  [ Page 39. ]
Increasing taxes on the rich will not raise as much revenue as the Clinton economic team has projected, both because the rich can take steps to avoid taxes and because they may not possess as many riches as they used to.  [ 39. ]


Can't an Ad Play Off New York's Problems?
To the Editor:
On Nov. 22, you ran a short Topic describing an advertisement for Daffy's, the off-price retailer, as offensive.
The specific billboard ad you cited ("In This Neighborhood, Be Sure To Keep An Eye On Your Wallet") runs exclusively in areas with expensive stores.
Its message is that consumers can get the same name-brand merchandise for less money if they shop at Daffy's.
The idea is not, as you suggest, that there is a mugger on every corner, but that there is an overpriced store on every corner.


Wise Stores reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Giants Planning a Rotation of Rookies
Phil Simms will be here to lend encouragement, but his elbow is still too tender to play.
Jeff Hostetler will not be here because he still becomes dizzy from post-concussion syndrome.
So when the Giants play the Phoenix Cardinals on Saturday, the rookies -- Kent Graham, their present quarterback of the future, and Dave Brown, perhaps the future quarterback of the future -- will be on display.
For a third straight week, Graham will start, but this time the plan is to put Brown in the game for more than cleanup duty.


CHRONICLE
JOSIE NATORI, the founder and president of the lingerie and fashion company that bears her name, gets lots of invitations, especially at this time of year, so nothing seemed exceptional to her about one that arrived in her office the other day.
"It went to the bottom of a pile of mail, and I didn't even notice it," she said yesterday, explaining why she had given short shrift to the hottest ticket in town: a summons to President-elect BILL CLINTON's high-level economic meeting in Little Rock tomorrow through Tuesday.
"My secretary finally brought it to my attention saying, 'You didn't respond to this and your husband thinks you should go,' " she said.
"I brushed past her, telling her: 'This is a last-minute invitation. It's a fax, but find out what it's all about.' "


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Victory for Sampras  Pete Sampras reached the semifinals of the Grand Slam Cup in Munich, Germany, with a 7-6 (7-3), 6-4 victory over Henri Leconte yesterday.
In the semifinals, Sampras will meet Michael Stich, who beat Richard Krajicek, 7-6 (7-4), 7-5.
In the other semifinal, Goran Ivanisevic will play Michael Chang. (AP) HOCKEY  Capitals Stay Hot


Manuel Noriega, Prisoner of War
Puppet, dictator, informant, racketeer, convicted felon, and now the only prisoner of war in United States custody.
That's the career path of Manuel Noriega, whose P.O.W. status was certified this week by the judge who sentenced him to 40 years in Federal prison.
At first blush, Mr.
Noriega looks like a criminal.
He turned Panama into a racketeering enterprise and staging area for cocaine smuggling into the United States.
Yet Judge William Hoeveler was clearly right to find that the defendant had been captured in 1989 in the course of an "armed conflict," the U.S. invasion of Panama.


Charge in Weinberger Case That Caused Furor Before Election Is Thrown Out
A Federal district judge today threw out a one-count indictment that was brought against former Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger four days before the Presidential election and created an uproar when Republicans asserted that it had contributed to President Bush's defeat.
In his ruling the judge, Thomas F. Hogan, said the new charge violated the five-year statute of limitations in the Iran-contra case and improperly broadened the original indictment that was filed in June against Mr.
Weinberger.
The one-count indictment was returned by a grand jury on Oct. 30.


2 Somali Factional Leaders Pledge to End the Fighting
The leaders of the two most powerful Somali factions met here today under the auspices of the United States and pledged to cease hostilities immediately.
In talks brokered by President Bush's special envoy to Somalia, Robert B. Oakley, and Lieut.
Gen.
Robert B. Johnston, head of the American-led military operation that began here on Wednesday, the two faction leaders, Gen.
Mohammed Farah Aidid and Mohammed Ali Mahdi, agreed to restrict their fighters and armed vehicles to designated compounds within 48 hours.


Trak Auto Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


European Leaders Try to Salvage Treaty on Unity
European Community leaders struggled today to restore the lost momentum of the drive to closer unity, which was stalled when Denmark rejected a treaty on political and monetary union this summer, and hoped to find a way out of the impasse on Saturday.
"I hope and, well, believe still that it will be possible to find some sort of solution during tomorrow," the Danish Foreign Minister, Uffe Ellemann-Jensen, said after a long day of negotiations on ways to allow his Government to resubmit the treaty to Danish voters in a second referendum in April or May.


Bolar Chief, A Founder, Steps Down
Bolar Pharmaceutical, the troubled Long Island-based maker of low-priced generic drugs, said yesterday that Lawrence S. Raisfeld, one of its founders, would step down as president and chief executive on Jan. 15.
The company said Dr.
Melvin Sharoky, 42, Bolar's vice president for research, would become president and chief executive next month.


Jimbo's Jumbos Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Yankees And Boggs Pursuing Each Other
Wade Boggs playing for the Yankees?
Could one of the hated members of the Red Sox make the switch from Boston to the Bronx?
According to Alan Nero, Boggs's agent, the possibility is strong, and an answer from the Yankees about signing the free-agent third baseman could come as early as today.
Joseph Molloy, the Yankees' managing partner, who personally negotiated the four-year, $17 million contract that brought free-agent pitcher Jimmy Key to the Yankees on Thursday night, immediately turned his focus to the 34-year-old third baseman.
Molloy wrested control of pursuing players from General Manager Gene Michael after the club failed to secure a premier free agent during this week's winter meetings.
Molloy met with Nero and Boggs yesterday in Tampa, Fla., the player's hometown.


Bridge
If one searched the world for a club game where the stakes and the quality of play were both very high indeed, one would probably end up at the Regency Whist Club in Manhattan.
A game there, virtually a club within a club, continues a tradition established at the Cavendish Club, whose demise is still lamented by New York experts.
The diagramed deal was played last month, with the South cards in the hands of Alan (Ace) Greenberg, who is the chairman of the brokerage firm of Bear Stearns.
When his partner overcalled three diamonds with three hearts, Greenberg was looking for a slam.
When his partner showed a spade fit and then three aces, he leaped confidently to seven spades.


Comptronix Dismisses Chief In Bogus-Earnings Scandal
The Comptronix Corporation dismissed its chairman and chief executive yesterday and said it expected to sue him for routinely and illegally inflating the company's profits for more than three years.
The electronics parts manufacturer also announced that its accountant, KPMG Peat Marwick, was resigning and that the board expected to appoint new auditors soon.
Arthur Andersen &amp; Company is working with a special committee of the board to track down fraudulent entries in Comptronix's accounting.


New Start for an Old Opera in Berlin
On Dec. 7, 1942, the Berlin State Opera celebrated its 200th anniversary.
It cannot have been an altogether festive occasion.
Germany was locked into a murderous war, which prescient observers knew it would lose.
The historic opera house had been destroyed by Allied bombs the year before but rebuilt in record time (it was to be destroyed again in 1945).
Three weeks earlier, in Buenos Aires, Daniel Barenboim, the son of Ukrainian Jewish refugees, was born.


School Costs Exceed the State Average by 35%, Study Shows
Administrative costs for Long Island school districts are 35 percent higher than the state average and 65 percent higher than in New York City, according to a report by two State Senators.
In addition, the report said, the number of Long Island school officials making $70,000 or more doubled in the last two years.
The report was prepared by Senators Donald M. Halperin and Joseph L. Galiber, both New York City Democrats, and follows disclosures that Edward J. Murphy, a former superintendent of a vocational training and special education district in Suffolk, received the highest retirement award in state history -- $960,000.
Most of that money was for accumulated sick leave and vacation time.


Transactions
Baseball American League
BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Agreed to terms with Harold Reynolds, second baseman, on a one-year contract.
Placed Bill Ripken, second baseman, on waivers for the purpose of giving him his unconditional release.
Agreed to terms with Dave Miller, pitcher and Tommy Hinzo, infielder, on minor league contracts.
BOSTON RED SOX -- Placed Tony Fossas, pitcher, on waivers for the purpose of giving him his unconditional release.


BC Sugar reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


LDI Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


THE STORM'S HAVOC: The Overview; STORM LASHES NEW YORK REGION WITH RAIN, GALES AND FLOODING
Howling like Valkyries on a rampage, a huge prewinter storm packing gusts up to 90 miles an hour and enough rain to submerge a small state struck the New York metropolitan region yesterday.
It crippled transportation, commerce and education, flooded wide areas, knocked out power to hundreds of thousands of homes, damaged thousands of buildings and disrupted the lives of millions of people.
The storm -- a behemoth that stretched 600 miles along the Atlantic Seaboard from upstate New York to North Carolina -- was not a hurricane, for it lacked a swirling tropical center and sustained winds over 75 m.p.h.
But for all practical purposes, it bore down like a hurricane hell bent for treachery.


Selden D. Bacon, 84, Professor and Expert On Alcohol Abuse
Prof.
Selden Daskam Bacon, former director of the Center of Alcohol Studies at Rutgers University, died Sunday in Martha's Vineyard, Mass., where he had retired.
He was 84.
He died of a heart attack, the center said.
Dr.
Bacon was an expert on alcohol abuse, writing many studies on it.
He directed the center at Rutgers from 1962 to 1975, after which he continued there as a professor of sociology.


Classical Music in Review
Two Youth Orchestras  Symphony Orchestra Vivo, Alice Tully Hall, and New York Youth Symphony, Carnegie Hall
Two youth orchestras on Sunday left behind questions about what a youth orchestra is supposed to be and whom it is to serve.
Based on performance alone, the Symphony Orchestra Vivo from Finland at Alice Tully Hall played better that evening than the New York Youth Symphony did earlier in the day at Carnegie Hall.


S.I. Ferry Clock Would Overshadow the Battery; View From Richmond
To the Editor:
Your endorsement of the big clock for a new Whitehall Ferry Terminal as the result of a "shrewdly" run design contest stretches the meaning of shrewd beyond any usage of which news has reached Staten Island.


Circuit City Stores reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Maldonado to Cubs
The Chicago Cubs signed outfielder CANDY MALDONADO to a two-year contract.
Financial terms of the contract were not disclosed, but the Cubs have an option for a third year.
Last season with the Toronto Blue Jays, Maldonado batted .272 with 20 home runs and 66 runs batted in.
He has a career batting average of .258.


Insurance Futures Begin Trading
When officials at the Chicago Board of Trade hammered a bell to inaugurate trading in insurance futures contracts at 10 A.M. today, the 40 or so men in the new pit acted less like traders than bewildered baseball outfielders hoping someone else would grab the fly ball about to fall between them.
But after a few uneasy moments, Lawrence Dorf, a bond trader who played a leading role in developing the new product, sold a contract on behalf of a customer to William F. O'Connor, the Board of Trade president.


Charges for Accounts Grow More Expensive
FROM California to New York, bank customers are facing higher fees for that staple of modern life, the bank account.
Congress has pushed banks for years to offer lower cost checking accounts, but the Federal Reserve concluded in a report issued this year that "a trend in the direction of higher fees is readily apparent."


Tapping the Rich May Prove Tricky
As Bill Clinton's new economic team considers how best to turn his campaign promises on taxes into legislative proposals, it may feel the ground shifting.
His campaign tossed around a host of proposals on Government financing, from spending cuts to getting more tax revenue from corporations and individuals, all aimed at getting the resources to accomplish goals ranging from middle-class tax relief to public works to halving the deficit.
But the consensus among experts was that many of the proposals were unrealistic, and that the proposal most likely to yield significant new money was tax increases on the wealthiest taxpayers.


Man Beaten in Crown Hts. Resurfaces
Ralph Nimmons, the missing man at the center of the Crown Heights beating case, reappeared yesterday at the side of his lawyer and the Rev.
Al Sharpton.
But the two men said Mr.
Nimmons would not testify to a Brooklyn grand jury, and they repeated their demand that Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo appoint a special prosecutor to take over the case.
At a news conference in Mr.
Sharpton's Bedford-Stuyvesant office, Mr.
Nimmons declined to speak, but at the direction of Mr.
Sharpton, he pulled off his ski cap and displayed the stitches in his scalp from his beating.
His lawyer, Michael W. Warren, read a statement from Mr.
Nimmons supporting the call for a special prosecutor and adding, "I want it to be known that I have full confidence in my advisers."


Challenger Steps Up Attack on Serbian Leader
Promising peace and prosperity, the Prime Minister of Yugoslavia brought his campaign to oust Serbia's hard-line nationalist President to this republic's industrial heartland today, trying to build support in a onetime stronghold of the President that has been laid waste by economic decline and international sanctions.
"There has been enough destruction, enough death, enough impoverishment," the Prime Minister, Milan Panic, told several thousand enthusiastic and mostly young supporters at a rally darkened by cold fog.
"No longer, at the end of the 20th century, can cannon be used to solve problems."


Review/Music; A 'Messiah' Looks Back to Premiere in Dublin
Handel's "Messiah," which had its premiere in Dublin 250 years ago, has throughout its history been a touchstone of the vicissitudes of Baroque music.
One of few works from the era to circulate prominently through the ages, it held its own by evolving with progressive times, from Mozart's fluffy orchestration to the elephan tine inflations of the late 19th century.
Some streamlining took place in the 20th century even before current notions of historical correctness began to take hold about four decades ago.
The result has been an incredible shrinking "Messiah," epitomized by the likes of the performance presented by Christopher Hogwood and the Handel and Haydn Society of Boston on Wednesday evening at Avery Fisher Hall.
Using the musical text of the Dublin premiere, Mr.
Hogwood deployed a chorus and period-instrument orchestra of 34 each, and seven relatively small-voiced soloists.
The performance illustrated the achievements of the early-music movement as well as its besetting problems.


Marcus Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 12


A Bad Bet for Sports
The gambling industry's constant craving for broader license -- this time for sports betting -- faces a crucial test next week in New Jersey.
The State Senate votes on a bill to let Atlantic City casinos make book on sports.
That would be bad for sports, for bettors and for the state.
The casinos say they need sports betting to compete with Nevada.
That's a tired argument; they always want more.
The sports world opposes it on solid grounds that state-sanctioned bets pervert sport into a contest for personal profit -- in the words of Senator Bill Bradley of New Jersey, "a gambler's game and not the fans' game."


Robb to Go Before Jury Again, Lawyers Say
Senator Charles S. Robb has asked for a second opportunity to testify before a Federal grand jury that is investigating whether he violated electronic eavesdropping laws, lawyers familiar with the case said today.
The lawyers, who spoke on the condition of anonymity, said the jury and Federal prosecutors had agreed to grant the Virginia Democrat's request, which came just as the grand jury was about to conclude its 18-month inquiry, possibly by indicting the Senator for eavesdropping violations and for perjuring himself while testifying in his first appearance in August 1991.


CHRONICLE
PRESIDENT BUSH read what he called "a roll-call of American heroes" yesterday as he bestowed the Presidential Medal of Freedom on 10 people in the arts, diplomacy, the military and sports.
The President said two winners, the singer ELLA FITZGERALD and the actress AUDREY HEPBURN, were unable to attend the ceremony in the East Room "by doctor's orders," The Associated Press reported.


Another Storm For Torretta To Weather
After everything that Gino Torretta and his University of Miami teammates have endured in their perfect football season, it could not come as a shock that the storm that has battered the Northeast might force the Hurricane quarterback to accept a Heisman Trophy long distance.
Torretta, the expected winner among the three invited finalists for the award announcement at the Downtown Athletic Club this afternoon, was in Louisville, Ky., last night to accept the Johnny Unitas Award as the outstanding senior quarterback in the nation.


Next Stop for Nets Is Home of the True Test
As rain and wind whipped up a frenzy in New York, the Nets quietly packed their belongings and took off for Chicago, leaving a natural storm and heading into a man-made one.
The Chicago Bulls are the National Basketball Association's defending champions and, at least for now, aren't shying away from their quest to win three straight titles.
The Bulls are leading the Central Division and continue to be impressive at home.
Michael Jordan again leads the league in scoring average, with more than 30 points a game.


Yeltsin to Meet Foes in Attempt to End Power Rift
President Boris N. Yeltsin agreed tonight to enter into full negotiations with an increasingly belligerent Congress of People's Deputies, after his opponents in the legislature blocked his attempt to put their fate to a national referendum.
After a day of nervous political speculation and parliamentary defeats, Mr.
Yeltsin met this evening with Ruslan I. Khasbulatov, the Speaker of the Congress, with Valery Zorking, the chairman of Russia's Constitutional Court, acting as mediator.


THE STORM'S HAVOC: Connecticut; A Vise of Coastal Flooding And a Blanketing Snowfall
A surging tide flooded coastal areas from Greenwich to East Haven today, sparing neither mansion nor beach cottage as Connecticut was hit by a storm that cut electricity to 63,000 homes.
Above a freeze line that ran north of the Merritt Parkway, many towns canceled school for the day, as accumulations of snow reached 10 inches and more in the hilly northwest part of the state.


The Time for Tax Planning Is Right Now
Time is short, but there are still two weeks and a few days left in 1992 to take steps to reduce this year's taxes and, just as important, to lay the personal financial foundations for 1993.
Planning for some people may be more complicated than in past years, because there are so many uncertainties about what changes in the tax laws will be enacted under the Clinton Administration.
But for others, especially those in the middle income tax brackets, this year is more or less like any other year, and fairly simple steps can save hundreds of dollars.


Focus on Afghans Should Not Be for Drugs
To the Editor:
Reading Nancy Lubin's article "Central Asia's Drug Bazaar" (Op-Ed, Nov. 16), one gets the impression that the Afghan freedom fighters have undergone a metamorphosis.
The same people who were hailed as the soldiers of freedom and champions of liberty have suddenly been transformed into "godfathers" and "kingpins" of a drug market.


Genesee Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Macy Reports a Narrower Loss in Quarter
Losses at R. H. Macy &amp; Company narrowed in the first quarter of its 1993 fiscal year, the bankrupt retailer reported yesterday.
It added that holiday sales were running ahead of last year and slightly ahead of plan, but the company said it remained cautious.
For the quarter that ended on Oct. 31, Macy reported a loss of $135.8 million on sales of $1.5 billion, compared with a loss of $155.3 million on sales of $1.6 billion in the corresponding period a year ago.
The first quarter of 1992 included sales at stores that have since been closed.


Clinton Widens His Circle, Naming 4 Social Activists
President-elect Bill Clinton today broadened the political and ideological profile of his emerging Administration, choosing three academics and an environmentalist known for strong advocacy of social causes.
A day after he turned to Washington and Wall Street for a notably mainstream economic team, Mr.
Clinton today reappeared in the Old Statehouse here with a group of Washington outsiders that included three women.


Exiting Cabinet Member Leading China Trip
As many as three dozen political appointees who will leave office next month will first visit Beijing when Commerce Secretary Barbara H. Franklin flies there next week on a $13,000-an-hour Air Force jet, Government and industry officials said.
Bush Administration officials have frequently run into trouble for their use of Government aircraft.
John H. Sununu, President Bush's first White House chief of staff, drew considerable public criticism when his extensive use of Government aircraft was revealed, although his travel appeared to be more personal than Ms.
Franklin's trip.


Economic Recovery Gaining Momentum
Retail sales rose for the fifth straight month in November and consumers spent at a much faster pace in October than previously estimated, the Government reported yesterday.
Other figures showed a hefty rise in average weekly earnings last month and another jump in consumer confidence in early December.


Big Deals in a Yearbook Face a Childlike Accuser
The boys in the basement that March afternoon in 1989 were the big deals at Glen Ridge High School.
The 17-year-old girl with them was anything but.
They were the stars of the football and wrestling teams.
That spring, the school yearbook was filled with candid photos of them clowning around and posing with the pretty girls.
They dominated the senior class poll.


New Offerings With Lower Charges
Fierce competition for mutual fund investors is leading to lower sales charges.
The Strong Funds just eliminated 1 or 2 percent sales charges on their Total Return, Opportunity, Discovery, Investment, International Stock and Common Stock Funds.
Fidelity Investments now waives sales charges on all stock funds except Magellan and Select Portfolios for shares purchased for individual retirement accounts and Keogh and other retirement plans.


THE STORM'S HAVOC: New Jersey; Swamped and Powerless, Thousands Flee Shoreline
Thousands of people were evacuated today -- by police boats, by National Guard trucks, and, in one case, by surfboard -- as a wind-driven storm forced evacuations in an estimated 20 towns along the New Jersey coast.
The severity of the nighttime assault, which caused some of the worst shore flooding in this century, led Gov.
Jim Florio to mobilize the National Guard and declare a state of emergency.
Damage estimates were sure to run into hundreds of millions of dollars, but adding up the property damage was not today's priority.


Carl Karcher Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 2


Crown Books reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Marlins Woo Santiago
Catcher BENITO SANTIAGO is close to signing a $3.8 million, one-year contract with the Florida Marlins, his family said yesteday.
COOKIE ROJAS, a Marlin coach, said the team was interested in Santiago, but negotiations have stalled because of the death of Marlins President CARL BARGER on Wednesday.


British Press Will Keep Up Royal Chase
When he announced in the House of Commons on Wednesday that the Prince and Princess of Wales were separating, Prime Minister John Major said in earnest tones and to roars of approval from his colleagues in Parliament that he hoped the news media would now afford the royal family some privacy.
The next morning The Sun, a mass-circulation tabloid, devoted fully half of its 56 pages to the split, including a guide to potential new romantic partners for the estranged couple.


Misleading Account of Videotape Dispute
To the Editor:
Your Nov. 13 Law page article describes a controversy over the "removal" of a videotape from an art exhibition at a recent conference on prostitution at the University of Michigan.


Who Manages a Fund? That Can Be Top Secret
ONE little sentence.
That's all it would have taken to let investors know who was running their mutual funds.
But 20 years and a towering stack of documents later, the Securities and Exchange Commission is just getting around to insisting that funds disclose in writing who their key portfolio managers are.


Beliefs
Three weeks ago, despite travel restrictions and military dangers -- to say nothing of political and religious obstacles -- leaders of the Serbian Orthodox, Croatian Catholic and Muslim communities slipped out of Belgrade and Sarajevo and met in the mountains near Zurich.
The statement they issued after two days of discussions came amid the bloody struggle fought along the lines of religious heritage in the former nation of Yugoslavia.
It was an interfaith appeal that could have just as well been directed to India, where Hindus and Muslims clashed this week with deadly results.


Classical Music in Review
Sergei Leiferkus  Baritone, Frick Collection
Sergei Leiferkus, a Russian baritone whose voice is both powerful and flexible, gave an engaging recital of Rachmaninoff and Tchaikovsky songs on Tuesday afternoon at the Frick Collection.
Mr.
Leiferkus has become a promising star of the Russian vocal world in recent seasons, with calling cards that have included appearances with the Kirov Opera in New York last spring, and a few recordings.
Now he is about to replace Thomas Hampson, who is ill, in the Met's current run of "Eugene Onegin."


Luis Rivera, a Dancer And Troupe Head, 54
Luis Rivera, a Spanish dancer and company director, died on Wednesday at St.
Vincent's Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 54 years old.
He died of AIDS, said Erica Shank, a friend.


What to Expect Today
Some of yesterday's transportation disruptions were expected to continue today.
Here's the status as of late last night.
Airports:
La Guardia: Expected to open at noon.
For information on specific flights, call the airline, or general airport information: 718-476-5000


Ed Krause, 79, the 'True Legend' of Notre Dame
Ed (Moose) Krause, the Notre Dame official who played football under Knute Rockne and coached under Frank Leahy before succeeding him as athletic director in 1949, died Thursday night after delivering a round of his customary cheer at the athletic department's annual Christmas party.
He was 79, and according to his son Phil, "he just went to sleep and never woke up."


Classical Music in Review
Brahms Chamber Works  Helicon Ensember, Weill Recital Hall, and Ruth Laredo with the Shanghai Quartet, Metropolitan Museum of Art
Fanciers of Brahms's chamber music were able to piece together a mini-festival last weekend.
On Dec. 4, the Helicon Ensemble performed three Brahms trios on period instruments at Weill Recital Hall, and the next evening Ruth Laredo, pianist and commentator, began a seasonlong survey of Brahms's piano quartets at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, presenting a discussion and performance of the G-minor with members of the Shanghai Quartet.


Henry Baldwin, 96, A Research Forester And an Early Skier
Henry Ives Baldwin, a retired research forester and naturalist who schussed the New England mountains long before skiing became fashionable, died on Thursday at the Medical Center at Princeton, N.J.
He was 96.
He died after a brief illness while on a visit, his family said.


Sports of The Times; Casting The First Stone
I FIRST met Arthur Triche about seven years ago at the National Sports Festival in Baton Rouge, La.
Triche was one of the information officers for the United States Olympic Committee.
The meeting stands out because it was unusual to see an African-American who was not an athlete involved in the dissemination of information at a major sporting event.


Hamilton Group reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Violence Is Abating in India; Death Toll Continues to Rise
The violence that swept through towns across India all week appeared to be abating today, although the death toll in Hindu-Muslim clashes and in battles with security troops rose past 1,050.
Prime Minister P. V. Narasimha Rao described the bloodshed and brutality as an "aberration," in which Hindu and Muslim mobs dragged people out of their homes and shops to stab, shoot and burn them.
The actual number of people killed is believed to be much higher than official figures.


THE STORM'S HAVOC: Long Island; Degree of Ferocity Shocks a Place That Is Used to Storms
On Long Island, where wind and waves have often turned charming beach communities into disaster areas, the storm that hit today stunned officials with its ferocity.
The Suffolk County Executive, Robert J. Gaffney, echoing the words of many, called it "the worst storm in 30, 40, maybe 50 years."


ASA Ltd.  reports earnings for Year As of Nov 30


Terreri Keeps Penguins on the Short End
The strong and swift Penguins kept jamming the net against Chris Terreri tonight, but the Devils' diminutive goaltender held his ground marvelously, flopping from side to side and denying the defending Stanley Cup champions time and again.
Terreri came up with 31 saves against Mario Lemieux and friends, including several of the spectacular kind, and inspired the Devils to a 2-1 victory in one of New Jersey's better games of the season, which came only two nights after one of its worst, a 6-2 loss to Washington.


Bayou Charm


The Executive Computer; In the Weight vs. Power Equation, a New Compromise
Many attempts have been made over the years to create personal computers small enough to carry easily yet powerful enough to meet the minimum needs of a traveling executive.
Most have failed because of the many compromises required.
In order to save a few pounds in weight, users have been forced to give up processing power, screen quality, keyboard comfort, hard disk capacity and ease of data transfer.
And people have been asked to pay extra for miniaturization, giving weight to the phrase "less is more."


U.N. Chief Says Letter to Bush Outlines U.S. Commitment to Disarm Somali Gangs
In a new attempt to persuade the American-led force in Somalia to disarm the warring militias and pacify the country, Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali of the United Nations says he plans to release a letter that he sent to President Bush, setting out the understanding he thought he had reached with the Administration on the American role in the operation.
The Secretary General said he wrote to Mr.
Bush immediately after the Security Council voted on Dec. 3 to authorize the United States to send troops to Somalia to assure delivery of food to starving people.


Music To Many Ears
To the Editor:
Having grown up in Brooklyn, I was delighted to read "A Museum Grows in Brooklyn (Painfully)"  [ Nov. 15 ] .
The article, however, made no mention of the progressive activities of the Brooklyn Museum's music department during the 1940's, 50's and 60's under the creative directorship of its musicologist, Dr.
David LeVita.
Public school children were regularly bused to a series of fascinating and imaginative children's concerts and lectures on ethnomusicology.
A children's chorus rehearsed and performed regularly.
For the general public, there were Sunday concerts with major artists performing in the museum's sculpture court; these programs were broadcast on WNYC radio.


Berlin, a Fast Car, Nightmares
THIS summer, I flew to Berlin to test-drive a new BMW.
I justified this act of jet-set bravado as part of my new persona of automotive columnist, a role I first discovered some five years ago and have since grown into with an alacrity that has alarmed and dismayed friends who knew me as a socially and politically concerned reporter.
Flying to Berlin to drive a fast car seemed wholly in keeping with the new spirit of the place.
I thought of the city as most people seemed to: an exciting, sophisticated center of the arts and an intellectual beehive -- one of the places to be, all the more so since the wall had come down.
With neo-Nazi violence still in its early stages, it was quite easy to push aside questions that my earlier self would have placed uppermost.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Great Neck Worms' Turn
APPROXIMATELY 8,000 worms have taken up residence at Saddle Rock Elementary School in Great Neck.
The worm census is approximate, because Carole Levitt, a science teacher, has no plans to count them.
"The worm people said they send 1,000 worms a pound," Mrs.
Levitt said.
"You have to trust someone." Even if she didn't, while she was counting one box, worms could be multiplying in another.


Fighting Erupts in Gaza After Israel Lifts Curfew
Several hours after the Israeli Army lifted a days-long curfew, severe clashes erupted today across the Gaza Strip, with soldiers opening fire on stone-throwing Palestinians, wounding dozens of people and accidentally killing a man who was not involved in the protests.
The casualty count, the highest in several months, reflected the tensions running through Israel's occupied territories as Palestinians mark a series of anniversaries in their anti-Israel uprising, which began five years ago this week.


Miss Lambert, Gary T. Carter
Maryjayne Anita Lambert, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Cedric P. Lambert of Henrietta, N.Y., was married yesterday to Gary Thomas Carter, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles E. Carter of Penfield, N.Y.
The Rev.
Michael Upson performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Immaculate Conception Church in Rochester.
Mrs.
Lambert Carter, 29 years old, is a credit analyst in Rochester for Marine Midland Bank.
She graduated from Rutgers University.
Her father is a retired principal of Public School 25 in Rochester.
Her mother, Dorothy Lambert, also retired, was a mathematics resource teacher at Public School 36 there.


A Wounded Yeltsin; Russian Chief Survives Power Plays, But He Seems More Vulnerable Now
Last year at Christmas time, Boris N. Yeltsin moved into the Kremlin, taking over the offices and much of the power of his old rival, Mikhail S. Gorbachev.
Nearly a year later, as the Kremlin's ancient walls echoed with another power struggle, the Russian President appeared strangely isolated and humiliated by a rambunctious conservative opposition at the Congress of People's Deputies.


In the Fight to Save Lives, Copters Save Precious Time
LAURIE ROCHE, a flight nurse, opened the left rear door of the helicopter for her first time at 200 feet above the Westchester County Fire Training Center.
She slowly slid her right foot out on the skid and began to check the pilot's blind spot as he descended for his landing.
Ms.
Roche is a new member of the County Medical Center's Stabilization Treatment and Transportation team and was undergoing what is known as "hanging out" training on a recent Saturday morning.
The skill is one of the most important ones a flight nurse must learn.
Ms.
Roche had to watch that the rotor blades would be clear of a street lamp, a building and fire escape on the left side of the helicopter while the pilot watched for a fence and a sign on the right.


Daredevil Backcourt Rescues Knicks
Desperate times call for desperate measures.
For Pat Riley, that comes down to turning loose Greg Anthony and John Starks, holding his breath and hoping the roller-coaster backcourt somehow stays on track through its convulsive swings up and down.
After watching his veterans, Doc Rivers and Rolando Blackman, shoot a combined 6 for 18 and help the Knicks fall into a 14-point first-quarter hole against the Detroit Pistons and to a 72-63 deficit after three periods, Riley figured, what the heck, why not take a walk on the wild side?


Louise V. Weir, George Creel 3d
Louise Vernice Weir, a daughter of Mrs.
Mahlon S. Weir of Delray Beach, Fla., and the late Mr.
Weir, was married yesterday to George Robert Creel 3d, the son of Colonel Creel Jr. of the United States Army and Mrs.
Creel, who reside in Tequesta, Fla.
The Rev.
Winston B. Charles performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
James Church in New York.
Mrs.
Creel is an analyst in the high-yield research department at Bear, Stearns &amp; Company in New York.
She graduated from Auburn University, as did her husband.
Her father was a real estate investor in Delray Beach and the owner of Weir Auto Electric Inc. there.
Her mother, Joan Weir, is the president of the company.


River Gambling
To The Editor: In reference to your article on riverboat gambling from Dubuque, Iowa ("Move Over Vegas: Viva Dubuque," Oct. 25), I had the nonpleasure of being aboard the Casino Belle recently.
The first annoying aspect was the interminable wait to board in a honky-tonk souvenir shop setting.
Upon reaching the gate I discovered that we were being held up while $6 souvenir photos were pushed upon the passengers.


In Combat


Sound Bytes; From Mexico, a Dedication to Inexpensive Software
Jose M. Hurtado, president and chief executive of M-USA Business Systems Inc. in Dallas, believes all software should cost $50 or less.
M-USA (for Mexico-U.S.A.) makes the Pacioli 2000 and Cashbiz accounting software, and Mr.
Hurtado's related businesses create video training films and produce paper business forms.
With his brother Leopoldo and two brothers-in-law, Mr.
Hurtado created DAC Software Inc., maker of the DAC Easy accounting program.
His price limit: $49.95.
Question: How are you affected by the North American Free Trade Agreement?


Devils' Weekend Isn't Wild Enough
The Devils, seeking a second victory in two nights over the Penguins, got off to a three-goal lead tonight.
But they were foiled by an unlikely source -- the veteran wing Troy Loney, who scored his first two goals of the season, including the game-winner on a disputed call.
Loney's second goal broke a 4-4 tie, and Pittsburgh went on to a 6-5 victory at the Civic Arena.


Schizophrenia: Chicken or Egg?
MADNESS AND MODERNISM
Insanity in the Light of Modern Art, Literature, and Thought.
By Louis A. Sass.
Illustrated. 595 pp.
New York: Basic Books. $30.


Corrections
An article on page 5 of the Arts and Leisure section today about the New York Theater Workshop in the East Village includes outdated information about the arrival in New York of Tony Kushner's two-part play, "Angels in America: A Gay Fantasia on National Themes."


Help for Howe? Not Banishment
To the Sports Editor:
The news media fail to acknowledge that Steve Howe or any other athlete or person fighting a narcotics or alcohol addiction has a disease.
Would a rational person destroy a career, family, self worth if he was healthy?


DEMOCRATIC LEADER AND CLINTON FRIEND GAIN MAJOR POSTS
President-elect Bill Clinton reached back to Hope, Ark., and into the corporate lobbying culture of Washington today to fill two more top jobs, naming his oldest childhood friend, Thomas F.McLarty 3d, as chief of staff, and the Democratic Party chairman, Ronald H. Brown, as Secretary of Commerce.
In picking a self-effacing boyhood chum for chief of staff, a job that in recent years has been filled by ambitious empire builders, Mr.
Clinton signaled that he wanted an apolitical referee to reconcile competing factions, not an advocate for any particular point of view.
He was also determined to pick someone who could keep a secret, a specialty of the press-shy Mr.
McLarty, whose friends call him Mack.
Concerns of Real People
"The people of America will learn, as I have over the years, that they can trust Mack McLarty to bring the real concerns of real people to the table," said Mr.
Clinton, his eyes watery with tears as he introduced his friend to the nation.
"I trust him to build a team in the White House. He is a chief executive officer who knows how to get things done. The American people can feel confident that he will make sure everyone's voice is heard before I make an important decision and that everyone pulls together once that decision is made."


Stony Brook Gristmill Is Grinding Again
DOWN by the old millstream in Stony Brook the gristmill's wheel is grinding grain into flour just as it did over 200 years ago.
But today, the flour is used not for bread, but to help teach a lesson in regional cultural heritage.
Once, mills like this one were centers of economic activity for preindustrial Long Island.
Hundreds of water-powered mills harnessed streams or harbors of major villages to provide the bread that was the staff of life.
The mill was also the social hub of each community.


Social Security: Another Cheer . . .
To the Editor:
Norman Ornstein's "The Payroll Tax Is Getting Out of Hand" (Nov. 8) does future Social Security beneficiaries a disservice.
Although the system collects more than it needs to pay benefits to current retirees, workers' contributions are building up -- as a reserve -- in anticipation of the retirement of the baby boomers beginning around 2010.
These reserves would add to national savings but for the uncontrolled Federal operating budget deficit that has nothing to do with Social Security.


No Headline
You see those starving kids on TV and you think, 'How could we not do this?' -- LEE HOSKINS, a salesman from a Cincinnati suburb.  [ 16:1. ]


String of Arsons Terrorizes a Small Community
In this quiet rural community, people are used to leaving their doors unlocked, exchanging gossip at the recycling station and gathering for barbecues on summer afternoons.
They are also getting used to something else: living in fear of arson.
Since 1980, a string of nearly 40 arson fires has laid quiet siege to this community of 3,500 and the surrounding area 110 miles north of New York City.
In the heart of Copake Village, 13 buildings have been destroyed during the arson wave.
Now, after a reprieve of a year and a half, arson is suspected in three recent fires.


Up From Juilliard
THE WAY I WAS
By Marvin Hamlisch with Gerald Gardner.
Illustrated. 234 pp.
New York: A Robert Stewart Book/ Charles Scribner's Sons. $22.


Corrections
A report in Styles of The Times last Sunday about the wedding of Carolyn L. Goodman and Michael J. Pianin was published prematurely.
They were married last evening.


Creating a 'Folk Dance' for Friends of Long Standing
Donald Byrd, A descendant of a modern-dance patriarchy that includes Talley Beatty, Louis Johnson, Donald McKayle and Alvin Ailey, is a hard choreographer to pin down.
He knows how to get performers moving with every muscle fiber.
That all-out dancing is tempered, however, by his passionately acquired knowledge of classical ballet and modern-dance techniques, idioms and history.
Over the years, his pieces have dealt with social issues, but they tend to be more intense evocation than overt protest.
Mr.
Byrd has worked in video; he has also created dances for theater and, working with Peter Sellars, for opera.
Now he has choreographed "A Folk Dance," a piece in which, for the first time in a 16-year career, he pays homage to specific dancers.
It will be performed by the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater on Tuesday at City Center during the troupe's monthlong season.


Lending One's Good Name to Something With a Bad One
THERE are many lines on Vernon E. Jordan's voluminous resume, but none as controversial as the one identifying him as a director of the R.J.R.
Nabisco Holdings Corporation, which owns R.J.
Reynolds, the nation's second-largest cigarette manufacturer.
In the past few weeks, anti-smoking groups and others have subjected Mr.
Jordan to a barrage of criticism.
Part of their concern has centered on the potential for a conflict of interest: Mr.
Jordan, chairman of the Clinton transition team, has refused to recuse himself from discussion of sensitive health appointments like the post of Surgeon General.


Jill E. Purdy, Paul D. Sarkozi
Jill Elizabeth Purdy, an associate at the New York law firm of Milbank, Tweed, Hadley &amp; McCloy, and Paul David Sarkozi, an associate at the New York law firm of Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton &amp; Garrison, plan to marry in February.
Ms.
Purdy, 26 years old, graduated from Tulane University, from which she also received a law degree.
She is a daughter of Judith E. Pridgen of Charlotte, N.C., and Dr.
J.
Gerry Purdy of Cupertino, Calif.
Ms.
Purdy's father is the vice president of the mobile computing group at Dataquest Inc., a market research company in San Jose, Calif.
The prospective bride is a stepdaughter of Samuel Pridgen of Charlotte and Melanie Purdy of Cupertino.


That Old Gang of Theirs
RUSSIA'S SECRET RULERS
By Lev Timofeyev.
Translated by Catherine A. Fitzpatrick.  177 pp.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $21.


No Pigeons Were Killed (Or Even Annoyed)
WHEN "HOME ALONE 2: LOST IN NEW YORK" WAS being filmed in Central Park a year ago, animal experts guarded the safety and well-being of the movie's hundreds of stunt pigeons.
In the credits of "A River Runs Through It," the audience is assured that "no fish were killed or injured" during the making of this movie about the killing and injuring of fish.
Horses used in a gunfight scene in the forthcoming "Bronx Tale" had their ears stuffed with cotton, and only the quietest of blank cartridges were fired.
Spiders and rats got similar protection in "Arachnophobia" and "Dracula," respectively, and the cat and dogs in Disney's "Homeward Bound: The Incredible Journey," a live action film due in January, were guaranteed a safe trip.


Knicks Offering Student Discount
The Knicks are again offering half-price tickets to New York City students through the G.O.
Card High School Student Discount Program.


To Thaw Plumbing Pipes
FROZEN plumbing can be an unwelcomed winter surprise.
Water freezing inside pipes expands, often breaking joints where pipes meet and sometimes even rupturing the pipes.
Fortunately plumbing in most homes is situated away from unheated areas.
But pipes leading to outdoor faucets usually face risks, as do pipes that may have been incorrectly installed during remodeling or whose location leaves them unprotected.


The Threepenny Verdi
KURT WEILL
Composer in a Divided World.
By Ronald Taylor.
Illustrated. 358 pp.
Boston: Northeastern University Press. $29.95.


Croat Asks Western Action in Bosnia
President Franjo Tudjman of Croatia has welcomed growing pressure for Western military action to halt Serbian offensives in Bosnia and Herzegovina, saying that the threat of such action might be enough to cause "a sobering up" of the Serbian Government of President Slobodan Milosevic.
Mr.
Tudjman said action by the Western nations was essential to prevent the Bosnian conflict from spreading south to Macedonia and Kosovo, a region of southern Serbia where an ethnic Albanian majority has demanded independence.


What Counts Is Productivity and Productivity
TOPIC A at Bill Clinton's economic extravaganza next week in Little Rock will no doubt be the recession.
But as the President-elect told everyone from newspaper executives to Congressional leaders last week, it is productivity that will mark the success or failure of his economic policies.
And most economists, it is safe to say, would agree with him.
Recessions come and, mercifully, always go.
However, the only way to raise living standards and pay for dreams like universal health care and welfare reform is to increase productivity -- how manycars, hamburgers and everything else Americans make per hour.


A Kennedy at Work
NAME: Robert Sargent Shriver.
IDENTITY: Kennedy family scion; venture capitalist; record producer; Maria Shriver's brother.


'Schtonk': Is It Springtime For Hitler?
Last year, the Germans incurred a good deal of international disgruntlement by refusing to offer Agnieszka Holland's "Europa, Europa" as a contender for the best foreign-film Oscar.
The ostensible reason was that Miss Holland was Polish-French and the film's financing was not German, despite the film's German actors and crew and its use of the German language.
The movie, about a Jewish teen-ager who disguises his identity during World War II, was called "an embarrassment" by the head of the German Export Film Union.
A wide range of progressive German film makers and actors protested their country's decision.


Even Without the Smile, Kidd's Game Has Become Pure Magic
The graduate students here are on strike, the undergraduates dodge the picket line, and a male student walks unclothed to class every day -- though, on cold days, he throws on a knapsack.
Berkeley has always been the 1960's in microcosm, and now that even includes the basketball team.
Up a slight mountain, past a Russian restaurant and about 100 yards from the protesters is Harmon Arena, home to Pete Newell's Final Four teams of 1959 and 1960.
There, inside the crowded office of an assistant coach, Todd Bozeman, sits the player who is supposedly the premier freshman in the nation -- who says he will turn pro as soon as the University of California reaches its next Final Four.


London Agency For Apartments
A new London-based company called the Apartment Service publishes a guide and takes reservations for apartments in Britain, Ireland and France.
At present most of the accommodations are in London (about 3,000 apartments) but new properties in other cities, particularly in Paris, are being added, the service says.
The Apartment Service is run by Charles McCrow, who in November 1991 bought a small apartment renting agency from Expotel, one of Britain's largest hotel reservation services, and Dev S. Anand, a former managing director of Expotel.
The operation has expanded substantially in the past year, they say.
Reservations can be made for any length of stay, though only some locations can be booked by the night.
Most stays are for from a week to three months.
The illustrated guide gives weekly rates and information on such facilities as parking, babysitting, dishwasher and maid service.
A typical one-bedroom apartment has sitting room, bedroom, fully equipped kitchen and bathroom with maid service at least twice a week.


Shades of Emotion


Marlo C. Pfister, Jeffrey Cadeddu
Marilyn M. Thorpe of New Orleans and Gerrit A. Pfister of Gaillard, France, have announced March wedding plans for their daughter, Marlo Colette Pfister, and Jeffrey Anthony Cadeddu, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank Cadeddu of Plandome, L.I.


Recent Sales
Fair Lawn  $254,900
10-12 Plymouth Drive  3-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 40-year-old colonial; playroom, fireplace, alarm system; taxes $3,629.
Livingston  $442,000
15 Consul Road  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 42-year-old colonial; 2-car garage, fireplace, deck, recreation room; taxes $7,574.
Ramsey  $176,000
390 North Central Road  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, over 50-year-old Tudor; sun room, hardwood floors, fireplace; taxes $2,937.
Ridgewood  $490,000
22 John Street  5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, new colonial; fireplace, deck, eat-in-kitchen, skylights; taxes $10,750.
Ringwood  $192,000
45 Dewey Drive  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 13-year-old split level; hardwood floors, deck, fireplace; taxes $4,984.
Short Hills  $335,000
424 White Oak Ridge Road  4-bedroom, 2-full bath, 2-half bath, 36-year-old colonial; deck, hardwood floors, 2-car garage; taxes $5,802.
OTHER AREAS Peekskill, N.Y.  $157,000
727 Frost Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 82-year-old colonial; wraparound porch, dining room, living room, eat-in kitchen, deck, 2-car garage; taxes $2,650.
Wilton, Conn.  $362,000
24 Salem Road  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 26-year-old ranch; new kitchen and deck, finished lower level, 1 acre; taxes $3,581.
Manhasset Hills, L.I.  $305,000
319 Courthouse Road  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 35-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, eat-in kitchen, Florida room; taxes $4,600.


More Than Militant Feminism?
To the Editor:
Oscar Wilde wrote of a man who removed his face so the world could see his mask.
I can't help wondering whether some of the contributors to your symposium on David Mamet's "Oleanna" may not be missing the mask by concentrating on the face  [ "He Said . . . She Said . . . Who Did What?" Nov. 15 ] .
The transformation of Carol from the poor, whining, ununderstanding student of Act I into the composed, assertive mistress of events in Act II would seem to represent more than a passing triumph for militant feminism.
Isn't Mr.
Mamet saying that Carol and her "group" have found a way to make learning irrelevant to the modern university experience?
And isn't this really a metaphor for many other kinds of campus "correctness" -- racial, ethnic, social, cultural and political as well as sexual?
Teachers, of course, don't fare much better in Mr.
Mamet's demonology.
Sure, John is willing to help a poor student.
But his real priorities are to gain tenure and a good mortgage on his new and larger house.


The Grooves. The Box. Ribbon-Ready.
Boxed sets have become a holiday gift-giving staple.
Here are some new choices for this season.
Prices are suggested retail.
'Roots 'n' Blues -- The Retrospective 1925-1950' Columbia/Legacy 47911; four CD's ($52) or cassettes ($37).


DEC. 6-12: Iran-Contra Conviction; The Cautionary Tale Of the C.I.A.'s Clair George
With the conviction of Clair E. George last week, a Central Intelligence Agency official for the first time was found guilty of felonies for his official behavior.
While unique in that sense, the Federal court trial demonstrated something far more common about Washington scandals.
Those who end up worst-off are often not involved in the underlying offense but rather caught in the ensuing coverup.


NORTHEAST NOTEBOOK: Rutland, Vt.; A Downtown For the Future
THE owners of a downtown shopping center here have agreed to undertake a $12 million renovation in the spring by replacing a 20,000-square-foot Price Chopper supermarket with a new 58,000-square-foot version.
The new store would be the largest in the state and anchor the Rutland Shopping Plaza, which in turn would be the centerpiece of almost $50 million in construction and renovation work expected over the next two years.


Childhood Malapropism
To the Editor:
Reading John J. O'Connor's tribute to Alistair Cooke, "An Icon in an Armchair Makes a Gracious Exit"  [ Nov. 29 ] , brought back a flood of memories of curling up on my parents' bed with my mother and our dog to watch "Upstairs, Downstairs."


Beth R. Sabbota And Avi Adler
Dr. and Mrs.
Harvey Sabbota of Southfield, Mich., have announced the engagement of their daughter Beth Robyn Sabbota to Avi Adler, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bernard Adler of White Plains.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Sabbota, 22, graduated from Yeshiva University's Stern College for Women.
She is a second-year nursing student at New York University.
Her father is a cardiologist in Detroit.


Carrie Goodman, Michael Pianin
Carolyn L. Goodman, a daughter of Dr.
Richard Goodman of Stony Brook, L.I., and the late Florence L. Goodman, was married last evening to Michael J. Pianin, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Albert Pianin of West Hartford, Conn.
Rabbi Robert Marcus officiated at the Muttontown Club in Brookville, L.I.
Ms.
Pianin, who is 29 years old and known as Carrie, is an asset manager for American International Group Real Estate Investment and Management Company in New York.
She graduated from Wellesley College and received an M.B.A. from Cornell University and a master's degree in real estate development from New York University.
Her father is an orthopedic surgeon and a lawyer in Smithtown, L.I.
Her stepmother, Jemmy Goodman, is the president of Medical Risk Management Advisory Corporation, a medical-risk consulting company there.


Drive Is On To Collect Back Taxes
FOR hundreds of residents who live in Greenburgh, Bedford, Somers and New Rochelle who have not been paying their property taxes, the wolf is at the door, and he wants the house.
Desperately seeking a way to replenish empty treasuries drained by tough economic times, these and other communities have started or are about to begin legal proceedings to foreclose on properties whose taxes are long overdue.
Although town officials say they hope no families will be made homeless by their actions, they insist they have no alternative.


MOST LIKELY TO SUCCEED
Your article reports that Bill Clinton attributed Frank Aller's draft resistance to "the old Martin Luther King thing . . .  'I'm doing this because I can't do anything else.' "
I believe that Clinton may have intended to refer to King's namesake, Martin Luther, who, upon his refusal to acknowledge the error of his ways to the Imperial Diet at Worms, said: "Here I stand; I cannot do otherwise."


B.C. Player Suspended
Boston College guard GERROD ABRAM, the team's top 3-point shooter, was suspended indefinitely after he was charged with larceny involving receiving stolen goods and an illegal application for a credit card, the school has announced.
Abram pleaded not guilty in Boston Municipal Court and was released on bail.
A Jan. 19 court date was set.


'The Change'
To the Editor:
Natalie Angier describes herself as a "baby boomer . . . tottering uncomfortably on the rim of middle age." The women of my mother's generation talked with foreboding about "the change," but most of my friends were too busy living to give it more than a passing thought.
At 67, having safely survived the downhill slide into "crone-ness," I would say the only thing that depresses me these days is the thought that, because it's happening to
them,
the baby boomers are going to make a big deal out of menopause.
MARY LU WALKER Corning, N.Y.


Wall Street; Bill Donoghue's Electronic Tarring
FINANCIAL experts get away with lots of bogus claims and useless predictions in both their own publications and the media in general.
But in one relatively new forum the pros are being kept a bit more honest than usual.
Ask William Donoghue, everyone's favorite expert on money market funds.
He's still taking a whipping from amateur investors who humiliated him late last month on Prodigy's Money Talk, a popular electronic bulletin board.


Data Bank/December 13, 1992


Hotels Offer Un-Plane Meal
The French-owned Sofitel group of seven hotels is sending its guests on their way with an $8.95 box lunch called the Un-Plane Meal.
Although suitable for air travelers looking for an alternative to airplane food, an official said, the meals are available to all guests who call room service an hour before departure.
The meals include a fruit and cheese appetizer, ham, shrimp, turkey or cheese on lettuce with a baguette, or a homemade sandwich on French bread with pastry or fresh fruit.
Both include utensils and mineral water or soda.


Grace Hanrahan and Robert Gibbons
Grace Catherine Hanrahan, a daughter of Grace C. Hanrahan of Yonkers and the late James Hanrahan, was married yesterday to Robert Graham Gibbons, the son of Robert A. Gibbons of Marion, Mass., and Elaine B. Gibbons of New York.
The Rev.
John Dwyer performed the ceremony at Sacred Heart Roman Catholic Church in Highland Falls, N.Y.
Mrs.
Gibbons, 34 years old, is the administrative assistant to the director of liver transplants at Mount Sinai Hospital in New York.
She graduated summa cum laude from Mercy College.
Her father was a construction supervisor in Yonkers.


Results Plus
TENNIS Chang and Stich Win Michael Chang tamed the power of Goran Ivanisevic, and Michael Stich won three tie breakers yesterday against Pete Sampras to reach the final of the Grand Slam Cup in Munich, Germany.
Chang outlasted Ivanisevic, 6-7 (3-7), 6-2, 6-4, 3-6, 6-3.
Stich beat the third-seeded Sampras, 7-6 (7-3), 7-6 (7-5), 3-6, 7-6 (7-2), in the semifinals of the world's richest tennis tournament.
The winner gets $2 million from a $6 million purse, the loser $1 million.
Ivanisevic blasted 25 aces to become the first player to surpass 1,000 in a season, bringing his total to 1,017.
But he also served 19 double faults, effectively wiping out his most effective weapon.
Chang, playing on a fast Supreme Court surface that should not favor his game, wasted five match points and saved three break points while serving for the match.
He finally scored with a service winner, clinching the 3-hour-38-minute match.


Erika A. White and Gary B. Glass
Mr. and Mrs.
Barry D. White of Newburgh, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Erika Alexandra White, to Gary B. Glass, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Weisglass of New York.
A March wedding is planned.
Miss White, 23 years old, graduated from Emory University and is a third-year law student at Fordham University.
Her father is the senior vice president of Lightron of Cornwall Inc., a commercial lighting company in New Windsor, N.Y.


Bruce Hausman and Amy Kadin
Amy Judith Kadin and Bruce Hausman were married in New York last evening.
Rabbi David Seligson performed the ceremony at the Carlyle.
Mrs.
Kadin-Hausman is a sales executive in New York for the Isabella Company, a manufacturer of women's clothing.
She graduated from New York University.
She is the daughter of Reba Kadin of New York and the late Benjamin Kadin.
Her father, a founder of the Albert Einstein College of Medicine in the Bronx, was an owner of the Courtley Shirt Company, formerly in New York.
Her previous marriage ended in divorce, as did Mr.
Hausman's.


Long Shadow on Paraguay Vote: Stroessner
"Watch out for ghosts," warns a political campaign advertisement here.
For Paraguayans, who lived for 35 years under the rule of Gen.
Alfredo Stroessner, no explanation is necessary.
From exile in Brazil, Paraguay's former dictator is casting a long shadow over this nation as it prepares for the first free presidential election in its 181-year history.


Season Becomes Pointless for the Giants
How bad was the Giants' humiliating 19-0 loss to the Phoenix Cardinals today?
Let us count the ways:
*It was the first time the Giants had been shut out since the Chicago Bears beat them, 21-0, in January 1986 in the playoffs.


'The Change'
To the Editor:
In your interview with Germaine Greer, Ms.
Greer laments that she has not been a lover of women, since "loving men is such a mess." This statement is predicated on the tired stereotype of lesbianism as a retreat from heterosexuality -- in fact, from passion itself.
Women do not become physically attracted to one another in response to the difficulty of maintaining a good heterosexual relationship.
The bad news is the great news: lesbians make messes, too.
PATRICIA GROSSMAN Brooklyn


German Leader Resigns
WILLI DAUME resigned yesterday after more than 30 years as president of the country's Olympic Committee.
At a meeting of the committee in Stuttgart, Daume was replaced by WALTHER TROGER, its reigning general secretary.
Troger, who has served as the general secretary since 1963, received a unanimous vote from the 146-member committee to succeed the 79-year-old leader.


Whips, Chains and Domestic Pets
To the Editor:
Thank you for giving us the first intelligent piece of journalism on "Sex." Caryn James's review (Oct. 25) is thorough, precise and objective.
Those qualities, I think, are particularly difficult to achieve when writing about a media construction like Madonna.
PETER B. WELLER New York


Remember, If A Beats B, And C Loses, Then . . .
Parity (the league would prefer to call it competitiveness) is so much a fact of pro football life that it is possible no new playoff teams will be determined today -- thus making millions of fans, and more than 1,000 players, uncertain about post-season payoffs until next weekend.
Going into yesterday's Buffalo-Denver game, only four clubs were assured of the 12 playoff berths, and none has even clinched a division.
But some grand old names can return to their once-accustomed spots as division champions by the close of business tonight: Pittsburgh could win the American Conference Central Division for the first time since 1984, and Dallas can top the National Conference East for the first time since '85.
Over all, four division champions could be crowned.


World Markets; The Britain-First Cure Is Working
It is only technically accurate to call what occurred in rural Vermont last weekend a retreat.
True, some 50 A-list women, influential in policy, economics, the women's movement and plain old politics, gathered away from the ambitions and distractions of everyday life to develop an economic plan attendant to the needs of women.
But by all accounts the proximity of what most of the participants would call the Clinton millennium, at least for now, gave the gathering the kinetic force of an advance rather than a retreat.
In the week since the meeting ended, members of the group have revised an outline into a working paper they will circulate at President-elect Bill Clinton's "economic summit" in Little Rock, which begins tomorrow.


Corrections
An article on Nov. 22 about travel in Paris on a tight budget misstated the purpose of the Deportation Memorial on the Ile de la Cite.
It is dedicated to the 200,000 French men and women -- not only Jews -- who were deported during the German occupation in World War II.
Nearby, on the Right Bank of the Seine, at 17 Rue Geoffroy-l'Asnier, there is a memorial to the Unknown Jewish Martyr, dedicated to victims of the Nazis.


Anne Kristof and Donald Finley
Anne Franc Kristof, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank F. Kristof of East Stroudsburg, Pa., was married yesterday to Donald Randolph Borden Finley, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
John Finley of Cold Spring Harbor, L.I.
The Rev.
Thomas D. Bowers performed the ceremony at St.
Bartholomew's Episcopal Church in New York.
Mrs.
Finley, 28 years old, is a men's-wear designer at the Philips Van Heusen Corporation in New York.
She graduated from the Fashion Institute of Technology.
Her father, now retired, was the owner of Blue Ridge Inn, a resort in East Stroudsburg.
Her mother, Joyce Kristof, is a financial planner at the Monroe County Children and Youth Agency, an agency for abused children in East Stroudsburg.


Bosnia's Religious Leaders Transcend War in Humanity's Name
To the Editor:
Last week I took part in an unprecedented religious summit of the heads of the three great religious communities in the former Yugoslavia: Patriarch Pavle, head of the Serbian Orthodox Church; Ra'is ul Ulama Jakub Selimoski of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Islamic community, and Vinko Puljic, the Roman Catholic Archbishop of Sarajevo.
The three religious leaders joined in a unanimous declaration stating that the fighting in Bosnia was "not a religious war," and that "crime in the name of religion is the greatest crime against religion."


Fruit Juice
It's a new age -- the age of the hybrid.
The two hottest beauty trends -- back-to-nature simplicity and pharmaceutical sophistication -- have finally melded in a product extracted from a piece of fruit.
Alpha-hydroxy acids, touted as the miracle of modern skin care, combine the appeal of the green-marketing trend with claims of high-tech results.
Also known as fruit acids because most are derived from apples, citrus and grapes -- and even milk or sugar cane -- they are being marketed as the hottest breakthrough in the antiaging arena since Retin-A.
But while Retin-A is still a prescribed drug, A.H.A.'s are flooding the market in over-the-counter versions.


Data Update
*4*MEDIAN RESALE HOUSE PRICES
Oct. 92
Sept. 92
Oct. 91
Nation
$ 104,100
103,400
$ 99,100
Northeast
135,500
137,500
136,700
Midwest
82,400
81,800
77,100
South
92,300
91,600
88,200
West
146,800
145,400
146,600
*4*Source: National Association of Realtors
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
8.57
8.58
8.82
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.53
5.52
6.38
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
8.40
8.39
8.72
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.33
5.31
6.31
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
8.47
8.47
8.71
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.20
5.19
6.29
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
8.58
8.55
9.05
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.93
5.93
6.82
Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
3.82
3.45
4.61
National Mortgage Contract Rate
7.40
7.40
8.78
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes.  (Source: HSH Associates)


Behind the Scene
It's happened four times already.
Todd Oldham's fitting model tries on a new outfit and Kevin Krier, Oldham's friend and fashion show producer, attempts to finish it off by enfolding her in an airy, carnival-bright "harlequin happy stole." After much redraping, Oldham pulls the wrap away.
"We definitely have to have this piece in this collection," Krier insists.
"It defines your mood perfectly." Oldham agrees.
But after three more futile rounds of push me, pull you, the stole is temporarily banished to a folding chair.
Krier threatens to wear it to the show if a place isn't found for it.
Oldham promises it will find its way back, but right now "it's not worth getting aggravated over."
He's right, especially when there are so many other ways a fashion show can earn you a Maalox moment.
There is the world-class movie director who unexpectedly brings along an entourage and wants it in the front row; the multilicensed designer who shifts his three shows from his usual day to yours, eliminating the availability of your dream models; models stuck in traffic, buyers tired of waiting; elevators stalling, tape glitching.
There are reporters who will miss deadlines (and you'll miss coverage) if you start late, editors who won't show up if you start too early, gate-crashers and the retailer who can't believe you have spelled her name wrong when she has always spelled yours right (perhaps that's because yours is on a label).
The privilege of having these hassles can cost anywhere from $60,000 to $250,000 per show, which may not break a conglomerate like Kashiyama, which distributes Todd Oldham.
But for a one-woman band like Anna Sui, each presentation sends her future heading down the runway swinging on a handbag.


Streetscapes: The Chatsworth; Riverside South's Threat to a 1904 Apartment Tower
"CONTEXT" is an urban design buzzword for the late 20th century and Riverside South is going to be one big hunk of context, six blocks of prewar-style apartment houses along the Hudson River that could be approved by the New York City Council next Thursday.
For the residents of the 1904 Chatsworth apartments at 344 West 72d Street it is probably a little too much context, for Riverside South will block some and possibly all of its 214 river-facing windows.
In some cases it will be more than simply light and air that will be eliminated; whole rooms may become illegal for occupancy.


Robyn Farrell, David McCree
Robyn Kay Farrell, an assistant vice president in the private-banking division of Bankers Trust Company in New York, was married yesterday to David Burgess McCree, a sales representative for R. R. Donnelley &amp; Sons, the printing and information company, in New York.
The Rev.
Dr.
Thomas A. Hughart performed the ceremony at the Bedford Presbyterian Church in Bedford, N.Y.
Mrs.
McCree, a graduate of Denison University, is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard G. Farrell of Bedford.
Her father is the president of Richard Farrell Associates, a marketing communications firm there.


The N.H.L. Employs A Head for Business
Gary Bettman remembers attending a hockey game at Nassau Coliseum in the early 1980's, when the Islanders clinched one of their Stanley Cup championships.
"It was an incredibly exciting event," he said, adding he doesn't remember exactly which of the four cups it was.
He remembers playing pickup hockey in the early 1970's in a rented arena with fellow students at Cornell, but he's not sure what position he played.
"I don't think we had positions," he said.


The Cold Peace
THE PORCUPINE
By Julian Barnes. 138 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $17.


Mutual Funds; Risk-Reward in Latin Debt Funds
SEEKING to capitalize on investors' frustration with rock-bottom yields in the United States, a trio of closed-end bond funds that invest in Latin American debt and yield roughly 11 percent have come to market in the last five months.
The yields are high, of course, because the risk is high.
Combine Latin America's long history of political turmoil with illiquid fund holdings and some leverage, and "you've got a pretty dicey investment," said Thomas J. Herzfeld, who specializes in closed-end investment and analysis in Miami.
Invest only small amounts in these funds, analysts warn, and only when their share prices fall from premium levels.


If You're Thinking of Living in: Springfield
THE Union County township of Springfield, site of the last great New Jersey battle of the Revolutionary War, will be host to a different kind of battle next June, the United States Open golf tournament.
The site will be the 471-acre Baltusrol Golf Club, founded in 1895, which has been host to seven United States Opens, more than any other club.
With its $25,000 initiation fee, the club is too expensive for most residents of middle-class Springfield, and most of its 500 members are from wealthy neighboring communities like Summit and Mountainside.


Oxford Elated (in Its Fashion) Over Clinton
Oxford University, the sort of place that resists enthusiasm, is allowing itself to indulge in a bit of interest in Bill Clinton.
It has welcomed "the election of the first Oxonian to the Presidency of the United States of America" and noted his ascension to "the long list of world leaders who have studied at the University."
Oxford, after all, has already educated 24 British Prime Ministers as well as Prime Ministers and Presidents of Germany, New Zealand, Australia, Canada, India, Pakistan and Trinidad, along with at least two Supreme Court Justices and five sitting Senators.


European Chiefs Stem Threats to Unity
European Community leaders have patched together a series of agreements removing some new obstacles to the region's move toward political and economic unity.
Struggling to keep alive a union treaty agreed to only 12 months ago, they found compromises on Saturday permitting Denmark to call a new referendum on the subject and settling a dispute over economic aid between rich and poor nations within the community.


The Grooves. The Box. Ribbon-Ready.
Boxed sets have become a holiday gift-giving staple.
Here are some new choices for this season.
Prices are suggested retail.
'The Essential Bill Monroe and His Blue Grass Boys 1945-1949'  Columbia/Legacy 52478; two CD's ($25) or cassettes ($16).


Editorial Notebook; Dr. Video
Jack Wennberg of the Dartmouth Medical School says doctors often don't know what treatments work and almost surely don't know which treatment best serves their patients.
Dr.
Wennberg is onto something big -- big enough to change the way U.S. medicine is practiced.
He started out with some simple riddles.
Why were tonsillectomies performed nine times more often in one Vermont town than another?
Why were prostate surgeries four times more likely and hysterectomies three times more likely in some cities than others?
Why did doctors do twice as many bypass surgeries in New Haven as in Boston?


BEST SELLERS: December 13, 1992
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
2
DOLORES CLAIBORNE, by Stephen King. (Viking, $23.50.) After being accused of murdering her employer, a woman tells of killing her husband almost 30 years earlier and of her life ever since.
2
2
4
MIXED BLESSINGS, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.50.) Three couples' lives are strained by the problems of having children.
3
3
8
THE TALE OF THE BODY THIEF, by Anne Rice. (Knopf, $24.) Lestat embarks on a dangerous enterprise; "The Vampire Chronicles," continued.
4
4
6
MEXICO, by James A. Michener. (Random House, $25.) While researching the lives of his ancestors, an American journalist learns about the history of the land south of the border. (LP)
5
5
4
THE GENERAL'S DAUGHTER, by Nelson DeMille. (Warner, $21.95.) The investigation of the murder of a woman officer, a general's daughter, unearths scandals in the military.
6
10
40
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $22.50.) A woman law student probes the murder of two Supreme Court justices.
7
6
9
THE STARS SHINE DOWN, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $23.) The fortunes of a businesswoman are imperiled by secrets from her past. (LP)
8
7
7
MOSTLY HARMLESS, by Douglas Adams. (Harmony, $20.) In the fifth volume of the "Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy" series, a survivor tries to cope with new predicaments.
9
12
15
GRIFFIN &amp; SABINE, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.) The romance of an artist and a secret admirer, told through cards and letters.
10
8
9
SABINE'S NOTEBOOK, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.) Continuing the epistolary romance begun in "Griffin &amp; Sabine."
11
14
22
GERALD'S GAME, by Stephen King. (Viking, $23.50.) Twenty-eight hours of horror suffered by a woman handcuffed to a bedpost.
12
9
18
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $14.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.
13
11
7
DRIVING FORCE, by Dick Francis. (Putnam, $21.95.) An ex-jockey's horse-transport business is besieged by a series of mysterious deaths.
14
13
3
DOMES OF FIRE, by David Eddings. (Del Rey/ Ballantine, $22.) The veterans of the fantasy series "The Elenium" contend with new dangers in the first volume of another series, "The Tamuli."
15
15
WHERE IS JOE MERCHANT? by Jimmy Buffett. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $19.95.) A couple on the trail of a dead rock star who has been sighted.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
13
THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush H. Limbaugh 3d. (Pocket, $22.) Anecdotes and opinions offered by the talk show host.
2
2
10
IT DOESN'T TAKE A HERO, by H. Norman Schwarzkopf with Peter Petre. (Linda Grey/ Bantam, $25.) The autobiography of the general who commanded the allied forces in the gulf war.
3
4
15
EVERY LIVING THING, by James Herriot. (St. Martin's, $22.95.) Continuing the memoirs of the Yorkshire veterinarian.
4
3
6
SEX, by Madonna. (Warner, $49.95.) Erotic photographs of the pop star by Steven Meisel, and her reflections on them.
5
6
8
I CAN'T BELIEVE I SAID THAT! by Kathie Lee Gifford with Jim Jerome. (Pocket, $22.) The autobiography of the co-host of the television show "Live With Regis and Kathie Lee."
6
7
26
TRUMAN, by David McCullough. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) A biography of the 33d President.
7
12
12
THE TE OF PIGLET, by Benjamin Hoff. (Dutton, $16.) Aspects of Taoist philosophy explained through the actions of an A. A. Milne character.
8
5
4
MY LIFE, by Earvin (Magic) Johnson with William Novak. (Random House, $22.) The autobiography of the retired Los Angeles Lakers basketball player.
9
9
18
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $20.) A Jungian analyst reinterprets myths and folk tales to enable women to understand their psyches.
10
8
7
BANKRUPTCY 1995, by Harry E. Figgie Jr. with Gerald J. Swanson. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) The authors predict the collapse of America under Government debt and suggest ways to cope with it.
11
1
JFK: Reckless Youth, by Nigel Hamilton. (Random House, $30.) The first 29 years of the 35th President.
12
10
27
EARTH IN THE BALANCE, by Al Gore. (Houghton Mifflin, $22.95.) The Vice President-elect discusses factors affecting the environment and what must be done to save the earth.
13 *
13
6
GENIUS, by James Gleick. (Pantheon, $27.50.) The life and achievements of Richard Feynman, the Nobel Prize-winning physicist.
14
11
29
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Random House, $16.) The psychological and social significance of menopause for today's women.
15
15
15
YOUNG MEN &amp; FIRE, by Norman Maclean. (University of Chicago, $19.95.) An account of a disastrous fire in a Montana forest in 1949.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
22
HARVEY PENICK'S LITTLE RED BOOK, by Harvey Penick with Bud Shrake. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $19.) Anecdotes and tips about playing golf, by a legendary teacher.
2
4
11
THE AMERICAN HERITAGE DICTIONARY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE. (Houghton Mifflin, $39.95.) The third edition.
3
3
12
THE MEASURE OF OUR SUCCESS, by Marian Wright Edelman. (Beacon, $15.) The head of the Children's Defense Fund offers rules to live by for her own children and others'.
4
5
12
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $12.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
5
1
CREATING LOVE, by John Bradshaw. (Bantam, $23.) Ways to establish healthy relationships with other people.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,050 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
And Bear in Mind
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
THE DISCOVERY OF AMERICA, by Saul Steinberg. (Knopf, $50.) The first book-length collection in 14 years by a great and greatly intelligent artist, who came to this country in 1942 and whose vision of America has lately become tougher, grittier, darker.
CORNELL CAPA: Photographs, edited by Cornell Capa and Richard Whelan. (Bulfinch/Little, Brown, $60.) Pictures that certify Mr.
Capa's statement of his aims: to show "human beings, their lives, their habitats, their behavior and their relationships."
DANCING: The Pleasure, Power, and Art of Movement, by Gerald Jonas. (Abrams in association with Thirteen/WNET, $45.) A lavishly produced cross-cultural history of dance worldwide, companion volume to a forthcoming public television series.
THE TRUTH ABOUT THE SAVOLTA CASE, by Eduardo Mendoza. (Pantheon, $25.) Anarchists and labor activists square off against the bosses in this cheerfully subversive detective novel (its protagonist rarely has a clue), set in World War I Barcelona.
MAQROLL.
Three Novellas: "The Snow of the Admiral," "Ilona Comes With the Rain," "Un Bel Morir," by Alvaro Mutis. (HarperCollins, $20.) These interconnected tales share a rootless protagonist whose enterprises always fail, though he survives.
A RUSSIAN DOLL: And Other Stories, by Adolfo Bioy Casares. (New Directions, cloth, $22.95; paper, $10.95.) Understated, unsettling works of fiction by an Argentine fantast who distorts reality with grotesque details and catastrophic events.
MAZURKA FOR TWO DEAD MEN, by Camilo Jose Cela. (New Directions, $21.95.) Life in the early 20th century is nasty, brutish and scornful for the Galician peasants who inhabit this powerful, poetic novel by the 1989 Nobel laureate in literature.


It May Help to Be Jewish to Love Turkey
To the Editor:
May I add another linguistic note to the colorful "One Strange Bird" by Margaret Visser (Op-Ed, Nov. 26)?
The concurrence of the voyages of Columbus and the expulsion from Spain of its Jewish population after centuries of mutually advantageous co-existence has been widely aired in this 500th year of commemoration of both events.


Irish Treat
To the Editor: I enjoyed Richard Tillinghast's article about Ireland ("Across Ireland, Leisurely," Oct. 18).
I am writing to point out a treat missed in your Dublin-to-Galway trip.


Frank X. Zambetti, 77, U.S. Housing Official
Frank X. Zambetti, a retired construction engineer for the Federal Housing Administration and a civic leader in Riverdale, Calif., died on Thursday at his son John's home in Santa Monica.
He was 77.
He died of cancer, his family said.


Ruth Sleeper, 93, Dies; Educator in Nursing
Ruth Sleeper, a national leader in nursing education who helped raise academic standards for the nursing profession, died Thursday at her home in Braintree, Mass.
She was 93.
She died after a long illness, said the Massachusetts General Hospital, where she had been director of both the Nursing Service and School of Nursing from 1946 to 1966.


Puerto Rico's Coastline: New York's Back Door
For tens of thousands of Dominicans who dream of a better life in New York, the long road to Washington Heights or Queens begins here on the rugged, reef-lined shores of Puerto Rico's west coast.
With the help of smugglers, they cross the perilous Mona Passage in rickety wooden boats called yolas, arriving under cover of darkness in groups as large as 175, and are put ashore on isolated beaches.
If they manage to evade the United States Border Patrol agents assigned to this corner of America's Caribbean frontier, they will make their way to San Juan.
After earning enough money for plane fare, they will try to continue on to New York.


Mutual Funds; Hurry Up on Small Stocks?
SMALL-STOCK investors should factor the so-called "January effect" -- a phenomenon in which the returns on small stocks suddenly spike up in January -- into their investment plans.
During the last 66 years, small-company stocks returned an average of about 0.8 percent a month from February through December.
But in January, their returns averaged 6.82 percent.
Small-company stocks outperformed their larger capitalization cousins in 56 of the 66 years.


Adding Up the Costs In Drunken Driving
Re: John Bury's letter to the New Jersey editor (Nov. 29) on drunken driving cases:
Mr.
Bury's suggestion to have a lawyer is good advice, and it does become lucrative for a lawyer to specialize in the D.W.I. field; however, this is part of the problem.


Fernandez and His Battles: Can an Innovator Be Happy in New York?
Three years ago, Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez charged into New York City with a virtual mandate to rouse a slumbering system in which corruption, incompetence and mediocrity flourished.
But after a breathtaking start in which Mr.
Fernandez introduced such things as school-based management and drew attention for his dismissals of local school officials, he now finds himself with an increasingly angry and hostile board of directors who last week gave him a major rebuff.


Chung H. Lew and Alison H. Golden
Alison Hope Golden, a daughter of Renee V. Golden of Chestnut Hill, Mass., and the late Gerald M. Golden, was married last evening to Chung Hyun Lew, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Chae Woo Lew of Hillsborough, Calif.
Alex Zimmer, a justice of the peace in Newton, Mass., officiated at the Harvard Club of Boston.
Mrs.
Lew, 28 years old, is an analyst and an associate director in the corporate finance department at the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation, the bond-ratings company in New York.
She graduated from Harvard University and received an M.B.A. degree from Columbia University.
Her mother is the chief executive of the Langley Corporation in Medford, Mass., a distributor of industrial equipment formerly headed by the bridegroom's father.


THE STORM'S HAVOC: Connecticut; Snowfall Adds to Woes As Flooding Subsides


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
TARRYTOWN CHRISTMAS
Clement Moore's poem "A Visit From St. Nicholas" will be read during a Victorian Christmas celebration today from 2 to 4 P.M. at the Historical Society of the Tarrytowns.
Nicholas Robinson, a professor of law at Pace University and a former president of the society, will do the honors at 2:30 and 3:30 P.M.


A Monument to Energies, Human and Inhuman
"Carbon" by Lothar Baumgarten is not like any other book that has come this critic's way.
Nobly proportioned and built to evade and outlive the inroads of physical decay (it costs $325), the book has been published by the Museum of Contemporary Art in Los Angeles.
Its author is not quite like anyone else, either.
A German artist, now age 48 and due for a large but unrelated exhibition at the Guggenheim Museum next month, Mr.
Baumgarten is a combination of anthropologist, photographer, poet, storyteller, installation maker and connoisseur of names. (I cherish especially his map of the Paris subway, in which he rechristened every single stop.)


Joanna Molloy, George Rush Jr.
Joanna Molloy, a daughter of Frances Molloy of Farmingdale, L.I., and the late Joseph G. Molloy, was married yesterday to George P. Rush Jr., the son of Margaret M. Rush of Highland Park, Ill., and the late Mr.
Rush.
The Rev.
Peter Colapietro performed the ceremony at the Roman Catholic Church of the Holy Cross in New York.
Ms.
Molloy, who is 37 years old, is keeping her name.
She is co-editor of The New York Post's Page Six column.
She graduated from the University of California at Berkeley.
Her father was a vice president at the Equitable Life Assurance Society in New York.
Her two previous marriages ended in divorce.


The Grooves. The Box. Ribbon-Ready.
Boxed sets have become a holiday gift-giving staple.
Here are some new choices for this season.
Prices are suggested retail.
'Earth, Wind and Fire -- The Eternal Dance' Columbia/Legacy 52439; three CD's ($46) or cassettes ($35).


Behind Appointments, Quiet Warring
As President-elect Bill Clinton begins to fill out his Cabinet appointments, a spate of political knife fights have broken out behind the scenes between interest groups trying to cut their people into the new Administration, and their opponents out.
Already, this ideological combat appears to have dimmed the prospects of Lawrence H. Summers for a top economics job, and of John Young, a business executive who was once the leading candidate for Commerce Secretary.
And it is endangering the chances of others.


Jennifer Berenson, David F. Penson
Richard and Susan Berenson of Armonk, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Jennifer Margot Berenson to Dr.
David F. Penson, a son of James Penson of Los Angeles and Ruth Penson of Roslyn, L.I.
An April 1993 wedding is planned.
Miss Berenson, 27 years old, is a pastry chef at Opus Restaurant in Santa Monica, Calif.
She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania, where her fiance graduated cum laude.
Her father is a senior partner in Berenson, Berenson, Adler &amp; Company, an accounting concern in New York.


The Grooves. The Box. Ribbon-Ready.
Boxed sets have become a holiday gift-giving staple.
Here are some new choices for this season.
Prices are suggested retail.
'Barry Manilow: The Complete Collection and Then Some. . .' Arista 07822-18714-2; four CD's ($79.98) or cassettes ($69.98).


Chelsea's School: Public or Private?
This city, which hasn't seen a First Child since the freckled-faced Amy Carter, is about to get a new kid on the 1600 block of Pennsylvania Avenue.
The impending arrival of Chelsea Clinton has set off a buzz of speculation about where she will go to school, either for the remainder of this school year or at the beginning of the next.
In the process it has renewed a long-simmering debate over the merits of public versus private education.


THE STORM'S HAVOC: The Costs; Calculating a Storm's Costs: Rebuilding Is Just One Factor
As a brutal wintery storm continued its assault on the metropolitan region yesterday, retailers and public officials began assessing the financial costs, ranging from wind and water damage to thousands of homes and businesses to a setback on what had been brisk holiday sales.
While the total impact on the region was impossible to measure, large losses seem certain on several levels of its economy.
For large retailers in all three states, the storm all but obliterated sales for at least 24 hours, with empty department stores in New York City and malls closing in surrounding areas.
By yesterday, customers were returning and stores were reopening in much of the region, but malls in Connecticut reported a drop-off in the number of patrons because of the snow that had started falling.
Glen Wielgus, marketing manager for the South Street Seaport, said that the storm came at "a very unfortunate time." Immense Costs of Cleanup
"It's particularly unfortunate at the time between Thanksgiving and Christmas," he said.
"For most major retailers, this time can be upwards of 20 percent of annual sales. So to lose one busy, one good Christmas Day is very unfortunate.
"It was definitely a blow, but it was not a major blow," he said.


Yale Repertory Offers 'The Colored Museum'
LET George C. Wolfe's characters spell out the playwright's recipe for revolutionary change.
"Words flowin' instead of blood," asserts Miss Roj, an imperious drag queen in go-go boots.
"A pinch of style and a dash of flair" are two of the fixings Aunt Ethel, "a downtown black woman wearing a bandanna" throws into the pot on her cooking show.
And don't forget, Aunt Ethel advises, "Add some attitude."
She doesn't stop there.
Survival (a heap), humility (just a touch), humor (a whole lot), salty language, sadness, all simmered to madness, to borrow the cooking school's ingredients and proportions.


Jordanians Think Iraqi Agents Killed Scientist
Jordanian officials say they believe that an Iraqi nuclear scientist shot dead in an Amman street this week was the victim of Iraqi secret agents sent from Baghdad to set an example for other Iraqis in Jordan who may consider defecting.
The officials, who spoke on the condition of anonymity, said the Iraqi, Moayyed Hassan Al Janabi, 35 years old, was killed on Monday because he failed to return to his job after several weeks of vacation in Jordan.


Pianist In Preview Of Debut
HOLIDAY concerts predominate at this time of year, but there are a few alternatives.
Benedetto Lupo, bronze medalist at the Eighth Van Cliburn Piano Competition, makes his New York debut tomorrow night at Alice Tully Hall, but he will play the same program of works by Brahms, Debussy, Schumann and Bartok at the Emelin Theater in Mamaroneck today at 3 P.M.
The number to call for more information is 698-0098.


The Grooves. The Box. Ribbon-Ready.
Boxed sets have become a holiday gift-giving staple.
Here are some new choices for this season.
Prices are suggested retail.
'The Stiff Records Box Set' Demon/Rhino 71062; four CD's ($50).


Abby R. Klieman, Lawrence La Sala
Larry and Lenore Klieman of Fair Lawn, N.J., have announced February wedding plans for their daughter, Abby Rose Klieman, and Lawrence Joseph La Sala, a son of Jeanne M. La Sala of Ridgewood, Queens.
Ms.
Klieman, 24 years old, is a fund-raising officer at Columbia University, where she is also a master's degree candidate in international affairs.
She graduated from Smith College.
Her father is a retired social worker.


Recent Sales
Avon, Conn.  $114,000
508 Lovely Street  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 62-year-old colonial; large rooms, updated systems, owner financing, 0.5 acre; taxes $1,983.
Stamford, Conn.  $265,000
130 Dannell Drive  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 42-year-old ranch; hardwood floors, c/a, large deck, 0.25 acre; taxes $2,810.
Wilton, Conn.  $362,000
24 Salem Road  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 26-year-old ranch; new kitchen and deck, finished lower level, 1 acre; taxes $3,581.
Cross River, N.Y.  $200,000
Debbie Lane  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 8-year-old raised ranch; family room, utility room, 2-car garage, cathedral ceilings, dining room, eat-in kitchen; taxes $4,410.
Peekskill, N.Y.  $157,000
727 Frost Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 82-year-old colonial; wraparound porch, dining room, living room, deck, 2-car garage; taxes $2,650.
Rye, N.Y.  $294,000
40 Rosemere Street  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 57-year-old colonial; enclosed porch, fireplace, sleeping porch, detached 2-car garage; taxes $6,061.
OTHER AREAS Manhasset Hills, L.I.  $305,000
319 Courthouse Road  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 35-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, Florida room; taxes $4,600.
New Hyde Park, L.I.  $220,000
12 Spruce Street  4-bedroom, 1-bath, 49-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 1-car garage; taxes $3,500.
Ridgewood, N.J.  $490,000
22 John Street  5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, new colonial; deck, eat-in-kitchen, skylights; taxes $10,750.


Corrections
An article on Nov. 22 about Michael R. Peevey, who recently resigned as president of Southern California Edison, imprecisely characterized an organization he once worked for.
The organization, the Council on Economic and Environmental Balance, is financed by industry and labor groups, and says it strives to act as a bridge between traditional business goals and traditional environmental ones.


DEC. 6-12: Better Prison Digs?; Noriega: Public Enemy Becomes Prisoner of War
For the past three years, Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega has argued that he is a prisoner of war, and last week a Federal judge in Miami agreed.
But rather than place him beyond the reach of American courts, as the former Panamanian leader had hoped, the ruling could merely ease his lot in prison, where he is to spend the foreseeable future for drug trafficking, money laundering and racketeering.
In his ruling, Judge William M. Hoeveler found that Mr.
Noriega, captured in the 1989 United States invasion of Panama, fit the definition of a prisoner of war set forth in the third Geneva Convention of 1949.
The Judge, however, did not address whether Mr.
Noriega's new status affected the court's jurisdiction, although the ruling was premised on having it.


For All the Bombs, the I.R.A. Is No Closer to Goals
As its annual pre-Christmas bombing campaign accelerates here and in Britain, the Irish Republican Army seems stronger than ever.
It apparently has the dedication, skill, manpower and weapons to continue indefinitely its 23-year campaign to force the British to withdraw their troops and their political control from this British province.
But while the estimated 300 to 400 guerrillas of the outlawed I.R.A. are tying down some 30,000 police and British Army troops -- setting off bombs in shopping areas, raiding police and army posts, shooting suspected members and sympathizers of Protestant paramilitary units -- the organization seems no closer to its stated objective.
That is to declare a cease-fire once the British promise to leave the six counties of Northern Ireland, and to set up conditions whereby the province's 950,000 Protestants and 650,000 Roman Catholics decide whether they want to become part of the Irish Republic.


Couple's Long Career Culminates in Festival
ELLIE and Red Conason have been in business together so long that one expects them to finish each other's sentences.
And they do, except it seems often not to be what the other one would say.
For more than four decades, the couple has been arguing about design matters and setting standards for crafts in the county -- first in their highly esteemed White Plains gift shop, called Ellie Conason, then in the Red Grooms Gift Shop of the Hudson River Museum here, which the Conasons ran for 10 years.
They are independent curators now, and after 51 years of marriage they can still lock horns in discussions of taste and craftsmanship.
Emanuel Voltaire Conason, who doesn't use his given name, is a tall and straight-backed man of 80 who spars with his wife in affectionate but emphatic tones.
She is a pixie-like 75-year-old given to punctuating her comments with fast-moving hands.
She keeps their battle of wits crackling, faltering only when a name or date eludes her. (The worst indignity of aging, she says, is memory loss.)


GARDENING
THERE is a word in the plant kingdom that gardeners will have to learn.
It is "dioecious," a word rooted in Greek which means two households.
For a gardener, the term means that two will have to be planted, that is, a male plant and a female plant since the male and female flowers are borne by different plants.
For the majority of plants grown in the garden there is no need to worry about this pairing.
Most of the plants have what are called perfect flowers, that is, male and female parts in the same flower.
But there are exceptions, and when the plant kingdom comes up with one of these glitches, unless there are two there will be no fruit.


Not in Ourselves but in Our Stars
CONVERSING WITH THE PLANETS
How Science and Myth Invented the Cosmos.
By Anthony Aveni.
Illustrated. 255 pp.
New York: Times Books/Random House. $21.


Perspectives: Public Housing; Seeking to Improve Quality in Shelter
REMEMBER the principle of economic mix in the tenancy, say the managers of large publicly assisted housing developments.
It is one of the keys to success in providing decent housing to lower-income people over time.
The theme has been sounded again of late by Sally Hernandez-Pinero, chairwoman of the New York City Housing Authority for the last 10 months.
"New York is working hard at keeping to the one-third, one-third, one-third mix on admissions," she said.
She defined that in general terms as one-third elderly, one-third working families and one-third publicly assisted families.


The Benefit Rediscovered
American Museum of Natural History explores the known, Dec. 8.


Little Rock Expects Surge Of Visitors
Tourism officials in Little Rock hope President-elect Bill Clinton's trip to the White House will inspire streams of visitors to his home state.
"There is a keen interest among tour operators who want to put us on their itineraries for 1993," said Jana Cohen, group travel manager for the Little Rock Convention and Visitors Bureau, which is preparing a brochure of the Little Rock area that will provide directions to sites of interest in Governor Clinton's life.


Second Chance


DEC. 6-12: American Financier; For Russian Science, A $100 Million Man
While Western governments continue to debate how best to help the former Soviet Union, the American financier George Soros last week just went ahead and did it.
His gift of $100 million, earmarked for fundamental scientific research, equals roughly a tenth of the United States Government's 1992 aid package for the region.


Recent Sales
Amityville  $165,000
203 Richmond Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 31-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, basement, 1-car garage; taxes $5,200.
Copiague  $97,000
33 34th Street  4-bedroom, 1-bath, 38-year- old Cape Cod; dining room, eat-in kitchen, basement, 1-car garage; taxes $2,800.
Lindenhurst  $155,000
201 Granada Parkway  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 38-year-old split level; dining room, eat-in kitchen, basement, 1-car attached garage; taxes $3,800.
Manhasset Hills  $305,000
319 Courthouse Road  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 35-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, Florida room; taxes $4,600.
New Hyde Park  $220,000
12 Spruce Street  4-bedroom, 1-bath, 49-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 1-car garage; taxes $3,500.
Westbury  $205,000
839 Jerome Court  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 21-year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, fireplace, finished basement, 2-car attached garage; taxes $6,100.
OTHER AREAS Peekskill, N.Y.  $157,000
727 Frost Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 82-year-old colonial; wraparound porch, dining room, living room, deck, 2-car garage; taxes $2,650.
Wilton, Conn.  $362,000
24 Salem Road  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 26-year-old ranch; new kitchen and deck, finished lower level, 1 acre; taxes $3,581.
Ridgewood, N.J.  $490,000
22 John Street  5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, new colonial; fireplace, deck, skylights; taxes $10,750.


Triple Threat High Note
To the Editor:
The chart accompanying the article about the 150th anniversary of the New York Philharmonic, "Some High Notes at the Philharmonic"  [ Nov. 29 ] , left out one important high note: the fact that in the 1926-27 season the three greatest conductors of that time, Wilhelm Furtwangler, Willem Mengelberg and Arturo Toscanini, shared the Philharmonic podium.


To Thaw Plumbing Pipes
FROZEN plumbing can be an unwelcomed winter surprise.
Water freezing inside pipes expands, often breaking joints where pipes meet and sometimes even rupturing the pipes.
Fortunately plumbing in most homes is situated away from unheated areas.
But pipes leading to outdoor faucets usually face risks, as do pipes that may have been incorrectly installed during remodeling or whose location leaves them unprotected.


The Threepenny Verdi
KURT WEILL
Composer in a Divided World.
By Ronald Taylor.
Illustrated. 358 pp.
Boston: Northeastern University Press. $29.95.


China Tour On Last Emperor
"The Last Emperor's Route" is the title of a tour of northern China that lasts for 12 days and costs $1,688 or, with an extension, for 19 days at $1,988.
Both prices, per person in double occupancy, include round-trip air fare from the West Coast to Beijing.
Departure is Jan. 31 and the tour company is HoliAsia Tours, in San Francisco, (800) 553-3533.
The title refers to Pu Yi, who became emperor in 1908 when he was 2 years old and was forced to abdicate four years later when the Qing dynasty collapsed.
He later served as emperor of the Japanese puppet state of Manchukuo in Manchuria.
Changchun in Manchuria, where Pu Yi lived for 14 years, and Shenyang, the first capital of the Qing dynasty in the 16th century, as well as Harbin (site of an ice sculpture festival) are on the itinerary.
In addition to air fare, prices for the escorted tour include all meals, hotels and air and land transportation in China, and local guides.


Calls to Restrict Immigration Come From Many Quarters
IN the last year, many politicians have sensed that the national mood -- frustration -- permitted the kind of complaints about immigrants that are traditionally considered un-American.
Senator Robert C. Byrd, for example, took to the Senate floor last June to offer some highly public trepidations about the changing face of America.
"I pick up the telephone and call the local garage," said Mr.
Byrd, a Democrat from West Virginia.
"I can't understand the person on the other side of the line. I'm not sure he can understand me. They're all over the place, and they don't speak English. Do we want more of this?"


Severe Storm Cripples New York Area


DEC. 6-12: Survey's Danger Signs; Sex and the Teen-Age Girl: More Partners, More Risks
For all the warnings about AIDS, American teen-agers are taking more sexual partners than ever -- and more risks for sexually transmitted diseases.
A study released last week revealed that 62 percent of sexually active girls aged 15 to 19 had had two or more sexual partners.
In a 1971 survey, 39 percent had had at least two partners.


Is It Art or Is It a Gift? (How About Both?)
Some nonprofit arts centers are unapologetic about going commercial for the holidays.
Exit Art/The First World, a 10-year-old SoHo exhibition space, opened a cafe and gift shop last week as permanent parts of its new 17,000-square-foot quarters at 548 Broadway, down the street from its old address.
"Museums have always done this," said Jeanette Ingberman, co-founder and co-director of Exit Art along with Papo Colo (both, below).
"We've put in a cash register and it's on the window that we accept Mastercard and Visa. We felt some people might walk in and think it's a show."


Officials Work to Ease Tensions in Indian City
Flanked by rifle-toting policemen, Ashok Priyadarshi, strode through dark lanes shuttered by fear, explaining that only a communication between Hindus and Muslims can restore lasting peace to India.
"We are still sitting on top of a volcano," said Mr.
Priyadarshi, a top official of this state capital, as he donned his riot helmet and strapped on a revolver.
"There has to be a dialogue between the two sides; these curfews and police presence are only temporary measures."


Yanks' New Strategy Has Tampa Imprint
The command somehow filtered down from George Steinbrenner last week, after Barry Bonds rejected the Yankees and signed with the San Francisco Giants.
Steinbrenner, according to people familiar with his thinking, was not thrilled when the Yankees failed to persuade Bonds to play in New York and thought a change in negotiating strategy was necessary.
So the still-banished owner contemplated asking baseball's executive council to allow him to help pursue free agents, a task that he accomplished with zeal when he controlled the Yankees.
But Steinbrenner had previously been told to abstain from baseball matters until his formal return March 1, so that idea was shelved.


The Grooves. The Box. Ribbon-Ready.
Boxed sets have become a holiday gift-giving staple.
Here are some new choices for this season.
Prices are suggested retail.
'The Complete Blue Note Recordings of Art Blakey's 1960 Jazz Messengers'  Mosaic (35 Melrose Place, Stamford, Conn. 06902); 6 CD's or 10 LP's ($90).


European Leaders Patch Up an Ideal
With a recession casting gloom over the talks, leaders of 12 European Community nations met in Edinburgh and reached some accords to salvage the drive toward political and economic unity.
One would allow Denmark, whose voters rejected a treaty on unity in June, to call another referendum.
But the vision of the community as a world power seems remote.
Article, page 26.


THE STORM'S HAVOC: Television; New TV Outlet Wearily Takes A Starring Role
The storm that has pummeled the New York metropolitan region has given New York 1 News, the nascent 24-hour cable station, its first chance to play a role similar to that of CNN during the Persian Gulf War -- albeit on a local scale.
In the station's chaotic newsroom at 460 West 42d Street in Manhattan, the mission was clear: churn the information.
Give viewers updates about the weather, the traffic and the subways so they can slog their way through the city.
Then update them again.


The Priest and the Runaways
BROKEN COVENANT
By Charles M. Sennott. Illustrated. 373 pp. New York: Simon &amp; Schuster.


Corrections
The Beauty column in The New York Times Magazine today is missing one line, at the beginning of the second full paragraph in the third column, referring to the use of alpha-hydroxy acids in cosmetics.
The sentence should read "Most mass-market cosmetics companies use 2 percent to 7 percent."


She Wanted to Be a Galaxy
PUSH COMES TO SHOVE
An Autobiography.
By Twyla Tharp.
Illustrated. 376 pp.
New York: Linda Grey/ Bantam Books. $24.50.


Corrections
The art listing in the Arts and Leisure Guide today misstates the address and the closing date for "Balanchine," an exhibition of photographs and memorabilia related to the choreographer.
The show will be in the main gallery of the New York Public Library for the Performing Arts at Lincoln Center from Thursday through May 15.


Holding Bonds To Earlier Words
To the Sports Editor:
Barry (Mr. November-December) Bonds's signing with the San Francisco Giants showed me he was primarily interested in cashing the biggest paycheck in baseball.
His earlier claim that he would sign only with a contending team committed to winning appears to be as weak as his bat in the playoffs.
CHARLES ALEXANDER Manchester Center, Vt.


THE STORM'S HAVOC: The Overview; On Heels of Rampaging Gales Come Snow and Floods
The region's worst storm in decades continued its assault on the New York metropolitan area yesterday with wide sweeps of wind-driven snow and renewed coastal flooding at high tides.
More than 154,000 homes and businesses remained without power across the region and the authorities attributed six deaths to the storm as hundreds of thousands of residents struggled to restore disrupted lives and began to survey damage that public officials said was likely to run into hundreds of millions of dollars.


Nets Put a Scare Into Bulls, But Jordan Counts for More
When Chicago Bulls forward Scottie Pippen dribbled the ball off his leg and out of bounds in the third quarter against the Nets tonight, it was a sign that the Bulls' heads weren't quite in the game.
Actually, it seemed as though their heads were in a fog bank.
They should thank Michael Jordan for proving to be too much for the Nets.
You have heard enough about how great Jordan is, so here are just tonight's vital statistics: 38 points, 6 rebounds, 3 assists.
Not his usual Herculean effort, but his intensity alone helped pick up the Bulls defensively.
If New Jersey controlled the game, Jordan and his teammates controlled the final six minutes as they put on a defensive show and won, 95-89, before a sellout crowd of 18,232 at Chicago Stadium.


MOST LIKELY TO SUCCEED
Alessandra Stanley's article "Most Likely to Succeed" (Nov. 22), about Frank Aller, Bill Clinton and, by extension, all of us in the Clinton generation, is a remarkable piece of writing -- not in the least because it recalls and feels like the life of the time it describes.
Ironically, "The Big Chill," in its script form,
focused
on a death very much like Aller's.
But Hollywood cut it, opting, instead, for a film about suitcases and the icons of avoidance we pack in them.


For Winning N.J. Schoolboy, Old Hill Was a Welcome Sight
Brendan Heffernan of New Jersey and Amanda White of Maryland, the Northeast regional title-holders, raced to convincing victories here today in the Kinney High School Cross-Country Championships.
Heffernan, a 17-year-old senior at North Hunterdon High School who placed 10th in 1991, captured the 5,000-meter (3.1-mile) race by 30 meters in 15 minutes 13.4 seconds.
On a challenging course at Balboa Park, Heffernan surged to the lead on a steep hill with a half-mile to go.
"That's where I fell apart last year," he recalled later.


'Drugs,' A Bitter, Satirical Expose
THE answer to the question, "What were the major influences on the latter half of the 20th century?" might very well be sex, drugs and rock-and-roll.
Instead of being an answer, however, "Sex, Drugs, Rock &amp; Roll" is the title of a bitter satire of contemporary life being presented at the Arena Players Repertory Theater in East Farmingdale through next Sunday.


THE STORM'S HAVOC: Transit; Failure of Two Outdated Generators Cited in Disruption of Subway's Safety Signals
The massive breakdown of New York City's subways during Friday's storm underscored an obscure Achilles' heel in the system: the reliance of about two-thirds of its safety signals on a rare and archaic type of electrical current.
Hundreds of safety signals on the IRT and BMT lines went dark Friday morning when flooding knocked out two Con Ed generators in Manhattan.
It was as if all the traffic signals in Times Square ceased to operate at the height of rush hour, a chaotic situation that forced Transit Authority officials to shut down most of the system.


Corrections
A listing of Caribbean resorts on Nov. 1 and a correction in this section on Nov. 15 misstated the daily winter rates for a double room at Caneel Bay on the island of St.
John.
They range from $320 to $570, without meals.


Brief Encounters


Schott Insults Women as Well
To the Sports Editor:
Not only is Marge Schott degrading blacks, Jews and the Japanese with her comments, but she's degrading women, too.


Petrenko Finds the Transition Slippery
As Viktor Petrenko spins on the ice, he is a vortex, a time traveler.
"Everything changes around me, it seems," Petrenko said.
"I am now skating in the pros. I am married this year. I represent the Ukraine. And figure skating is changing, too. This is a completely different life."


The Grooves. The Box. Ribbon-Ready.
Boxed sets have become a holiday gift-giving staple.
Here are some new choices for this season.
Prices are suggested retail.
'The Beat Generation' Word Beat/Rhino 70281; three CD's ($47.98) or cassettes ($39.98).


BENEIFTS
For Children in the Parks
MONDAY -- Children's programs in New York City parks run by the City Parks Foundation will benefit from a screening of the film "Into the West" at the Ziegfeld Theater, 141 West 54th Street.
The 6:30 P.M. show will be followed by a dinner party at the Museum of Natural History.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 360-1399.
To Build Independence
MONDAY -- With a goal of providing supervised efficiency apartments for gifted but emotionally troubled young people, Mothers for More Halfway Houses will hold a black-tie fund-raising dinner party at Sardi's, 234 West 44th Street.
Cocktails at 7 P.M.
Julie Wilson will sing.
Tickets, $500 or $300 for people 40 years of age and under, from (212) 288-6567. 'Nutty' Night; Serious Cause
MONDAY -- "A nutty selection of performers" is billed for a show at CB's 313 Gallery, 313 Bowery at Bleecker Street, starting at 7:30 P.M.
The performance and a party will benefit God's Love We Deliver, which provides hot meals for homebound people with AIDS.
Tickets, $12, at the door.
Information: (212) 262-9046.
Theater for Young Audiences
MONDAY -- Broadway Arts, a new professional theater company geared to works for young audiences, will present a program of original music with theatrical presentations at a cocktail party, 6 to 8 P.M., at 31 West 56th Street.
Suggested donations, $25, at the door.
Information: (212) 245-4680. 126 Years of Aid to Brooklyn
MONDAY -- The Brooklyn Bureau of Community Service, which has been providing a wide range of social services in Brooklyn since 1866, will celebrate its 126th anniversary with a dinner at the Sheraton New York Hotel and Towers.
Cocktails at 6:30 P.M.
Tickets, $500, from (718) 875-0710.
For Special Camps
TUESDAY -- The American-Italian Foundation for Cancer Research will hold a black-tie benefit at the Pierre for two summer camps for children with cancer: Camp Special Love in Winchester, Va., and the Hole in the Wall Gang Camp, founded by Paul Newman, in Ashford, Conn.
Mr.
Newman is the chairman of the benefit.
Cocktails at 6 P.M. will be followed by dinner, an auction of vacations and other events and items, and a dance.
Tickets, $400 or $150 for people 30 years of age and under, from (212) 628-9090.
Planned Parenthood Party
TUESDAY -- A jazz trio will perform at a preview of an auction of major antiquities and modern knickknacks at Sotheby's will benefit Planned Parenthood of New York City.
Cocktails, 6 to 8:30 P.M.
Tickets, $60, from (212) 274-7262.
For the Shakespeare Festival
TUESDAY -- The New York premiere of the movie "Hoffa" with Jack Nicholson, at the Ziegfeld Theater, 141 West 54th Street, and two parties afterward will benefit the New York Shakespeare Festival.
The movie at 7 P.M. will be followed at 9:30 P.M. by a cocktail buffet and dance at the Rainbow Room and by a dance party at Club USA, 218 West 47th Street.
Tickets, $275 for movie and Rainbow Room party or $75 for movie and Club USA party, from (212) 598-7162.
Kissinger Honored
TUESDAY -- United Cerebral Palsy of New York will honor Henry A. Kissinger at the organization's 38th annual Humanitarian Award Dinner at the New York Hilton Hotel.
Barbara Walters is the master of ceremonies; Katharine Graham will make the presentation.
Cocktails at 6:30.
Black tie.
Tickets, $750, from (212) 683-6700.
Medical Center Anniversary
TUESDAY -- The 60th anniversary of New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center will be celebrated at a black-tie benefit at the Waldorf-Astoria.
Cocktails at 7 P.M.
Tickets, $500, or $400 for physicians and $150 for people 35 years and under, from (212) 685-1095.
Visiting Nurses' Party
TUESDAY -- The Manhattan Committee of the Visiting Nurse Service will hold a cocktail party from 5:30 to 8:30 P.M. at the New York Yacht Club, 37 West 44th Street.
Tickets, $85, from (212) 794-9200, extension 4820.
Women of the Dance
TUESDAY -- Five leading dancers of the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater -- Sarita Allen, Marilyn Banks, Deborah Manning, Renee Robinson and Elizabeth Roxas -- will perform at the 7 P.M. premier of Donald Byrd's "Folk Dance" at the City Center and then be honored at a benefit afterward.
The black-tie supper buffet and dancing will be at the Broadway Grill, 49th Street at Broadway.
Tickets, $125, from (212) 767-0590, extension 321. 'Bubbe' Evening for Dorot
WEDNESDAY -- Dorot, an organization that provides food, housing and educational and social programs for the homeless or homebound elderly in New York, will benefit from the 8 P.M. performance of the one-woman show, "Bubbe Meises, Bubbe Stories" at the Cherry Lane Theater, 38 Commerce Street near Bleecker Street.
A champagne reception follows with the show's author/performer, Ellen Gould.
Tickets, $55, from (212) 769-2850. 'Messiah' Celebration
WEDNESDAY -- The Church of St.
Mary the Virgin, 145 West 46th Street, will mark the 250th anniversary of Handel's "Messiah" with a performance at the church to benefit three groups.
A 6 P.M. reception will precede the 7:30 P.M. concert.
Beneficiaries are Broadway Cares/Equity Fights AIDS, Graham-Windham Services to Families and Children, and the Women's Commission for Refugee Women and Children.
Tickets, $50 for reception and concert, $30 for concert only, from (212) 921-2939.
AMFAR at the Movies
WEDNESDAY -- The American Foundation for AIDS Research will benefit from a special showing of Richard Eyre's new film of Tennessee Williams's "Suddenly Last Summer" at Lincoln Center's Walter Reade Theater.
Screenings will be at 6:30 and 9 P.M.
Tickets, $75 for either screening and a cocktail party starting at 7:45, from (212) 682-7440.
Evening of Bach
THURSDAY -- Bach suites, cantatas and arias will be the fare at a concert by the Orchestra of St.
Luke's at Steinway Hall, 109 West 57th Street.
The evening, which starts with cocktails at 7:30 P.M. and ends with a champagne supper at 9 P.M., will benefit the children's free opera and dance program and other activities of the orchestra.
Tickets, $100, from (212) 840-7470.
Hanukkah Dinner
DEC. 20 -- Yeshiva University's 68th annual Hanukkah dinner and convocation, at the Waldorf-Astoria, will start with an academic convocation at 5:30 P.M.
Gen.
Colin L. Powell, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, will receive an honorary doctor of humane letters degree and deliver the keynote address.
The President of Israel, Chaim Herzog, will address guests at the dinner, which starts at 7 P.M.
Black tie.
Tickets for university benefit, $500, from (212) 960-0863.


MORE ON THE STORM
A Blow to the Wallet
Retailers and public officials lamented the storm's temporary effect on holiday sales and feared the costly, prolonged work needed to repair ravaged beaches and homes.
Page 49.
Transit's Fragile System
The breakdown of New York's subways during the storm underscored its reliance on a rare electric current to run many safety signals.
Page 55.


Music To Many Ears
To the Editor:
Having grown up in Brooklyn, I was delighted to read "A Museum Grows in Brooklyn (Painfully)"  [ Nov. 15 ] .
The article, however, made no mention of the progressive activities of the Brooklyn Museum's music department during the 1940's, 50's and 60's under the creative directorship of its musicologist, Dr.
David LeVita.
Public school children were regularly bused to a series of fascinating and imaginative children's concerts and lectures on ethnomusicology.
A children's chorus rehearsed and performed regularly.
For the general public, there were Sunday concerts with major artists performing in the museum's sculpture court; these programs were broadcast on WNYC radio.


Teams Open Wallets And Insert New Faces
A year ago, the Mets, the Cincinnati Reds and the Kansas City Royals were the most active off-season teams, the ones that made the most dramatic moves.
The results, however, did not match the expectations.
The Mets stumbled their way through the season and finished fifth, the Reds' injuries undermined their effort, and the Royals never recovered from 16 losses in their first 17 games.
The Mets, whose 1992 payroll was more impressive than their performance, decided to play a more reserved game this off season.
But the Reds and the Royals would not be deterred and once more are among the teams that have taken the most significant steps to try to improve their chances for the 1993 season.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Nov. 22 about facial disfigurement and reconstruction omitted the word "always." The sentence should have read, "Mrs. Leupold said that head and neck cancers did not always cause disfigurement."


We Need a Slimmer but Still Capable Air Force; Dangerous Isolation
To the Editor:
As a former attack helicopter pilot, I agree with "Who Needs Four Air Forces?" (editorial, Nov. 30).
Our Joint Chiefs learned the hard way the virtues of less separation and greater interservice coordination during the 1983 Grenada operation.
With radios that couldn't talk between the branches and naval fuel nozzles that didn't fit Army aircraft, it became apparent that the services had expanded in dangerous isolation from each other.


Jaruzelski Faces Accusers, or Is It Vice Versa?
Gen.
Wojciech Jaruzelski, the last Communist leader of Poland, sits impassively at the head of a long wooden table in Parliament.
Arrayed behind him are the balding and gray-haired Communists who, on Dec. 13, 1981, crushed the Solidarity movement with a show of force they called martial law.
It is a cathartic scene, one that 11 yeas ago could have been no more than a fantasy to Solidarity leaders: General Jaruzelski and his aides summoned to account for themselves by a democratically elected Parliament.


Compromiser Is Chosen To Run Commerce Dept.
Throughout his career, Ronald H. Brown has been known for many things but almost never for his ideology.
His successes have always featured his ability to submerge such feelings to forge compromises.
Although Mr.
Brown's resume includes work in the civil rights movement, his career has been largely within the rooms where powerful people make decisions rather than shouting at the establishment from outside.


Margaret S. Boll, Michael J. Blue
Mr. and Mrs.
Carleton H. Boll of Rumson, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Margaret Sanford Boll, to Michael James Blue, the son of Joanne Blue of Lake Worth, Fla., and James Blue of Deland, Fla.
A June wedding is planned.


The Grooves. The Box. Ribbon-Ready.
Boxed sets have become a holiday gift-giving staple.
Here are some new choices for this season.
Prices are suggested retail.
'Jefferson Airplane Loves You' RCA 61110; three CD's ($43) or cassettes ($29).


Chelsea's School: Public or Private?
This city, which hasn't seen a First Child since the freckled-faced Amy Carter, is about to get a new kid on the 1600 block of Pennsylvania Avenue.
The impending arrival of Chelsea Clinton has set off a buzz of speculation about where she will go to school, either for the remainder of this school year or at the beginning of the next.
In the process it has renewed a long-simmering debate over the merits of public versus private education.


Commercial Property: Concierges; The Concierge Comes to Office Buildings
ONE recent morning, Bernadette Hakin, the office manager for Trebol International Corporation, walked into her office in the Seagram Building to a rather daunting sight: a pair of six-foot skis, with a note asking her to send them to her boss's son in Colorado.
Sounds easy -- except how do you wrap skis, is the post office the cheapest way to get them there, do they need insurance, do they . . . ?
Ms.
Hakin had no idea.
So she made one call, to Penny Wallberg, the building's full-time concierge.
Ms.
Wallberg, in turn, made many calls.
Result: The skis went out Federal Express two-day economy service, which Ms.
Wallberg decided was the cheapest and safest way to get them there.


Heather Miller, N. A. Picchione
Heather Elise Miller, a daughter of Philip B. Miller of Katonah, N.Y., and Rita C. Downey of Roxbury, N.Y., was married yesterday to Nicholas Antonio Picchione, a son of Frank L. Picchione of Wilton, Conn., and Irene J. Picchione of Miami Beach.
The Rev.
John Kauta, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at St.
Patrick's Church in Bedford, N.Y.
Mrs.
Picchione, 26 years old, is an account executive at Kevin Krier &amp; Associates, a public relations agency in New York.
Her father is the vice chairman and chief financial officer of Saks Fifth Avenue in New York.
She is also a stepdaughter of Anne Miller of Katonah and Robert Downey of Roxbury.


Settlement Ends Federal Control of Texas Prisons
A Federal judge on Friday ended more than 20 years of legal battles over living conditions in Texas prisons, approving a settlement between the state and inmates in an epic lawsuit that brought sweeping changes to one of the nation's largest penal systems.
In approving the settlement, Judge William Wayne Justice of Federal District Court in Tyler ceded control of the Texas prison system and its nearly 50,000 inmates back to the state for the first time since 1980.


IN SHORT: FICTION
SABINE'S NOTEBOOK In Which the Extraordinary Correspondence of Griffin &amp; Sabine Continues.
By Nick Bantock.
Chronicle, $17.95.
In the first volume, Sabine, imagined by Griffin as his muse, is a Solomon Islander who can visualize Griffin's artwork as he draws in London.
She is also an artist.
In the new book, Griffin travels through Europe and the Mediterranean, dropping letters to Sabine, while she stays in his London flat.
The striking artwork on their postcards and letters, some of which have to be pulled from envelopes pasted into the book, are the strength of this otherwise self-conscious narrative.
Their correspondence tends toward the romantic, yet ultimately they're like other couples: Griffin can't make a commitment and Sabine is a candidate for a "Women Who Love Too Much" meeting.
Does the reader care about them?
Yes, but one wishes they would just stop writing and hop into the sack.


Battle Lines Drawn For Major Struggle Over Rent Control
"RENT control is like a drug," said Jim Whelan, Atlantic City's Mayor.
"Once you're on it, it's very difficult to get off it."
In the two decades since New Jersey's municipalities began enacting rent-control ordinances in large numbers, local officials have become increasingly disenchanted with the laws that limit rent increases.
They say that rent control, which exists in 119 communities, has shifted an increasing share of the tax burden onto residential and commercial property owners and led to the deterioration of rental housing in many areas.


Larry Frankini and Gita Khilnani
Dr.
Gita Monica Khilnani, the daughter of Lia D. Khilnani of Scarsdale, N.Y., and the late Dr.
Mansho T. Khilnani, was married yesterday to Dr.
Larry Andrew Frankini, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Oronzo P. Frankini of Flushing, Queens.
Msgr.
Lawrence McAllister performed the ceremony at St.
Andrew Avellino Roman Catholic Church in Flushing.
Dr.
Khilnani, who is keeping her name, is a first-year resident in radiology at Mount Sinai Hospital in New York.
She graduated from Tufts University and received a master's degree in biology from Hunter College.
She and her husband received their M.D. degrees from Mount Sinai School of Medicine.
Her father was a clinical professor of radiology at the Mount Sinai Medical Center and Lenox Hill Hospital, both in New York.


A Village Proposed for a Pastoral Island
The completion of the Mark Clark Expressway last June linking the pastoral Daniel Island with downtown Charleston just minutes away across the Cooper River has paved the way for a proposal to build a village over the next three decades to support as many as 17,000 residents.
Daniel Island is now home to two caretakers, deer, pigs, cattle and birds.


Juggling Jobs and the Deficit: Executives Doubtful
Many of America's senior executives say job creation is the Government's most important immediate task and the budget deficit the nation's most important economic problem.
But foreshadowing what is almost certain to be a major economic conflict of Bill Clinton's Presidency, the executives say that the President-elect will not be able to address those two concerns simultaneously.
Those views, on the eve of Mr.
Clinton's economic summit in Little Rock, Ark., this week, surfaced in a New York Times/CBS News poll of 499 senior executives in early December and in follow-up interviews with a dozen of them.
Both the poll results and the interviews revealed some enthusiasm for the new President.
While 53 percent of the executives voted for George Bush, a whopping 71 percent said the President had not displayed as much concern for the economy as Clinton had during the campaign.
And 81 percent said the Clinton election has increased consumer confidence and spending.


IN SHORT: FICTION
SABINE'S NOTEBOOK In Which the Extraordinary Correspondence of Griffin &amp; Sabine Continues.
By Nick Bantock.
Chronicle, $17.95.
In the first volume, Sabine, imagined by Griffin as his muse, is a Solomon Islander who can visualize Griffin's artwork as he draws in London.
She is also an artist.
In the new book, Griffin travels through Europe and the Mediterranean, dropping letters to Sabine, while she stays in his London flat.
The striking artwork on their postcards and letters, some of which have to be pulled from envelopes pasted into the book, are the strength of this otherwise self-conscious narrative.
Their correspondence tends toward the romantic, yet ultimately they're like other couples: Griffin can't make a commitment and Sabine is a candidate for a "Women Who Love Too Much" meeting.
Does the reader care about them?
Yes, but one wishes they would just stop writing and hop into the sack.


William Peterson, 98, A Legislator, Is Dead
William R. Peterson, a retired businessman, Connecticut legislator and civic leader, died on Friday in a nursing home in Portland, Conn.
He was 98 and had lived on a farm in Portland.
He died in his sleep, his family said.


World Markets; The Britain-First Cure Is Working
WHEN it abandoned the heart of its economic strategy in September and allowed the pound to float in value outside the European system of semi-fixed exchange rates, the British Government said it was adopting a new policy tailored for the needs of Britain, not of a unified Europe.
The new approach, which has consisted primarily of slashing interest rates and paying little attention to the tumble in the pound's value, has not yet lifted the nation out of its three-year recession.
But, by reducing the costs of borrowing, it seems to have given a kick to the economy, and it has been an undeniable winner on the London stock exchange, where share prices rose to their all-time highs at the beginning of this month.


Francisco Gonzalez-Abreu, Ms. Oller
Denisse Marie Oller, a news anchor, was married yesterday to Francisco Gonzalez-Abreu, an art director.
Dr.
Antonio Alonso, a lawyer, officiated at the Biltmore Hotel in Coral Gables, Fla.
Ms.
Oller, who is keeping her name, and her husband both work for Univision-Channel 41, the Spanish language channel in Secaucus, N.J.
She graduated summa cum laude from Hunter College.
She won an Emmy award for best single newscast in 1991.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Rafael Oller of San Juan, P.R.
Her father, now retired, was a lawyer there.


Public &amp; Private; 21 Going on 6
None of it makes sense without subtraction.
If you sit in the courtroom and watch the star witness in the Glen Ridge sex assault case and assess her body language, her affect, her testimony in light of her chronological age of 21 years, it is all strange.
The nose-wrinkling grimaces, the ingenuous answers, the singsongy voice -- it does not parse.


Train Hazards
To the Editor: I was recently traveling in Eastern Europe with a group of friends and feel obligated to report on an incident so that others may avoid the problem.
Before boarding an overnight train from Prague to Budapest, a guide had warned us about being robbed.
I assumed he was referring to passengers sitting up all night in second-class cars, not to those of us traveling behind the locked and chained doors of first-class compartments.


Man in Beating to Sue Hasidim, Sharpton Says
After making repeated calls for a special prosecutor in the case of a black man beaten by Hasidim in Crown Heights, the Rev.
Al Sharpton yesterday announced what he described as a "new legal strategy," a civil suit against the Hasidim.
Mr.
Sharpton said a $25 million suit, to be filed early this week, is intended to help lawyers for Ralph Nimmons, the man at the center of the case, gather evidence to present to a grand jury.


John R. Connolly, 53, Charity Fund-Raiser
John R. Connolly, a professional fund-raiser for charitable causes and educational institutions, died on Friday at Tisch Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 53 and lived in Manhattan.
He died of complications of AIDS, said his companion, Richard Clausen.


Marines and Somalis: 2 Worlds Meet
Lance Cpl.
Marion Ford had barely walked out of the port gate when he was engulfed in a crowd of smiling Somali men reaching out to touch him and speaking excitedly at him in a language he did not understand.
While some Marines are discovering a Somalia very different from their expectations, Corporal Ford, after four days in Mogadishu, was getting used to being marveled at.
He is black.


Torie Clarke, Brian Graham
Victoria Clarke, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Charles E. Clarke of Sewickley, Pa., was married yesterday to J. Brian Graham, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
F.
William Graham of Channel Islands, Calif.
The Rev.
John Malone officiated at Holy Trinity Roman Catholic Church in Washington.
The bride, who is 33 years old, is known as Torie.
Until recently, she was the press secretary for the Bush-Quayle '92 National Campaign.
She graduated from George Washington University.


Serial Killers Claim Movies As Their Prey
THEY EMERGED FROM the shadows to tap into our deepest fears and nightmares.
Monsters of the New Age, they are immune to deterrents like garlic, wolfbane, crucifixes, silver bullets and sharpened stakes.
Their relentless horror is real, and without apparent motive.
Meet the serial killer -- popular culture's villain of the 1990's.
No matter that experts on such matters maintain that the average American stands a better chance of being hit by lightning than by a serial killer.
They seem to be everywhere -- books, comic strips, television, even trading cards.
And after the success of "The Silence of the Lambs" and "Basic Instinct" -- two recent films that cashed in on serial murder plots -- a big-screen onslaught is on the way.


Q and A
Air Deals in London
Q.
I understand London is a good place to buy low-cost airline tickets to points in Asia and Africa.
How does this work?
What kind of savings are available? -- Henry P. Scarupa, Columbia, Md.


Chelsea Strikes Back at Influx of Pornographic Video Stores
When a new adult video store put up its Welcome sign a few weeks ago on the corner of 22d Street and Seventh Avenue, amid sedate brownstone residences and near a public school, community reaction was swift and angry.
In the last few months, seven new pornographic video stores have appeared in Chelsea -- three opened by one owner -- making a total of 10 and angering residents and tradespeople, who fear their neighborhood will become "42d Street South."


The Grooves. The Box. Ribbon-Ready.
Boxed sets have become a holiday gift-giving staple.
Here are some new choices for this season.
Prices are suggested retail.
Bob Marley: 'Songs of Freedom' Tuff Gong/Island 314-512 280; four CD's ($49.98) or cassettes ($35.98).


Foreign Affairs; Never Again
The day will soon come when two groups of leaders are charged with crimes against humanity in Bosnia: the Serbs who are killing Muslims and driving them from their homes, and the Western leaders who are doing little to stop this unspeakable brutality.
The Serbian policy of "ethnic cleansing" is worse than a crime; it is evil.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: December 13, 1992
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
6
HIDEAWAY, by Dean Koontz. (Berkley, $5.99.) A man miraculously resuscitated after he has technically died is haunted by visions of evil.
2 *
7
A RIVER RUNS THROUGH IT, by Norman Maclean. (Pocket, $4.99.) Three tales of the outdoors in western Montana.
3
3
ANGEL, by Johanna Lindsey. (Avon, $5.99.) A young woman enjoys a torrid romance while visiting a Texas ranch in the late 19th century.
4
46
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
5 *
4
THE DOOMSDAY CONSPIRACY, by Sidney Sheldon. (Warner, $5.99.) An American probes a mysterious balloon accident in the Alps.
6
35
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) Racial tensions surface during the trial of a man charged with murder in rural Mississippi.
7
1
THE WASTE LANDS, by Stephen King. (Signet, $6.99.) The third volume of "The Dark Tower," a series about time travel and a heroic quest.
8
8
MIDNIGHT WHISPERS, by V. C. Andrews. (Pocket, $5.99.) The travails of Christie Longchamp, haunted by her relatives' passions.
9
2
DRACULA, by Bram Stoker. (Signet, $3.99.) The 1897 novel about the exploits of a vampire-count.
10
6
A RIVER RUNS THROUGH IT, by Norman Maclean. (University of Chicago, $9.95.) Three tales of the outdoors in western Montana.
11 *
3
ALL THE WEYRS OF PERN, by Anne McCaffrey. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $5.99.) The 11th volume in the science fiction series "The Dragonriders of Pern."
12
12
A THOUSAND ACRES, by Jane Smiley. (Fawcett, $12.) The fortunes of a family that operates a large industrialized farm in the Midwest.
13
4
RECKLESS, by Amanda Quick. (Bantam, $5.99.) A Sussex maiden in distress finds help and romance during a midnight encounter.
14
10
SCARLETT, by Alexandra Ripley. (Warner, $6.99.) The sequel to Margaret Mitchell's "Gone With the Wind."
15 *
1
SUCH DEVOTED SISTERS, by Eileen Goudge. (Signet, $5.99.) The rivalry of two sisters -- one a successful businesswoman, the other a noted illustrator -- for the love of the same man.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
17
THE AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF MALCOLM X, with the assistance of Alex Haley. (Ballantine, $5.99.) The life story of the black leader, originally published in 1965.
2
475
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist. (LP)
3
3
DIANA: Her True Story, by Andrew Morton. (Pocket, $5.99.) An updated biography of the Princess of Wales.
4
9
BACKLASH, by Susan Faludi. (Anchor/ Doubleday, $12.50.) A journalist contends that the media and political groups are staging a war against women's rights.
5
6
MOLLY IVINS CAN'T SAY THAT, CAN SHE? by Molly Ivins. (Vintage, $11.) Essays about the recent political and cultural scene.
6 *
6
WHEN YOU LOOK LIKE YOUR PASSPORT PHOTO, IT'S TIME TO GO HOME, by Erma Bombeck. (Harper Paperbacks, $5.99.) The tribulations of travel suffered in all parts of the world.
7
15
UNITED WE STAND, by Ross Perot. (Hyperion, $4.95.) The Texas billionaire's suggestions for "rebuilding America."
8
82
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
9
10
PUTTING PEOPLE FIRST, by Bill Clinton and Al Gore. (Times Books/Random House, $7.99.) The next Administration's program for "changing America."
10
7
SEX, ART, AND AMERICAN CULTURE, by Camille Paglia. (Vintage, $13.) Twenty-one essays on contemporary subjects, ranging from Madonna to Anita Hill to date rape.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
12
THE INDISPENSABLE CALVIN AND HOBBES, by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) A collection of previously published cartoons.
2
70
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
3
5
COWS OF OUR PLANET, by Gary Larson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $8.95.) A new collection of "Far Side" cartoons.
4
99
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles for success.
5
1
THE WORLD ALMANAC AND BOOK OF FACTS 1993. (World Almanac/Pharos, $7.95.) The latest edition of a standard reference work.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


Russia's Parliament Hesitates Between Law and Power
THE upheavals around the Russian Congress of Peoples' Deputies last week reopened a painful question that seems to hover over all of Russia's turbulent history: is this a nation capable of democracy or reform?
Neither has an encouraging track record.
The fitful attempt at democracy after the collapse of the Romanov dynasty in 1917 only produced a far more lethal dictatorship.
The various attempts at economic reform -- the freeing of the serfs under the edict of 1861, the Stolypin land reforms of 1906, Lenin's "New Economic Policy" in the 1920's -- all foundered when the ruling regimes sensed a threat to their power.
Mikhail S. Gorbachev broke down the walls of Communism only to be swept away by the ensuing chaos.


Guatemala
To The Editor: As a North American raised and still living in Antigua, Guatemala, and as an avid reader of The Times, I was outraged by your spread on Guatemala ("Guatemala's 16th-Century Capital," Nov. 22.
Just last month the Guatemalan Quiche-Mayan woman Rigoberta Menchu became this year's recipient of the Nobel Peace Prize.
Rigoberta Menchu has worked hard to bring to light the genocide of the Mayan communities in Guatemala, where in the last 30 years over 100,000 Mayans have been killed, and over 40,000 have disappeared.


POSTINGS: A Home of Their Own; Neo-Classic Synagogue For a Historic District
Accustomed to modern synagogues that are starkly abstract, New Yorkers may do a double take when they see the recently drafted plans for the new Congregation Beit Yaakov synagogue at 11-13 East 63d Street.
Its lavishly neo-classical facade, built of a creamy gray French limestone, would have four Corinthian columns, about 20 feet high, supporting a full entablature and framed by rusticated walls.
Beit Yaakov, a Sephardic congregation, now worships in the Fifth Avenue Synagogue, 5 East 62d Street.
"They've been sharing space and now they want their own building," explained Caroline Kane, a staff preservationist at the Landmarks Preservation Commission, which approved the project last month.
She said the congregation hoped to begin the work immediately. (Telephone messages left for the congregation's president were not returned.)


'Magic World of the Illustrated Book'
WILLIAM DANE has done it again.
The keeper of special collections at the Newark Public Library has mounted yet another show that comes on unassuming -- prints on the walls of the building's inner court, books in glass cases -- the better to entrap its viewers.
This one, "The Magic World of the Illustrated Book," can eat up an entire afternoon.
In the accompanying brochure, Mr.
Dane modestly disclaims any attempt at inclusiveness.
Yet he has already dropped names like William Morris and Kate Greenaway and, in his essay and the show's labels, goes on to drop many more, along with arresting quotes and observations.


Yes, 'Philatelic' Lover, There Is a Real World
THERE is an continuing debate among hobbyists about the validity, so called, of purely "philatelic" items.
These are stamps or cancellations created only to attract collectors, as opposed to "real" postal history items, which reflect the use of stamps or cancellations in the routine operations of a post office.
The most common "philatelic" items by far are the envelopes, usually illustrated, to which new stamps are affixed and then canceled "First Day of Issue." The envelopes seldom pass through normal postal channels, but are processed and delivered to collectors in special packages.


When Using Pears, Plan Ahead
PEARS are among the more reliable of fruits to select for cooking and baking.
But because pears are best picked when they are still hard and allowed to become fully ripe off the tree, using them takes planning.
When pears figure in the menu, shopping for them is best done two or three days in advance to avoid a futile search for ripe ones in the market and to allow very firm specimens time to ripen at home.
This strategy also prevents buying pears that have become shopworn, battered and bruised on their way to ripening in the store.


Corrections
An article and a picture caption on Nov. 29 about the Marin Headlands, in Marin County, Calif., referred incorrectly to a local artist.
She is Robin Lasser.


Wearing Fur, Walking Fur
Well-dressed and groomed dogs accompanied by stylishly dressed owners added panache to the Madison Avenue Christmas for Children Fund promenade last Sunday.
From 62d to 72d streets, Madison Avenue was closed to vehicular traffic, and 112 stores donated 20 percent of their proceeds that day to five charities that help needy children.


Orlando's Success Raises Questions
THE Fall National Championships of the American Contract Bridge League, which ended two weeks ago in Orlando, Fla., proved to be the biggest in the 64-year history of the tournament.
In 10 days, there were 14,980 tables in play, beating the record set in Anaheim, Calif., five years earlier by 1,032 tables.
This is remarkable, because Anaheim could draw players from a much larger major metropolitan area than Orlando could.
It is clear that Disney World and other area attractions were a magnet for players who did not wish to spend every minute at the card tables.
The availability of cheap off-season room rates was probably also a consideration.


Spit and Images
BASEBALL has come a long way since the days when Ted Williams puffed Chesterfields for pleasure and for profit, but not far enough, according to Surgeon General Antonia C. Novello.
Although major leaguers may no longer endorse tobacco products, and clubhouses are no longer smoke-filled (although some players do smoke), many major leaguers chew or dip tobacco.
That, Dr.
Novello says, not only subjects them to a high risk of developing cancer of the mouth, but also creates a far wider health problem.


GARDENING
THERE is a word in the plant kingdom that gardeners will have to learn.
It is "dioecious," a word rooted in Greek which means two households.
For a gardener, the term means that two will have to be planted, that is, a male plant and a female plant since the male and female flowers are borne by different plants.
For the majority of plants grown in the garden there is no need to worry about this pairing.
Most of the plants have what are called perfect flowers, that is, male and female parts in the same flower.
But there are exceptions, and when the plant kingdom comes up with one of these glitches, unless there are two there will be no fruit.


Corrections
An answer in the Q &amp; A column on Nov. 22 about cruising along the coast of Asia Minor included outdated phone and fax numbers for Club Voyages.
The telephone number is (908) 291-8228; the fax is (908) 291-4277.


Better Protection Asked In Rabies Epidemic
The Nov. 8 article regarding the rabies epidemic (New Jersey Q &amp; A, "Leading the State's Fight Against Rabies") highlighted the problems facing veterinarians, physicians and the public at large.
Unfortunately, in New Jersey the public is not adequately protected from the threat of this disease.


'Sophisticated Ladies' At Downtown Cabaret
AUDIENCES at the Downtown Cabaret Theater can still arrive with fried chicken and chips in picnic hampers but on stage these nights the bill of fare is caviar.
That's because the setting is Duke's Place and the show is a streamlined smorgasbord of Mr.
Ellington's luxurious music.
Of course, the show is "Sophisticated Ladies," which was once conceived as a book musical.
After all sorts of tryout travails, the story was scrapped and the songs took over.
A revue with a concept -- the concept was class -- emerged as a 1981 Broadway hit.


For Withdrawn Youth, Fresh Air, Fresh Life
When Brennan Page was 10 years old, his grandfather died of a heart attack.
Brennan, who lived with his grandparents, no longer had anyone to take him to stores or to cook him special meals of hamburgers and french fries.
His best friend -- and his only male role model -- was gone.
Lonely and distraught, Brennan at one time considered suicide.
He didn't, but he did build a wall around himself for six years that even his mother could not breach.


Talking: Tax Planning; Taking Advantage Of the Law
AT the close of the calendar year, along with partying and Santa Claus, comes the need for tax planning.
For anyone who owns a home this means finding out about the tax deductions that might be available for use on the 1992 income tax return and doing something about those items that may need attention before year-end.
These can differ from year to year, as much as a result of changing personal circumstances as of alterations in the tax code.
For one, "We've had a lot more people who became landlords for the first time because they couldn't sell," said Timothy Morse, a tax manager for KPMG Peat Marwick, the national accounting firm.
And that change alone makes a dramatic difference in the tax status of property.


Uproar Greets Indian Pact in Arizona
For the last three weeks, residents of this mountain town have been seething over a Federal proposal to transfer 500,000 acres of public and private land to the Hopi Indian Tribe as part of a deal to settle a 110-year-old land dispute with neighboring Navajo Indians.
Last week 700 people, including some Navajos and Hopis, gathered at Northern Arizona University to express their outrage, not only with the plan but with the Federal court-sanctioned secrecy that surrounded 17 months of negotiations.


BENTSEN IS FACING BIG CUT IN SALARY
The choice of Senator Lloyd Bentsen to be Secretary of the Treasury will cut the budget deficit.
A little.
An obscure Constitutional provision prohibits members of Congress from taking Federal jobs in which the pay has been increased during their elected term.
But like other appointees in the past, Mr.
Bentsen will be able to get around the rule by taking his new post at the salary it paid when he began his current six-year term in the Senate, $99,500 a year.


Newly Selected Chief of Staff Is Widely Known for Loyalty
Almost everyone, it seems, who has ever known Thomas F. McLarty 3d says the same thing about him.
"Just a real nice boy who grew up into a real nice young man," said Dorothy Moore, a grade-school teacher in Hope, the Arkansas town where Mack McLarty, as his friends call him, was born two months before Bill Clinton.


Finding Better Ways To Fight Hunger
Through the years, the number of people the government is forced to feed has rapidly increased.
The Oct. 25 article "Safety Net for the Hungry Is Collapsing" was filled with facts and figures about how many people are starving and why welfare is not helping.
But what is the government doing wrong, and how we can change this flawed system?


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
HANG TIME Days and Dreams With Michael Jordan. By Bob Greene. Doubleday, $22.50.


'The Change'
To the Editor:
Germaine Greer should remember that middle-aged "invisibility" cuts both ways.
Slick young chicks out in public hoping to meet somebody new look right past the balding, flabby older man.
And by her own admission, Ms.
Greer has "always been principally interested in men for sex." Does she focus on looks or inner qualities?
Maybe both sexes would be better off looking at each other as people, not "marketable commodities" or age specimens or targets to hit on.
But when has humanity ever shown that much empathy?
MARCIA SPIRES New York


Corrections
A review of "East of the Sun: The Epic Conquest and Tragic History of Siberia" on Nov. 15 misstated the first name of its author.
His name, which was rendered correctly in the brief listing that preceded the review, is Benson Bobrick.


Rights Report Faults Officials in Ethnic Strife
The upsurge in ethnic violence since the collapse of the Soviet Union stems as much from deliberate governmental policies as it does from age-old racial, religious and national antagonism, Human Rights Watch said this week in its annual report.
In releasing its 424-page report on human rights violations in 53 countries, the group urged that Clinton Administration develop a consistent policy of condemning rights violations committed by either allies or foes.


Savage Intolerance; Fundamentalism In South Asia Isn't All Islam
THE cry on the lips of the fanatical Hindus who stormed and destroyed an obscure mosque in the northern Indian town of Ayodhya was deafening and terse: "Jai Sri Ram!" ("Hail Lord Ram!").
The cry on the lips of the mujahadeen who roared into Kabul last spring was also terse: "Allahu Akbar!" ("God Is Great!").


Spies &amp; Thrillers
Charlie Muffin, that seedy fellow, is back.
He may be a slob, but there is nobody smarter, more experienced or more resourceful in the British Secret Service, as he powerfully demonstrates once again in Brian Freemantle's COMRADE CHARLIE (Thomas Dunne/St. Martin's, $22.95).
Muffin has been relegated to a desk job by his superior, a twit who hates him and would love to see him demoted to dogcatcher.
Charlie wears mismatched socks, baggy clothing that may or may not have been cleaned since D-day, shoes that seem to have come from a garbage dump and a face that as often as not needs a shave.
He is definitely not a role model for the British upper classes.


The Chancellor's Answer
Excerpts from the proposed revisions of the New York City teachers' guide, "Children of the Rainbow."


GARDENING
THERE is a word in the plant kingdom that gardeners will have to learn.
It is "dioecious," a word rooted in Greek which means two households.
For a gardener, the term means that two will have to be planted, that is, a male plant and a female plant since the male and female flowers are borne by different plants.
For the majority of plants grown in the garden there is no need to worry about this pairing.
Most of the plants have what are called perfect flowers, that is, male and female parts in the same flower.
But there are exceptions, and when the plant kingdom comes up with one of these glitches, unless there are two there will be no fruit.


THE STORM'S HAVOC: Scenes; Drenched and Stunned on New York's Shore
John and Maria O'Gara and their two daughters waited out the storm in an upstairs bedroom as floodwaters rose and rose in the living room of their tiny bungalow on Broad Channel, Queens, the island community in Jamaica Bay.
When they came down yesterday morning, they had lost everything in three feet of murky water.
Debris littered the place, the heater and just about everything else did not work, the soil beneath the bungalow's foundation had washed away.
Then high tide crept perilously close again, and Mrs.
O'Gara and the children left for the Red Cross shelter that opened in the American Legion Hall on the island.
Mr.
O'Gara stayed behind, though, as his home flooded for the third time in two days, until finally police officers in a dinghy picked him up and carried him away.


'Messiah' at Carnegie Hall
The Masterwork Chorus and Orchestra, under the direction of David Randolph, will perform Handel's "Messiah" at Carnegie Hall today at 2:30 P.M.
The performance is to feature the soloists Louise Wohlafka, soprano; Grayson Hirst, tenor, and Kevin Deas, bass.
This is to be the last season in which Mr.
Randolph conducts the chorus's performance of "Messiah." Over the last 37 years, he has conducted it 159 times, a fact appearing in the Guinness Book of Records.
His final performance will be on Dec. 27 at Carnegie Hall.
Tickets are $13.50 to $60.
Information: (212) 247-7800.


Wings of Time


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
GRANDMA'S LATKES
By Malka Drucker.
Illustrated by Eve Chwast.
Unpaged.
San Diego: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. $13.95.
Ages 4 to 8.
ELIJAH'S ANGEL
A Story for Chanukah and Christmas.
By Michael J. Rosen.
Illustrated by Aminah Brenda Lynn Robinson.
Unpaged.
San Diego: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. $13.95.
All ages.
IN THE MONTH OF KISLEV
A Story for Hanukkah.
By Nina Jaffe.
Illustrated by Louise August. 32 pp.
New York: Viking. $15.
Ages 3 to 8.
THE GLASS MENORAH
And Other Stories for Jewish Holidays.
By Maida Silverman.
Illustrated by Marge Levine. 64 pp.
New York: Four Winds Press. $14.95.
Ages 6 to 9.


Roger Nettler and Michelle Duke
Michelle Helene Duke, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jack F. Duke of Forest Hills, Queens, was married last evening to Roger Lawrence Nettler, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul T. Nettler of Greenvale, L.I.
Rabbi Aaron M. Petuchowski performed the ceremony at Temple Sinai in Roslyn Heights, L.I.
Mrs.
Nettler, 26 years old, is the assistant to the director of community fund-raising at the American Cancer Society in New York.
She graduated from Queens College in Flushing, Queens.
Her father is a financial consultant in New York.
The bride's stepgrandfather is John Rewald, the art historian, of New York.


The Wright Stuff
FRANK LLOYD WRIGHT: COLLECTED WRITINGS
Volume One: 1894-1930.
Edited by Bruce Brooks Pfeiffer.
Illustrated. 352 pp.
New York: Rizzoli.
Cloth, $60; paper, $40.
Volume Two: 1930-1932.
Edited by Bruce Brooks Pfeiffer.
Illustrated. 384 pp.
New York: Rizzoli.
Cloth, $60; paper, $40.
THE WRIGHT STYLE
By Carla Lind.
Illustrated. 224 pp.
New York:  An Archetype Press Book/ Simon &amp; Schuster. $50.
FRANK LLOYD WRIGHT
By Meryle Secrest. Illustrated. 634 pp. New York:  Alfred A. Knopf. $30.


But Who'll Disarm the Thugs?
Americans take quiet pride in the army they have sent to help relieve Somalia's agony.
But as Operation Restore Hope rolls on, a nagging doubt arises.
After years of chaotic civil strife, Somalia is awash in guns and gunslingers.
What's the sense of temporarily keeping the peace, so starving Somalis can be fed, if the thugs who prey on them keep their arms?
The underlying question is scarcely limited to Somalia.
In other far corners of the world, even after civil wars have ended, zealots cling to their weapons, imperiling civilians, outside peacekeepers and peace.
Defiant belligerents mock overstretched U.N. monitors in Bosnia, Cambodia and Angola.
The Security Council even now debates sending 8,000 more troops to supervise a cease-fire and elections in Mozambique.


Radio Host Tries to Close a Generational Gap
PEOPLE older than 50 now make up about 25 percent of the population of the United States, and those over 65 now outnumber teen-agers for the first time in American history.
Carole Bobruff cites these statistics as she urges people to look harder at both the power and the needs of older Americans.
She says it is time to forget myths, recognize markets, tap skills and stop ignoring problems.
Since 1990, Ms.
Bobruff has been the producer and host of "Senior Focus," a twice-weekly hourlong talk show, aimed at those 50 and older, on radio station WSUB in Groton.
For the show, which she said was the only one of its kind in Connecticut, she writes scripts, schedules guests, takes calls from listeners, solicits advertising and operates the equipment.
Recent guests have included a lawyer discussing tax laws and asset protection, pharmacists talking about drugs, and a lawmaker who urged area agencies for the elderly to work together.


Philadelphia Journal; Hospital Helps Itself by Helping Poor
Four years ago, when the national shortage of nurses was nearly at its low point, the Presbyterian Medical Center of Philadelphia closed its School of Nursing.
The school that had trained registered nurses for a century no longer attracted enough qualified applicants, in part because nursing students, mostly from middle-class families, did not want to study or work at an inner city hospital.


Corrections
A listing on Nov. 22 with an article about Antigua, Guatemala, misstated the telephone number of a language school at Proyecto Linguistico Francisco Marroquin.
Dialed from the United States, the number is (011-502-9) 320 406.


Profile/William Amherst Vanderbilt Cecil; Opening His Door to 700,000 Visitors
WILLIAM AMHERST VANDERBILT CECIL owns the largest house in the nation, more than three times the size of the White House, with a yard more than nine times the size of Central Park.
Problem is, the place is too small.


Corrections
A report in the Westchester Guide column last Sunday about events at the John Jay Homestead Historic Site in Katonah misstated the date of concerts by the Bedford Bell Ringers.
They will be next Sunday, not Saturday, at 2 and 4 P.M.


Packing
To the Editor: I was amused by Robert Eisner's "Packing by the Book" (Oct. 18).
I myself have never learned to pack light, although I never stop dreaming of baggage-free traveling.
Frankly, each time I travel I want to bring my home along with me -- and I very nearly do -- but I necessarily pay the price for dragging such niceties of comfort and of preparations for the unexpected.


MOST LIKELY TO SUCCEED
No offense to Alessandra Stanley, or to Frank Aller, who sounds as if he must have been quite special, but if contacts weren't everything in America, he'd be just another suicide case, remembered by only those who loved him.
As it turns out, though, Frank Aller has become a front-page "star."


Downhill


Save Us From the Wild Recruiter
To the Editor:
"Dear I.B.M. (or Current Occupant): I'd Like a Job, Please" (Nov. 22) epitomizes the desperate conditions of our fragile economy.
When the Wayne Starrs of this world can generate personal fortunes by merchandising a "hope and a prayer" approach to job search, we have hit rock bottom.


The Grooves. The Box. Ribbon-Ready.
Boxed sets have become a holiday gift-giving staple.
Here are some new choices for this season.
Prices are suggested retail.
Sonny Rollins: 'The Complete Prestige Recordings'  Fantasy 7PCD-4407-2; seven CD's ($90).


'Gypsy' Revisited
To the Editor:
Adding to Charles Bergoffen's Nov. 22 letter on "Gypsy," Miss Lee lived in Greenwich Village from about 1938 to 1941.
Working for the deceased Railway Express Agency, I delivered parcels to her about daily.
She would tip me a dollar instead of a glass of Irish whisky "because you are too young!"


POSTURING
I am writing to make a modest proposal about irony and wit in contemporary writing.
From my position as one of the bozos referred to in Paul Taylor's About Men column "Posturing" (Oct. 25), perhaps I can shed some light on what seems to be a misapprehension of the artist's process, and product.
In art, as on 14th Street, caveat emptor.
A writer's voice is a subtle subject for study, providing a subtext, through irony, that seems to have been missed by one of your readers (Letters, Nov. 5).
Dance, as an art form, is about action -- about sweat and physicality.
At its best, it is a melding of zen, psychoanalysis and the Olympian ideal.
To step into the shoes, or suit, as it were, of a great artist and presume to revive a long-lost dance is a great test of one's ability and character.
If, to prove one is up to snuff, one is asked to stand in rain without flinching, do floor work until one's muscles and joints ache or skip meals to afford class, that is the dancer's lot.
It's my life.
I like it.
It builds character.
If it's too much for some, there's always restaurant work.
It's not about nice; it's about excellence.


Tale of Two Cities: Yonkers and 'Yonkers'
THIS is a story about Hollywood make-believe.
It is the story of one city that wants to be a star and another that lost a chance for stardom.
It is also a glimpse at how one movie was made and the trail of disappointment it left behind here.
The story begins in the imagination of Neil Simon, the playwright who wrote "Lost in Yonkers." His story, which won a Pulitzer Prize and a Tony Award -- about two young brothers sent to live above a candy store with their grandmother -- takes place in the Yonkers of 1942.
Most of the play is set inside an apartment, where the boys are swept into a tangle of bewildering family relationships.


Kissinger's Friend and Colleague
To the Editor:
I read with considerable interest Stephen R. Graubard's letter (Oct. 25) concerning "Kissinger: A Biography," by Walter Isaacson.
I was surprised to discover that Mr.
Graubard was not identified to the readers of The Book Review.
How can his comments be judged fairly until the reader is aware of his interest, if any, in the subject or his expertise in the field?
MARK A. OLAGUE Renton, Wash.
The Editor replies:
Mr.
Graubard, who chose not to identify himself in his letter, was a friend and colleague of Henry Kissinger at Harvard University and is the author of "Kissinger: Portrait of a Mind" (1973).


In Love Again (This Time a Weird Fern)
"YOU don't want a staghorn fern," Byron Martin said.
"They need a lot of light and you have to soak them in the bathtub twice a week."
But I wanted one.
"I could do that," I said.
"I have a bathtub. And there's a skylight over it. I could hang it there."


'Woyzeck' Ricochets Through a Mad World
"Woyzeck," as Joanne Akalaitis has directed it at the Joseph Papp Public Theater, is ravishingly grim.
The grimmer matters become, the more ravishing it is, so that the climax of this sordid drama -- the stabbing of a cheap prostitute by the soldier who's been living with her for years -- is very likely to take your breath away.


GARDENING
THERE is a word in the plant kingdom that gardeners will have to learn.
It is "dioecious," a word rooted in Greek which means two households.
For a gardener, the term means that two will have to be planted, that is, a male plant and a female plant since the male and female flowers are borne by different plants.
For the majority of plants grown in the garden there is no need to worry about this pairing.
Most of the plants have what are called perfect flowers, that is, male and female parts in the same flower.
But there are exceptions, and when the plant kingdom comes up with one of these glitches, unless there are two there will be no fruit.


Cyrena Bogert, Geoffrey Fink
August wedding plans have been announced for Cyrena Lawrence Bogert and Geoffrey D. Fink by Miss Bogert's parents, Lee Lisman and H. Lawrence Bogert 3d, and by her stepfather, Dr.
Richard D. Lisman, all of New York.
Miss Bogert, 24 years old, is an associate account executive with Bronner Slosberg Humphrey, an advertising agency in Boston.
She and her fiance graduated from Yale University, he summa cum laude.
Her father is an investment consultant at Shearson Lehman Brothers, the securities brokerage in New York.
Her stepfather is a surgeon director of the Manhattan Eye, Ear and Throat Hospital and a clinical associate professor of ophthalmology at New York University.
Miss Bogert is a stepdaughter of Peri Bogert of New York.


IN SHORT: FICTION
LOOKING FOR ATLANTA By Marilyn Dorn Staats. University of Georgia, $19.95.


Scots March to Instruct Europe on a Concept: Independence
If European Community leaders gathered in Holyrood House were having trouble today deciding what the abstruse concept of "subsidiarity" meant, 12,000 to 14,000 Scots who paraded down Princes Street today demanding independence, or at least home rule, were prepared to tell them.
To the skirl of bagpipes and the flutter of hundreds of blue-and-white St.
Andrew's Cross banners, the national flag of Scotland, a festive crowd of men, women and children rallied peacefully for a measure of the autonomy that vanished in the early 1700's, when Scotland became a part of the United Kingdom.


Case Sets a Record For Victories in Season
WALTER CASE Jr. broke HERVE FILION's North American harness racing record for most victories in a single season when he got his 815th triumph of 1992 last night, guiding Radar Hanover to a 1-length victory over Lord Bertram at Yonkers Raceway.
Case has successfully fought a 10-year addiction to drugs and alcohol to emerge as the top driver on the New York harness circuit.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article about Time Warner on Nov. 29 misstated the format for the recording of Ice-T's "Cop Killer." The song was never issued as a single.


On Sunday; What Do Nonprofits Do? Take a Look
PEOPLE have a vague sense of what nonprofit social-service agencies do.
Maybe church ladies delivering turkeys at Christmas?
Maybe not.
Nonprofit agencies rely on tax dollars to run a huge portion of the social-welfare system.
In New York State, nonprofits run nearly all drug programs and group homes for the mentally ill and two-thirds of foster-care programs.
New York City will soon hand over the operation of its much-maligned homeless shelters to nonprofit agencies.


Hark! A Choir Of Angels
These papier-mache angels, ready to alight in the branches of a tree, are a heavenly holiday discovery.
There are six in the choir.
Handcrafted in China, the five-inch-high angels from Holiday Classics have delicate hands and faces and flowing, multicolored robes.
The set is $19.99 at Price Club.


Uneasy Lies Path to Crown
For those wondering if the Princess of Wales can still be crowned Queen of England after she and Prince Charles agreed last week to separate, history provides one grim precedent.
In 1796, a year after Prince George, the ignominous son of King George III, wed Caroline of Brunswick, a German princess, he abruptly left her, citing what divorce lawyers might now describe as irreconcilable differences: "I had rather see toads and vipers crawling over my victuals than sit at the same table as her."


Mary Lindblom, Peter S. Zegras
Mary Lewis Lindblom, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Norwood W. Lindblom of Short Hills, N.J., was married there yesterday to Peter Stephan Zegras, a son of Maria Zegras of Rye, N.Y., and the late Stephan J. Zegras.
Chief Judge Herman D. Michels of the Appellate Division of New Jersey Superior Court officiated at the bride's parents' home.
Mrs.
Zegras is the director of beauty advertising for Glamour magazine in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Franklin Pierce College.
Her father is a vice president of O'Gorman &amp; Young, an insurance agency in Chatham, N.J.


New York Lifers Groups Argue for Early Parole for Good Behavior
Among the ways of retribution inside the wine-red walls of the state prison here, none is felt as dearly as the simple breezes from the outside world that regularly tease John Massey, dean of the lifers, as he attends to his duties near the exit of the departure center and says goodbye to fellow convicts whose prison time is done.
"I'm looking at that door and I'm getting that breeze every time the door is opened," says Mr.
Massey, a 48-year-old convicted murderer, kidnapper and robber now in the third decade of a sentence of 25 years to life.


How to Attract U.S. Investors: High Prices
Nothing draws American money like rising prices.
A few years ago, when stock prices were low in what used to be called third world countries, few in this country were interested.
Now those countries are called emerging markets, many of them have seen soaring prices, and the money is pouring in. (Latin debt funds, page 16.)
In the first half of this year, the Securities Industry Association reported last week, American investors invested $3.3 billion in those markets, or more than the record $2.2 billion invested in all of 1991.
Back in 1987, the figure was $22 million.


In the Region: Connecticut; For a Watershed, a Cemetery Proposal
A PROPOSAL to construct a regional, nondenominational cemetery on 62 acres of a potential watershed on the Woodbridge-Orange border has been so vociferously opposed by both towns that the South Central Regional Water Authority in New Haven, owner of the land and author of the plan, has temporarily withdrawn it.
The controversy has exposed some broad issues arising from problems of growing populations and shrinking open space: burial vs. cremation, vaults leaching embalming fluids into water supplies, pressure on legislatures to weaken clean-water statutes and threats to the value of homes that suddenly abut a new graveyard.


Frostbiting: Fast Starts, Frigid Dunks
WHEN Denis Farley goes sailing these days, he dons a polyurethane dinghy suit over a heavy woolen sweater.
He wears two pairs of socks -- one cotton, one woolen -- beneath his waterproof boots, plus a woolen cap, plus rubber gloves.
Mr.
Farley is the captain of the frostbite fleet at the Monmouth Boat Club, whose 50 hardy members take part in eight Sunday races from October through December.


Pictures Needn't Move To Be Moving
SOME of the most poignant images of starving Somalis to appear recently on television were still photographs.
On Nov. 24, "NBC Nightly News" ran a segment on a photography exhibition at the United Nations.
The color and black-and-white photos show mothers with bone-thin arms hugging emaciated babies, and children without the strength to wave off the flies on their faces, or children being beaten while waiting for food.
Other images show food bags being used for clothing, or to bury the dead.
During this 1-minute 40-second segment, NBC showed 19 of the exhibition's 54 photographs.
"The newsroom came to an absolute stop when we ran the photo essay," Tom Brokaw said two weeks ago before leaving for Somalia.


A New Notch in Humongous Shopping
LE CORBUSIER called the pared-down house of the future a machine for living.
The 7-week-old Price Club, a megawarehouse of general merchandise at wholesale prices on Old Country Road in Westbury, L.I., is a machine for shopping.
It's like Job Lot, Home Depot, Pathmark and Toys "R" Us rolled into one.
Under a soaring corrugated steel roof that could cover three football fields, shoppers push oversize yellow carts through 600 sections stocked with food, appliances, tools, linens, pharmaceuticals, books and toys.


Lauren Goldberg, Leonard Linsker
Lauren Ruth Goldberg, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Robert T. Goldberg of Great Neck, L.I., was married last evening to Leonard Bruce Linsker, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Bruno Linsker of Forest Hills, Queens.
Rabbi Jack Bemporad officiated at Temple Israel in Lawrence, L.I.
Mrs.
Linsker, 30 years old, is an assistant product manager at the Ciba-Geigy Corporation's pharmaceuticals company in Summit, N.J.
She graduated cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania and received an M.B.A. there.
Her father is the director of ophthalmology at Booth Memorial Medical Center in Flushing, Queens, and an associate clinical professor at the New York University Medical Center.
Her mother, Phyllis Goldberg, is the office manager of his practice.


Silicon Valley's Laugh Man
"I'M the Bill Gates of computer culture," says Jeff Armstrong, who's been satirizing the Microsoft chairman and lesser members of the industry for six years as one of the world's first high-tech comedians.
In his guise as St.
Silicon, founder of the world's first user-friendly religion, CHIP (Church of Heuristic Information Processing), Mr.
Armstrong appears in priestly garb at 150 computer conventions, business parties and sales meetings a year.


Protector of the Prominent
AS a prosecutor years ago, Charles A. Stillman gained a reputation as a tough, no-nonsense lawyer who put many white-collar criminals behind bars.
These days, he's a tough, no-nonsense lawyer trying his best to keep prominent clients, including some business executives, out of jail.


Susan R. Kessler, Seth Harris Ross
Susan Rachel Kessler, an engineer, was married yesterday evening to Seth Harris Ross, the editor of a real-estate newsletter, both in New York.
Rabbi Stanley Kessler, an uncle of the bride, performed the ceremony at Temple Beth Hillel-Beth El in Wynnewood, Pa.
Mrs.
Ross, 32 years old, is an associate partner at Syska &amp; Hennessy Inc., engineering consultants.
She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Arnold M. Kessler of Philadelphia.
Her father is the senior partner of Kessler &amp; Cohen, a law firm there.
Her mother, Naomi E. Kessler, is a counselor in the Philadelphia public school system.


Rutgers Tries Hard, But Yields to Inevitable
The Duke Blue Devils seem to approach each new campaign like a game of King of the Hill.
Their object is not necessarily to never be tossed off the hill, but to grow stronger after each challenge and wind up on top when it counts.
For the last two seasons Duke has finished as national champion.
The Blue Devils began this season by crushing Canisius, humbling the chatty Michigan Wolverines and trouncing Northeastern.


Debating Whether 'Yes' Means 'No'; Glen Ridge Sex Assault Trial Tests the Defense of Consent
A 17-year-old girl follows a group of teen-age boys into the basement of a suburban home, removes her clothes and, without protest, participates in an afternoon of sexual stunts while the boys goad her on.
When it is over, she dresses and lingers in the house, hoping someone will ask her out on a date.
The likelihood of proving criminal sexual assault charges against the youths would seem to be slight, if it were not for one thing -- the teen-age girl is mentally retarded.
Those facts, which have emerged during nine weeks of trial, underlie the question at the heart of the Glen Ridge, N.J., sex assault case: Can a 17-year-old with an I.Q. of 64 and the social acuity of an 8-year-old have the ability to consent to sex?


Dreary Stop at Home for Islanders
This was a game that almost got stolen by the weekend's grinch of a storm, which caused travel trauma to both the Islanders and Winnipeg.
Perhaps the Islanders would have been better off if they'd never limped home from Chicago.
Unassertive to the last, they let the Jets steal this one.
"We work hard and keep shooting ourselves in the foot," said Islander Coach Al Arbour of the 4-3 overtime loss, his club's third defeat in its last four games.
"The work ethic's there, but there's a lot of little things that are hurting us."


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
123.87
124.95
129.10
per Dollar
German Mark
1.5780
1.5930
1.5900
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.2741
1.2774
1.1430
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.5560
1.5595
1.8155
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$335.10
$335.60
$359.00
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Saab Updates Its 9000-Series Sedan
LET'S say you don't know where to go for your next vacation.
Tokyo is too expensive, and the Bahamas are . . . well, too
close
. But how about Trollhattan?
That might be just the place, in fact, if you are in the market for a new car or, more specifically, for a new Saab.


For NBC, Hard Times and Miscues
YOU thought the Queen of England had it bad this year?
Look at what happened to NBC, the king of television just three years ago.
There was the embarrassing flop of the Olympic triplecast, the network's heavily promoted tie-in with cable TV.


Filling the Stockings of The Athletically Active
Whether you're looking for a gift for a friend, or for an excuse to buy something for yourself, the holiday season is a plentiful time to shop.
While sales are scarce, sports merchants tend to keep the shelves full of the newest products.
Here are a few suggestions: GOLF  Simplicity dictates the design of the Bag Boy Lite, a pull cart.
With the use of aluminum for the frame, the Lite, which was first introduced last year, weighs only 6.78 pounds and folds up after use.
It is available in six colors for about $80 at golf shops and sporting-goods stores.
For information, telephone Bag Boy in Milwaukee, Ore., at (800) 955-2269.
TENNIS  Proceeding from the premise that consistency brings service power, Serv-O-Meter is the latest gadget for the tennis player who has everything and wants more.
A 5-inch plastic meter for measuring swing speed and ball speed during practice, the Serv-O-Meter is being pitched by Nick Bollettieri, the coach who operates a tennis academy in Bradenton, Fla.
The meter, which weighs less than an ounce and fits onto the side of a racquet frame with Velcro straps, operates on a calibrated, spring-loaded internal mechanism, according to Eric Kercher, marketing director.
Each time you swing the racquet, you must reset the meter by turning a small knob.
The meter registers racquet speeds from 40-80 miles an hour, and ball speeds, from 60-100 miles an hour.
Available in eight colors, the Serv-O-Meter costs $19.95.
Telephone: (800) 232-3687.
RUNNING A reflective vest that blinks in the dark for runners who jog at night operates on a 9-volt battery.
Set in a small pocket of the fluorescent orange mesh garment, the battery powers two 7-inch lighting strips on the front and back of the vest.
The strips are made up of phosphorus, a luminescent material that is silk-screened onto an electrical field.
When you turn the vest's switch on, the strips blink like a strobe light, with an intermittent on-off flashing sequence.
The vest's manufacturer says that the light can be seen at night from as far away as a half-mile.
Available from Firefly Safety Vest, Inc. of South Bend, Ind., in six sizes, from S to XXXL.
Telephone: (800) 451-5397.
BIKING A tire iron, the plastic or metal lever used to pry a flat tire over its rim, is a tool common to most cyclists.
But a lever made out of recycled milk cartons?
Pedro's USA of Newport, R.I., a company that makes biodegradable bike grease products, has developed the Milk Lever.
At $2.95 a pair, this product makes an inexpensive stocking stuffer.
It is a useful tool for any bike rider, espcially those with the environment on their mind.
Telephone: Bike Nashbar, a national bike-products catalog company, at (800) 627-4227; refer to the lever as Stock No.
PE-ML, because it is not yet in their catalogue.
SKIING  The North Face of Berkeley, Calif., a ski-wear company that also makes technical clothing and gear for serious climbers, has produced a new line of ski clothing originally designed for the Professional Ski Instructors of America.
The Sensor Jacket looks more like a flight jacket than a winter ski coat.
It is made with several synthetic materials, including wind-and-water-repellant Gore-Tex, to keep the cold out.
The jacket has numerous zippered pockets, including a pouch on the back, and elastic drawstrings at the neck.
An insulated hood folds into the stand-up collar.
An inner elasticized waist liner snaps closed below the belt.
Available at sporting-goods stores for $425 in four color combinations, in men's sizes S-XL (for women, adjust accordingly).
BOATING "America's Cup 1851 to 1992," the official record of the 1992 cup races and Louis Vuitton challengers' trials, recently became available in book stores.
Written by Michael Levitt, the former managing editor of Nautical Quarterly, the book is a lavish coffee-table chronology of the events played out in the 28th rendition of yachting's oldest competitive event.
The book includes 200 color photographs of boats under sail and competitors ashore.
Available at book stores through Graphic Arts Publishing Company of Portland, Ore., for $50.
Information: Graphic Arts at (800) 452-3032.


Bookshelf
Additional titles of interest:
JINGLE THE CHRISTMAS CLOWN.
Written and illustrated by Tomie dePaola.
Putnam. $15.95. (Ages 5 to 9) Jingle and the baby animals of Il Circo Piccolo are left behind in a poor Italian village when the rest of the circus goes on to the big city.
The little boy and the animals put on a special free Christmas Eve performance that takes on magical qualities even before an angel appears.


Window-Shopping For Beauty
IT was a cleansing moment.
Brian D'Amato stood at his kitchen sink, scrubbing a pear with liposome-free Aquanil lotion.
"I'm hyperaware of toxins in New York," said the 30-year-old author of "Beauty," a novel about plastic surgery published in October by Delacorte Press.
"I'm not maniacal about skin care, but I'm interested in aging and death. I think it's important to start freezing your loved ones. It would be a shame not to have Walt Disney walking around in 70 years. Or your mom."
The prospect of a refrigerated afterlife didn't seem to faze his mother, the mystery-book writer Barbara D'Amato.
"If Brian insists on it," she said by telephone from her Chicago home.
"It doesn't matter to me. I'll be a Momsicle."


Conversations/Bernard-Henri Levy; An Alarum for the New Europe Is Sounded From a Paris Salon
THE setting could not be more genteel: golden curtains drawn on the hubbub of the Quartier Latin, brown velvet cushions puffed on sumptuous white sofas, Oriental artifacts scattered here and there, an Indian servant in discreet attendance and a bowl of fallen leaves setting off the elegiac tone of the salon's autumnal shades.
But it is barbarism that concerns Bernard-Henri Levy as he dangles a perennially unlit cigarette from his slender fingers.
Specifically, he worries about the resurgent barbarism of racist movements he sees engulfing a disoriented Europe, from the former Yugoslavia to Germany, from France to Austria.


Gas Explosion Destroys Supermarket


Seared by Faces of Need, Americans Say, 'How Could We Not Do This?'
Huddled against the cold outside the Franklin County Agricultural Co-Op, his 18-wheeler loaded with pig innards, Todd Schuppert doesn't consider himself an expert on foreign affairs, but he knows exactly what he thinks about the decision to send American troops to Somalia.
"I think it's a pretty doggone good idea," said Mr.
Schuppert, a 31-year-old truck driver from Pekin, Ind.
"You just have to turn on a television to see that those people need help, and no one else is going to help them but us."


Silence of the Frogs
In the early 70's, a bizarre, inexplicable illness was sabotaging the academic career of Cynthia Carey.
Then a young biologist, she was writing a dissertation on the physiology of coldblooded animals.
Her creature of choice was Bufo boreas, named for the ancient Greek god of the north wind, an extravagant tag for a warty, blotchy, four-inch toad.
It is more commonly and appropriately known as the western toad, its range encompassing the mountains of western North America.
Twice a week, Carey went into the vast, pristine wilderness of Colorado to do her research.
At times the toads were so plentiful she had to be careful when driving away not to crush them under her wheels.
In 1973, two years into her work, the illness struck.
When she went into the field, Carey started coming upon an alarming sight: dozens of dying toads, toads barely able to move because their legs were puffy and red.
She took one back to a veterinarian, who told her the toads were dying from an opportunistic infection because their immune systems had collapsed.
But why?
Carey was in no position to unravel the mystery -- she had a dissertation to do.
But by 1979, there were no western toads, healthy or sick, to be found at any of the previous sites, or anywhere else in Colorado she looked.
"These are wilderness areas," she says today from her laboratory at the University of Colorado at Boulder, where she is an associate professor of biology.
"There was no development, no housing, no habitat destruction. I was sad and mystified."


White Plains
To the Editor:
Your article titled "White Plains Adding Downtown Malls" on Nov. 8 included an observation by Julian DiDonato, president of the White Plains Merchants Association, that 40 of the 110 storefronts downtown are vacant.


Man of Action


An Uncandy Woman
With her lack of eyebrows, androidlike looks and angular poses, the model Kristen McMenamy would appear to have limited commercial prospects.
But after several star turns on the runway at the recent spring shows in New York, she has landed two high-profile ad campaigns.
Ms.
McMenamy just finished shooting Calvin Klein's follow-up to his Marky Mark and Kate Moss advertisements, and Richard Avedon recently photographed her for Gianni Versace.


Face of Beauty, Faces Bright
THE human face is a book, a mirror of the mind and a blank slate.
For the supermodel Christy Turlington, it is also a blank check.
Last Saturday night, there was a party for Ms.
Turlington's face.
It took place at Pucci, the mannequin factory and showroom in SoHo where Ms.
Turlington's face had been copied for the new mannequins at the Costume Institute at the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
Guests were greeted at the entrance to the Pucci loft by six identical Christy mannequins dressed in identical black tank-top dresses, black mules and various wigs.
They were lined up in two rows like so many trendy Venus de Milos in a sculpture garden.


NOTES
At the premiere party for Al Pacino's film "Scent of a Woman" on Tuesday, Chris O'Donnell, his 22-year-old co-star, said that his first scenes were simple to shoot.
In the movie, Mr.
Pacino plays a blind man.
"My character is really nervous around him when they meet," said Mr.
O'Donnell, who has also appeared in "School Ties" and "Fried Green Tomatoes." "That was natural. He's Al Pacino."
Sylvia Heisel, a fashion designer, is experimenting with the material usually associated with frying pans and a certain President.
"I'm working on a Teflon dress," she said at the Costume Institute party on Monday.
"I'm working with a couple of different industrial-use textiles. We get overruns from these companies with military contracts." The dress will not be lined.
"It's friction resistant," Ms.
Heisel explained.
"It feels really good. Not the way silk does in a normal way but in a real kind of creepy way."


MOST LIKELY TO SUCCEED
In reading the article on Frank Aller, I noted several references to his marijuana and alcohol use.
Yet, among the speculations offered for his suicide, no one suggested that heavy use of these substances -- which can cause depression, cloud judgment and lower impulse control -- may have played a role.
In fact, research has found significant associations between alcohol use and suicide, particularly with those acts involving a firearm.
Although I would not want to draw any conclusions based on this information alone, I finished the article wondering whether Aller might have been a casualty of his time in another way -- a victim of the glamorization of drugs. (In fact, "discovering pubs, wine shops" is the first evidence given in the article of the "polish" Aller acquired at Oxford.) NAIMAH WEINBERG, M.D.
Baltimore


Packing
To the Editor: How much and what to pack depends, for me, on the method of travel.
I was a tank commander in the U.S.
Army in Germany for several years.
When we were sent on a three-day alert, I packed for three weeks: almost 100 pounds of dry underwear, socks, uniforms, books, cigarettes and snack food.
Sometimes it was an unused load to carry, sometimes I had the only clean, dry socks in our battalion.
This summer I rode from Lancaster to Canada on my bicycle.
I carried only what would fit in my shirt pockets: including a raincoat, shorts, a book to read, a credit card, money and some tools.
No pack, no saddlebags, no more than five pounds (including a spare tire, two spare tubes, and a plastic tire changing tools) of stuff for a three-day, 400 mile trip.


Technology; For the 90's, Screen-Based Phones
FOR years, even as telephone services have changed radically, the telephone itself has not.
True, phones now come in a staggering variety of shapes, like tennis shoes, jukeboxes, even Mickey Mouse.
But the insides have changed little in basic principle since Alexander Graham Bell's time.
But a new generation of phones, with built-in visual displays, will be available over the next year or so.
Called screen-based phones, they are not quite so futuristic as video phones, which allow callers to see each other as they talk.
But the new machines allow callers to navigate more easily through the electronic purgatory that typically begins, "For more options, press 1."


A Modern Accent for Music Of Christmastime
HOLIDAY music to be performed in churches and concert halls throughout Westchester will, as usual, reflect the catholic tastes of music directors and their audiences.
As generation follows generation, however, music of past centuries must make room for more contemporary works.
In that regard, a school of modern English composers has risen to popularity in recent years, influenced by Ralph Vaughan Williams, who died in 1958, and Edward Elgar, who died in 1934.
Drawing inspiration from folk songs and early madrigals, they created a new but nostalgically English sound.
Among their followers was Gustav Holst, whose "In the Bleak Midwinter" will be performed at the Bedford Presbyterian Church, Irvington Presbyterian Church, the Old Dutch Church in North Tarrytown and the Reformed Church in Tarrytown.


New Accusations Erupt Over the Dead Sea Scrolls
More name-calling controversy has erupted among scholars of the Dead Sea Scrolls, deepening distrust and threatening to disrupt an international conference scheduled to begin tomorrow at the New York Academy of Sciences.
A group of scrolls experts is asserting that the authors of a new book translating 50 of the ancient documents borrowed heavily and without acknowledgement from the research of others.
They condemned that as the "unethical appropriation" of previous transcriptions and translations, and said the authors' claims of having done independent and original work were "laughable and manifestly dishonest."


Susan Barrett, Richard Malone
Susan Veronica Barrett, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James P. Barrett of Manhasset, L.I., was married there yesterday to Richard John Luckyn Malone, a son of Emily M. Malone of Kingstone, Herefordshire, England, and the late John S. Malone.
The Rev.
John Denniston performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of St.
Mary.
Mrs.
Luckyn Malone, 32 years old, was until recently a vice president in the international group of Merrill Lynch &amp; Company, the securities brokerage, in New York.
She graduated from Marist College.
Her father is a partner in the New York law firm of Simpson Thatcher &amp; Bartlett.


'The Cover of Life': A Family in Wartime
A PICTURE-PERFECT story perfect, that is, for a Life magazine cover, circa 1943 -- turns out to have a tainted underside in "The Cover of Life," by R. T. Robinson, in its world premiere by the American Stage Company.
In other words, Life is a magazine, but real life is tough.
Kate, the play's narrator, is a hard-hitting Life correspondent who's "been around" (a drunken Hemingway begged her not to divulge his secrets, whatever they were).
From all her indications and innuendoes, it doesn't take long to figure out that she is going to uncover another story behind the story and that the audience will get the story behind
her
story.


'The Change'
To the Editor:
Germaine Greer neglects to mention the true invisibles.
They are the women who wouldn't turn heads even at the age of 20.
The women who complain the most at reaching 50 are the ones who conquered all by their looks at 20.
At menopause the prom queen and the wallflower become equals.
The climacteric thus represents the sweet revenge of the plain Jane.
ELIZABETH YEW Astoria, Queens


The Executive Life; Hollywood's Tree Gets the Spartan Look
"THOSE were the days," laments Russell Schwartz, an independent film distributor with fond memories of Hollywood Christmases past.
During the 1980's boom, he recalls, "we used to get 10-cup coffee makers, big thick argyle sweaters and big boxes of frozen steaks."
Not so now.
The trend in the recession-hit entertainment industry -- once the epitome of holiday largesse -- is toward cheaper gifts, or none at all, or, for the politically correct, a card announcing a contribution to charity.


Reaching Beyond Personal Slurs to Public Policy
Marge Schott's racial and ethnic slurs were reprehensible, and all of baseball's owners must act swiftly to condemn her remarks and, despite her lukewarm apology last week, impose a serious sanction.
The owners should not expect to be praised for this.
It is neither courageous nor controversial to condemn Schott's explicit racism.
It is a minimum action we have a right to expect from the sport.
Surely the owners must know that racial slurs are more than a matter of insensitivity; they raise serious questions about Schott's fairness and her fitness to own and run a baseball team.
They also serve as a symbol of baseball's larger problem: an entrenched racism.


F.B.I. Chief Took Government Plane to the Ballet
The Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, already under scrutiny for using Government aircraft for private travel, flew on an F.B.I. plane to a performance of the Bolshoi ballet at the Sands Hotel in Atlantic City last month as a guest of the Russian Ambassador, bureau officials say.
John Collingwood, a spokesman for the bureau, said Friday that the trip by the Director, William S. Sessions, was permitted by bureau regulations but that Mr.
Sessions had been concerned that it might be perceived as a purely social event.
So, Mr.
Collingwood said, Mr.
Sessions cleared the trip in advance with Lawrence S. Eagleburger, the Secretary of State; George J. Terwilliger 3d, the Deputy Attorney General, and a lawyer for the bureau.


Frank C. Wright, 59, A Finance Executive
Frank C. Wright Jr., a finance executive, died on Friday in Newport News, Va., where he was on business.
He was 59 and lived in Manhattan and Mantoloking, N.J.
He died of heart failure, his family said.


Clinton Resigns as Governor of Arkansas


THE GUIDE
CRECHES FROM FRANCE
Last year the three creches imported by Jani Caroli for her shop in Greenwich were sold.
This year she has five, and they are worth seeing.
Handcrafted in the south of France since the early 1900's by four generations of the Fouque family, the Nativity scenes have won many prizes including a gold medal from the Ministry of Art to their designers as the best craftsmen in France.


Sumptuous Silk Robes From China
EMBROIDERED serpents with long fangs prance and grimace on 19th-century silk robes from China in a dazzling exhibition, "Dragon Threads," at the Newark Museum.
The five-clawed dragon was designated as the official emblem of the emperor in 206 B.C.
Through the centuries, this sign has been emblazoned on everything that belonged to the emperor and his immediate family.
The Chinese regime became known as the Dragon Throne.


9 Other Deaths Reported
Besides the six fatalities in the New York metropolitan region, nine others attributed to the storm have been reported in the Eastern United States since Thursday.
In Pittsburgh, three printing company workers were killed on Friday when a roof laden with snow collapsed.
Six others died in Pennsylvania on Thursday.


Rules for Drivers Entering Mexico
DRIVING into Mexico has become more complicated in recent years.
There are the stringent border controls created to keep cars, including stolen ones, from being driven into Mexico for illegal sale.
There are persistent concerns about safety and gasoline supply on some roads, and finally, there are the weekday driving restrictions that Mexico City, facing acute pollution, has applied.
The border rules have tightened over three years, and now, unless you stay within the "free zone," which is 12 miles deep and also includes all of the Baja California peninsula, you must carry a number of documents as well as a credit card issued outside Mexico.
Earlier this year, Mexico unexpectedly expanded the rules to require that motorists carry an original copy of their auto insurance policy, which created delays at the border, but after protests, this regulation was withdrawn within weeks.


Eagles' Joyner Hits as Hard As His Candor
In today's brand of professional football, in which specialization and situational substitutions have become the norm, Seth Joyner is a novelty.
Playing on all defensive downs for the Philadelphia Eagles at outside linebacker, he is strong enough to clash with a fullback in the backfield, nimble enough to cover a receiver over the middle and intelligent enough to master his variety of responsibilities in the Eagles' thick defensive playbook.
In this, Joyner's seventh pro season, no one is playing his position better.
Joyner, who turned 28 last month, is the epitome of the National Football League player of the 1990's, who speaks with bluntness and conviction and who attempts to balance his individuality with team unity and team goals.


Eagleburger Says U.S. Now Wants Ban on Serbian Flights Enforced
In a stiffening of the Bush Administration's position on the war in the Balkans, Secretary of State Lawrence S. Eagleburger said today that the United States would support a United Nations resolution to enforce the ban on Serbian flights over Bosnia and Herzegovina.
He also said the Administration was rethinking its opposition to lifting a United Nations arms embargo that has the effect of benefitting the well-armed Serbian forces.


Angela Gomez, Wayne Sinhart
THE REV.
WILLIAM G. KALAIDJIAN, the pastor of the Bedford Park Congregational Church for the last 39 years, is one of the best-known clergymen in the Bronx.
People call him "Mr. Bronx," "Reverend Bill" and "the good-vibes pastor."
He's the kind of pastor who invites neighbors -- as well as couples who plan to be married in his church -- to sit on his porch and discuss everything from baseball to poetry to matrimonial commitment.
"I tell each couple, 'Keep thee unto her or him, and that means no fooling around,' " he said.
"I'm a Navy guy. I don't tie any slip knots."


Simone Says
SIMONE DE BEAUVOIR
The Woman and Her Work.
By Margaret Crosland.
Illustrated. 463 pp.
North Pomfret, Vt.: Heinemann/Trafalgar Square.
Paper, $22.95.


Neediest Fund Helps Elderly Who Need Housing and Dignity
She thought she had saved enough, but the money went fast after her husband died and his pension shriveled.
Pretty soon, Eleanor F. had to sell off some of her furniture.
Then one day she found herself in the pawnshop, handing over the engagement ring he slipped on her finger in 1948.
A little less than a carat.
She got $400.
"I cried in the store," said Eleanor, who is 68 years old.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-29  U.S. DESTROYS 3 SOMALI VEHICLES


To Thaw Plumbing Pipes
FROZEN plumbing can be an unwelcomed winter surprise.
Water freezing inside pipes expands, often breaking joints where pipes meet and sometimes even rupturing the pipes.
Fortunately plumbing in most homes is situated away from unheated areas.
But pipes leading to outdoor faucets usually face risks, as do pipes that may have been incorrectly installed during remodeling or whose location leaves them unprotected.


This Ol' House
I WAS HAVING SOME trouble with a leaky copper gutter, and the beams in the basement looked bent out of shape, so I called Martha Stewart.
This author of cookbooks and guides to weddings and other entertainments has a new book out -- "New Old House" -- dealing with
restoration
and
renovation
.
Actually, not gutters but leaders are my problem; during Washington's interregnum, the synonymy of
renewal
was bothering me.


TRANSACTIONS
Football National Football League  DETROIT LIONS -- Activated Reggie Barrett, wide receiver, from injured reserve.


APPLYING YOURSELF
I am rooting for Nancy Ring!
I hope she becomes such a great chef that she will be able to earn all the money she needs by baking only one cake a day.
Then she could paint as she wishes, "lost in the flow of time." Also, she could write articles -- many of them -- like "Applying Yourself" (Hers, Nov. 15), in which she tells the absolute truth, notwithstanding her first sentence, "I lie." MARGOT S. NEUHAUS
Washington
ILS&gt;Drawing


Mission Of Mercy
Their first humanitarian amphibious assault took the marines to Somalia.
Thomas L. Friedman analyzes the many similar loose ends of the cold war.
And Alan Cowell describes how the ideal of a greater Somalia dissolved into clan-on-clan butchery.
Pg. 3


Peers Ask: Why Quit?
Two veteran Indy-car drivers who don't want to quit said they were surprised to learn that RICK MEARS had done just that late Thursday.
"Surprised, shocked," MARIO ANDRETTI said of his reaction to Mears's plans.
"I hate to hear that. I wish I could talk him out of it."


Miss Chapman, David Sandman
Dr.
Sabrina C. Chapman of State College, Pa., has announced the engagement of her daughter, Kathryn Sabrina Chapman, to David Michael Sandmann, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael G. Sandmann of Glastonbury, Conn.
A February wedding is planned.
Miss Chapman graduated from William Smith College.
Her mother is the director of the Center for Women Students and an affiliate assistant professor of sociology and women's studies at Pennsylvania State University in State College.
The prospective bride's father, Dr.
Hugh H. Chapman Jr. of Bryn Mawr, Pa., is a professor emeritus of romance languages at Penn State.
Her maternal grandfather, the late Edward L. Coffey, was a senior partner in the New York law firm of Simpson, Thacher &amp; Bartlett.


Barri L. Katz and Michael J. Stryer
Dr.
Barri Lynn Katz, a child psychiatrist, was married last evening to Michael Jonathan Stryer, a business executive.
Rabbi Marc Disick officiated at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Dr.
Stryer, 31 years old, is a chief fellow in child psychiatry at the University of California at Los Angeles Neuropsychiatric Institute.
She graduated from Princeton University and received her M.D. from Columbia University.


Ms. Krueger, Nathanael Larson
Elizabeth Anne Krueger, the development officer at the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum in New York, was married yesterday to Nathanael Carl Larson, an associate at the New York law firm of Shearman &amp; Sterling.
The Rev.
Richard L. Jeske performed the ceremony at the Holy Trinity Lutheran Church in New York.
Mrs.
Larson, 26 years old, graduated from the University of Wisconsin and received a master's degree in visual arts administration from New York University.
She is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Bruce R. Krueger of Rochester, Minn.
Her father is a consulting neurologist at the Mayo Clinic there.


Business Diary/December 6-11
THE ECONOMY Clinton's Team Looks a Lot Like Cuomo's


Karen A. Ammer, David M. Spector
Dr. and Mrs.
Dean S. Ammer of Lexington, Mass., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Karen Ann Ammer, to David Mark Spector, the son of Shirley Spector of Great Neck, L.I., and the late Lawrence Spector.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Ammer, 31 years old, is an associate in Palo Alto, Calif., for Heller, Ehrman, White &amp; McAuliffe, a San Francisco law firm.
She graduated from Princeton University and received a law degree from Georgetown University.
Her father owns Hospital Purchasing Institute Inc., a health-care consulting company in Lexington.
Her mother, Christine Ammer, is a lexicographer and a writer there.


FIGHTING IN INDIA APPEARS TO SLOW
After a week of savage sectarian rioting in dozens of cities and towns set off by the demolition of a 16th-century mosque by Hindu militants last Sunday, India struggled toward calm today, with far fewer reports of deaths and injuries trickling into the capital.
Still, spasms of sectarian conflict erupted, raising the number of people killed in six days of Hindu and Muslim strife above 1,100.
In Bombay, which was one of the cities hardest hit by the violence, the police again opened fire on stone-throwing mobs, but today there were no reports of deaths.


This Week's Numbers
Consensus
Last Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. Inc.)
Tuesday
Nov. business inventories, percent change
0.0
0.1
Nov. current account, billions
-$17.8
-$13
Late Nov. auto sales, millions, annual rate
7.3
6.5
Wednesday
Nov. housing starts, millions, annual rate
1.23
1.26
Nov. building permits, millions, annual rate
1.14
1.30
Nov. industrial production, percent change
0.3
0.3
Nov. capacity utilization, percent
78.5
78.6
Thursday
Nov. trade balance, billions
-$8.3
-$8.5


Jets Passer Takes a Step Up, but Has Nowhere to Go
For much of this season, the Jets' quarterback situation has been a revolving door of the young and the old, the future and the past, depending upon the health of the players involved.
Rookie Jeff Blake has been standing on the outside of the whirl, a passive observer of the proceedings.
As the No. 3 quarterback, he is assured of being one of two inactive players for each game.
He has also run the scout team.
But mostly he has watched.


In the Region: Connecticut; For a Watershed, a Cemetery Proposal
A PROPOSAL to construct a regional, nondenominational cemetery on 62 acres of a potential watershed on the Woodbridge-Orange border has been so vociferously opposed by both towns that the South Central Regional Water Authority in New Haven, owner of the land and author of the plan, has temporarily withdrawn it.
The controversy has exposed some broad issues arising from problems of growing populations and shrinking open space: burial vs. cremation, vaults leaching embalming fluids into water supplies, pressure on legislatures to weaken clean-water statutes and threats to the value of homes that suddenly abut a new graveyard.


DEC. 6-12: 3 Soldiers Shot Dead; From Stones to Bullets: The Arab Uprising Evolves
In the annals of the Palestinian uprising against Israel, 1992 will go down as the year of the gun.
What began with stones and protests five years ago last week is giving way to bullets and a rising toll.
Added to the victims last week were three Israeli soldiers who were machine-gunned, presumably by Muslim fundamentalists, while on patrol in the turbulent Gaza Strip.
In all, 11 soldiers have been killed in the occupied territories this year -- equaling the number of soldiers killed in the four previous years of the uprising combined.
Israeli civilian deaths in the territories also stand at 11 for 1992, compared with 6 last year.


Chain by Chain, Woolworth Reinvents Itself
In Freehold, N.J., last month, the Woolworth Corporation opened the first of what will be a chain of huge athletic footwear and apparel stores.
The store, called World Foot Locker, comprises "10,000 square feet of retail theater," with big video screens showing merchandise in action and striking displays from Nike and Reebok.
It will be, the company boasted in advertisements, "like nothing in the world you've ever seen."
But to those who know the new Woolworth, World Foot Locker actually sounds familiar.
More than any other retailer, the 113-year-old company once known for dowdy variety and discount stores has been reinventing itself by introducing new chains of specialty stores in malls, exporting them to other countries and replacing the ones that don't meet its profitability standards.
All told, Woolworth is now running more than 40 specialty chains.


Josef Hoffmann's Linear Motifs, All in a Row
Josef Hoffmann, Vienna's most versatile 20th-century architect, designed cafes, town houses, a sanitarium, a palace and the decorative furnishings that filled them.
After co-founding the Wiener Werkstatte in 1903, he kept the Viennese workshop's artisans busy, producing scores of objects in a variety of materials until it closed in 1932.
These accomplishments are thoroughly documented in "Josef Hoffmann: Designs," an exhibition at the I.B.M.
Gallery of Science and Art, 590 Madison Avenue, at 56th Street, through Jan. 23.
Organized by the Austrian Museum of Applied Arts in Vienna, the show consists of more than 100 objects and 200 drawings from its collection, making this exhibition more comprehensive than the two previous New York surveys of the architect's career, presented in 1975 and 1981 at the Austrian Cultural Institute.
The institute helped finance the current show.


Three Very Rare Generations
SOUL TO SOUL
A Black Russian American Family 1865-1992.
By Yelena Khanga with Susan Jacoby.
Illustrated. 318 pp.
New York: W. W. Norton &amp; Company. $22.95.


GARDENING
THERE is a word in the plant kingdom that gardeners will have to learn.
It is "dioecious," a word rooted in Greek which means two households.
For a gardener, the term means that two will have to be planted, that is, a male plant and a female plant since the male and female flowers are borne by different plants.
For the majority of plants grown in the garden there is no need to worry about this pairing.
Most of the plants have what are called perfect flowers, that is, male and female parts in the same flower.
But there are exceptions, and when the plant kingdom comes up with one of these glitches, unless there are two there will be no fruit.


SURFACING
PRIDE --
Black colleges' sweatshirts:
It's an ethnic pride thing among young African-Americans, whether they went to the schools or not.
Recent sighting: the rap impresario Russell Simmons, who attended City College, wearing a Grambling sweatshirt on the cover of Black Enterprise.
CHARITY --
Donating frequent-flier miles:
Seriously ill children hoping to realize a special wish, disabled athletes and multiple-sclerosis patients are among those who benefit from programs offered by American Airlines and Continental Airlines.
TOYS --
Rollerblading dolls:
California Roller Baby (Tyco) and Baby Rollerblade (Mattel) are among the season's hottest toys.


When Using Pears, Plan Ahead
PEARS are among the more reliable of fruits to select for cooking and baking.
But because pears are best picked when they are still hard and allowed to become fully ripe off the tree, using them takes planning.
When pears figure in the menu, shopping for them is best done two or three days in advance to avoid a futile search for ripe ones in the market and to allow very firm specimens time to ripen at home.
This strategy also prevents buying pears that have become shopworn, battered and bruised on their way to ripening in the store.


Sailing Program for the Disabled
Americans with disabilities may learn to sail next year while exploring the Netherlands aboard a double-masted clipper ship.
Four departures are scheduled for a 13-day vacation on the Lutgerdina, a 95-year-old sailboat refitted with hydraulic steering, an electronic speaking device to instruct blind helmsmen and navigational charts in Braille.
It also has adapted showers and toilets for wheelchairs and an elevator.
The participants will board in Amsterdam and then set sail for villages, nature reserves and other ports before tying up at Robinson Crusoe Island, south of Amsterdam.
The island, operated by the Netherlands' Aquatic Sports Foundation for People With Disabilities, offers opportunites to learn water skiing and operate adapted canoes, kayaks and windsurfing boards.
Nine nights will be spent on the ship and two on the island.


Cuban Rights Advocate Beaten and Detained
One of Cuba's most prominent human rights advocates was being held by the authorities today after being beaten by a mob of Government supporters, his friends and relatives said.
The human rights advocate, Elizardo Sanchez, who is the leader of one of Cuba's tiny dissident human rights groups, was said to be recovering in a military hospital after having been dragged from a friend's apartment on Thursday afternoon and beaten nearly unconscious.


The Grooves. The Box. Ribbon-Ready.
Boxed sets have become a holiday gift-giving staple.
Here are some new choices for this season.
Prices are suggested retail.
Aretha Franklin: 'Queen of Soul -- The Atlantic Recordings'  Rhino/Atlantic R2 71063; four CD's ($54.98) or cassettes ($39.98).


Preying


MOST LIKELY TO SUCCEED
The article about Frank Aller was sad and disturbing.
He seems to have been adept at hiding his pain; it is unfortunate that, among his highly educated and sophisticated friends, so few had any notion of his suffering until it was too late.
The friend who wondered why Aller couldn't just "check out of the intensity of those times" as "most people" did might as well have been asking why he couldn't just make up his mind to swim the Pacific Ocean.
A depressed person does not have the freedom to decide to give up his particular "intensity"; he has difficulty getting from one day to the next, let alone making decisions.
It is a marvel of human resilience that Aller was able to accomplish as much as he did.
The word "depression" is used too often today to have any clear meaning.
Real clinical depression is another order of magnitude from the depressed moods we sometimes have.
Those who have not experienced it, even caring and empathetic people, as Aller's friends were, cannot begin to understand its debilitating weight and the pervasiveness of the despair and pain.


THE STORM'S HAVOC: Drenched and Stunned on New York's Shore; Brooklyn Neighborhood Loses a House to the Sea
In Sea Gate, battered by fierce tides, a house crumbled into the sea yesterday morning.
A dozen other homes on the shore line appeared to ready to fall, too.
It was perhaps the most dramatic incident in the Brooklyn seaside community near Coney Island during the angry storm that tore down fences, flooded streets and homes, sent people fleeing to shelters and swept away porches and patios.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Friday about the separation of the Prince and Princess of Wales misidentified Princess Anne in some editions.
She is Queen Elizabeth's daughter, not her sister.
A report on Princess Anne's wedding appears today on page 22.


Clouded Role Model?
To the Editor:
Too bad the Disney people didn't read Aljean Harmetz's article about smoking in the movies, "History Is Written in Smoke"  [ Nov. 8 ] , before they released "Aladdin." During this animated feature for children, there are no less than three references to smoking -- a Groucho Marx with a cigar, a French maitre d' dangling a cigarette from his mouth and the genie gratuitiously asking, "Mind if I smoke?"


Clinton and Abortion: Limited Expectations
President-elect Bill Clinton will turn aside many of the laws, regulations and proclamations that have halted abortions over the last 12 years, but he will not eliminate all of them, advocates on both sides of the issue say.
Anti-abortion groups say they are dismayed but not dispirited, and will quickly retreat to shore up the next barricade.
They concede that the Government is likely to reverse its stand on a half-dozen issues, ending the ban, for example, on Federal financing of research using tissue of aborted fetuses.


Sports of The Times; Baseball's Antitrust Exemption
Take me out to the ball game Take me out to the crowd Buy me some peanuts and Crackerjack Just put them in my antitrust sack.
FOR 70 years, baseball has protected its antitrust exemption as if it were the steal sign.
But more than ever before, Congress has begun to wonder if maybe it really is the steal sign.


Save Us From the Wild Recruiter
To the Editor:
As a professional from the executive ranks in the biomedical industry, I have been out of work since April -- the first time in a 20-year career that this has happened to me and a source of extreme financial and family burdens.


Christmas 1993: Store Sales Up, Stocks Down
FOR the first time in three years, it looks as though Christmas will be a merry one for the nation's retailers.
But on Wall Street, that already is being treated as old news.
Share prices in the big store chains peaked within a day or two of Thanksgiving, the traditional kickoff of the shopping season.
That performance appears to provide another piece of evidence of how the stock market can be a leading indicator, showing knowledge of what is going to happen long before the economists or the politicians figure it out.
Retail stocks began to leap just as summer, along with rhetoric about how bad the economy was, began to heat up.


Lindblad to Lead Antarctic Cruises
Lars-Eric Lindblad, a pioneer of Antarctic cruises and a tour operator who went bankrupt following a dispute with the United States Government about Vietnam programs, will lead groups of 400 travelers to Antarctica starting late next year aboard a refurbished ship for a new company.
The ship, the Marco Polo -- the former Aleksandr Pushkin, an 850-passenger Soviet cruise ship -- is undergoing a $60 million renovation in Europe for Orient Lines, which has offices in Fort Lauderdale, Fla.
The company's founder, Gerry Herrod, is a British shipping magnate and former owner of Ocean Cruise Lines, which also operates Antarctic cruises.
In May 1990 Mr.
Herrod sold Ocean and its subsidiary, Pearl Cruises, to Paquet French Cruises and agreed not to compete with Paquet before next February.


To Thaw Plumbing Pipes
FROZEN plumbing can be an unwelcomed winter surprise.
Water freezing inside pipes expands, often breaking joints where pipes meet and sometimes even rupturing the pipes.
Fortunately plumbing in most homes is situated away from unheated areas.
But pipes leading to outdoor faucets usually face risks, as do pipes that may have been incorrectly installed during remodeling or whose location leaves them unprotected.


Under Foot, Vision From Above


U.S. DENIES APPEAL FOR 4 ILL HAITIANS
Despite pleas from military officials, the Immigration Service has refused to allow four ill Haitians infected with H.I.V. to leave the crude camp where they are held here and come to the United States for treatment.
In the camp, within the Guantanamo Bay Naval Base, are 222 Haitians seeking asylum in the United States who have tested positive for the virus that causes AIDS.
Among them are 15 whose level of defensive immune system cells is low enough to officially designate them as having AIDS.


Patricia Bleznak, H. A. Silverstein
Sally Cooper Bleznak of Bryn Mawr, Pa., and Alan D. Bleznak of Penn Valley, Pa., have announced January wedding plans for their daughter, Patricia Bleznak, and Howard Alan Silverstein, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Samuel Silverstein of New York.
Ms.
Bleznak, 33 years old, is a vice president of the Whitney Group, an executive search company in New York.
She and her fiance graduated from the University of Pennsylvania, he magna cum laude.
Ms.
Bleznak received an M.B.A. from New York University.
Her father owns the Bleznak Organization, a real-estate development and management concern in Pennsauken, N.J.
Her mother is a freelance public-relations consultant in Bryn Mawr.


Gehry's Disney Hall: A Matterhorn for Music
Walt Disney is a trademark.
Walt Disney is an empire.
But Walt Disney is also the name of a popular American artist whose subject was enchantment.
A pumpkin grows into a coach.
A kiss breaks the spell.
Trick photography makes the bud blossom.
Disney's enchantment was America's.
His images of wonder were metaphors for a nation that, in his time, was as blessed as any magic kingdom.
Then, like American moral authority, the Disney magic waned.
The padded Mickeys, the bloated theme parks, the denatured wholesomeness came to seem like desperate overcompensations for curdled American innocence.
Last week, ground was broken in downtown Los Angeles for a building that will recast that lost enchantment in a bold, contemporary form.
Walt Disney Concert Hall, designed by the Los Angeles architect Frank Gehry, is by no means innocent of worldly ambitions.
The $80 million, 2,400-seat hall, the future home of the Los Angeles Philharmonic, doesn't shrink from civic booster scale.
Like the Museum of Contemporary Art, its neighbor on Bunker Hill, Disney Hall is expected to help revitalize the city's downtown district and lift its cultural profile.
Fortunately, Gehry has resolved not to be crushed by the burden of such exemplary goals.
For once, an architectural imagination soars to the level of the highest civic hopes.


School Plan Cuts Impact of Moving
FOR Diane Jones, a homeless mother of two young children, frequent moves around the county from one site to another were difficult enough.
What concerned her most, however, was the impact on her 7-year-old son's education.
"He used to go to school in Ossining, then in Elmsford," Ms.
Jones said.
"Then he spent first grade in Mamaroneck."
With her family's most recent move to the Westhab complex for homeless families in Greenburgh, Ms.
Jones's second grader might very well have had to make another adjustment to another school, this time in the Greenburgh Central Seven school district.


In Mayor's Race, Gay Vote Is Appealing
The raucous debate over whether New York City's schools should teach first graders to respect homosexuals, and how they might do so, has probably obscured other and clearer signs of the growing political power of the city's gay voters.
Both Mayor David N. Dinkins and his all-but-certain Republican challenger, Rudolph W. Giuliani, have gone out of their way to appeal for the votes of gay New Yorkers.


THE STORM'S HAVOC: The Warnings; Accuracy of Storm Forecast Debated
New York City officials yesterday questioned whether forecasters adequately advised them about the extreme nature of Friday's storm.
If they had been more precisely warned and had realized that the storm would make roadways and subway tracks unpassable, they said, they would have reacted more urgently, closing certain major arteries and advising travelers to stay home.


Donna, The Collection
IT'S 10-ish on a Monday morning, and Donna Karan, the word is, has hurt her back.
She was dressing, leaning forward to pull up her tights when suddenly,
un-be-liev-ably
, "Crrr-ack!" From all reports she is now lying in her limo, cruising the garment district, unable to move.
Here, in her spare, sunny office, there are at this moment some 20 people who absolutely "require" Donna Karan.
Six reporters are holding for her thoughts on heels, tie patterns, on whether she might someday run for President.
Patti Cohen, Ms.
Karan's vice president for advertising and public relations, explains that "with Donna, things just get faster. Huger!" There are so many clothes and companies -- a $270 million "
ex-puh-lo-sion
of design" -- that only five or six weeks separate each collection. Or maybe four.


Seeing Beats Reading
To the Editor:
In "Sublime Sculptures in a Dubious Setting"  [ Nov. 22 ] , Michael Kimmelman berated the National Gallery of Art in Washington for its Greek loan exhibition because he doesn't feel that "the occasion is worthy of the objects." He went on to insist that "major loan shows are supposed to make a contribution to scholarship as well as to engage the public."


Update; U.S. Still Searching For Missing Boy
More than eight months have passed since Shai Fhima, a 13-year-old Jewish boy, disappeared in Brooklyn.
But despite search efforts by Federal investigators, Shai is still missing.
The boy disappeared last April after a series of combative meetings between his parents, Jacky and Hana Fhima, and an ultra-orthodox rabbi who has a yeshiva in Brooklyn.


Nancy J. Cascella, Steven D. Flatow
Claire Cascella of New York has announced the engagement of her daughter Nancy Jane Cascella to Steven David Flatow, a son of Ursula and Fred Flatow of Bethesda, Md.
A March wedding is planned.
Ms.
Cascella, 29 years old, is an associate at the New York law firm of Hahn &amp; Hessen.
She graduated cum laude from Tufts University and received a law degree from Fordham University.
She is also a daughter of the late Ralph A. Cascella, who was a lawyer in New York.
Her grandfather James J. Crisona of New York was a New York State Senator, a Borough President of Queens and a Justice of the New York State Supreme Court.


'Three Men on a Horse,' 1935 Comedy
ERWIN TROWBRIDGE doesn't do it for the money.
And you better believe it.
What Erwin does is dope out horse races and come up with winners.
Never misses.
But in the eyes of others, Erwin is a loser -- a sap, in the heavy bettors' vernacular -- or a double-crosser.
His brother-in-law, Clarence, who can't believe that Erwin doesn't have thousands of dollars piled up from all that "mental betting," calls him a worm.


Lisa E. Landy, Steven G. Safran
June wedding plans have been announced by Mr. and Mrs.
Milton Landy of Brooklyn, for their daughter, Lisa Ellen Landy, and Dr.
Steven Gary Safran, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin Safran of Lower Emerson Hill, S.I.
Ms.
Landy is an administrator at Beth Israel Hospital in New York.
She graduated from New York University, from which she also received a master's degree in health services management.
Her father is an administrator at the Queens Hospital Center in Jamaica, Queens.
Her mother, Florence Landy, is the office manager for a dental group in Brooklyn.


APPLYING YOURSELF
If the purpose of the Hers column is to articulate the human condition and, perhaps, make a connection between people, then Nancy Ring's article succeeded, at least in my case, in a most unusual way.
In the early 1900's, my grandfather's family emigrated from the town of Zelva -- a small village midway between Volkavisk and Slonim on the Russian-Polish border.
By the 1940's, Zelva had disappeared from Soviet atlases -- either because the town itself was gone or, as was more often the case, because military units were stationed there.


U.S. Helicopters Destroy Vehicles In Somali Clash
In the first clash of its kind since troops landed in Somalia, two Marine Corps helicopter gunships destroyed three armed Somali vehicles today after the American aircraft were fired on, the military said.
Lieut.
Col.
Fred Peck of the Marines, a spokesman, said the AH-1 Cobra gunships were on a reconnaissance mission in the northwest section of the capital when they were fired on by a Somali armored personnel carrier but not damaged.


A Church in Scarsdale Losing All 3 Ministers
TWO years after rebuilding its sanctuary in the wake of a suspicious fire, the Hitchcock Presbyterian Church here must withstand another trauma.
All three of its ministers have resigned, including its ecumenical-minded senior minister, the Rev.
Robert S. MacLennan.
Sitting amid packing clutter in the church office he has occupied for nine years, Dr.
MacLennan, who has forged strong bonds with the county's Jewish community, said irreconcilable differences among the ministerial staff had led to his resignation in mid-October.
The Rev.
Norman Stanton and the Rev.
Shannon White, associate pastors, announced last month that they would also resign.


Barbara Randell, Bradley Lesch
Toinette Tucker of New York has announced February wedding plans for her daughter, Barbara Barnard Randell, and Bradley David Lesch, a son of Helen Lesch of Binghamton, N.Y., and David Lesch of Lisle, N.Y.


Time to Review Football's Ways
To the Sports Editor:
When two National Football League players are left paralyzed in two seasons, it is time to assess the way the game is played.
This assessment is something that the N.F.L., its players association, the experts on sports medicine and the sportswriters seem loath to do.


Many Calls on Storm Reported by Insurers
Insurance companies in the metropolitan region reported a surge in calls yesterday as customers tried to make claims for storm damage.
"On a typical day we might get 150 to 300 calls, but we got 1,000 calls on Friday, and it seems we'll get 1,000 more today," said Pat Breslin, communications manager for New Jersey Manufacturers Insurance Company in West Trenton.


Hiss Case's Bogymen Are Still Not at Rest
AMERICANS who were born after the early 1950's -- after the initial terrors of the Russian A-bomb and Senator Joseph McCarthy's Communist witchhunts -- probably neither understand nor much cared what the reformed, anti-Communist Russian Government said two months ago about the Alger Hiss case.
A thumbnail: Mr.
Hiss was the most contentious political figure of his era, convicted and jailed in 1950 for perjury after denying, insistently and under oath, that he had been a Soviet plant within the State Department.
Conservatives called him the embodiment of subversive Communism.
Liberals called him a martyr strung up by a McCarthyite fanatic.
In mid-October, a senior aide to President Boris Yeltsin sided with the liberals, saying a review of Soviet files found no evidence that Mr.
Hiss had ever been a Kremlin agent.
The entire episode, so searing 42 years ago, now has the brittle, dog-eared feel of an old newspaper clipping in some attic scrapbook.
Communism is dead and buried; Mr.
Hiss is 88 and nearly blind.
Who cares?


Rap After the Riot: Smoldering Rage And No Apologies
Ice Cube does some gloating on his new album, "The Predator." "Anything you wanted to know about the riot was in the records before the riot," he says in an interview-style interlude.
"All you had to do was go to the Ice Cube library and pick a record."
He's right: "Death Certificate," released on Halloween in 1991, not only articulated the rage surrounding the beating of Rodney King, but showed exactly where the flashpoint would be in the April riots in Los Angeles.
The album included "Black Korea," which revealed the deep resentment between Korean shopkeepers (whom Ice Cube, in one ignorant flourish, described as "chop-suey-eatin' ") and blacks, who felt they were being treated more like potential criminals than customers; when the riots came, Korean businesses became targets.


Clinton Inherits Conflicts That Don't Follow Rules
THERE is a story making the rounds at the Pentagon about the moment the Marines landed in Somalia last week.
Evidently one leatherneck asked his commander as they waded ashore to this starving land: "How do we tell the good guys from the bad guys?"
"The bad guys are the fat guys," his officer answered, "and the good guys are the thin guys."


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ended Nov. 28  MANHATTAN  Greenwich Village  $875,000
25 East Ninth Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,100-sq.-ft prewar penthouse co-op; 24-hr. doorman, manned elevator, 2 fireplaces, wrapped terrace, 3 greenhouses; maintenance $2,110, 30% tax-deductible (Brokers: Sinvin Realty-Laurie Brant Real Estate)  Greenwich Village  $1.85 million
19 West 12th Street  3-family, 5-story, Greek Revival town house; dining room, 3 1/2 baths in first floor duplex; 2 1/2 baths, skylight in 4th-floor duplex; 1 bath in third-floor simplex; 2 bedrooms in each; c/a, rear garden, 25- by 106-ft. lot; taxes $19,522 (Brokers: Ambrose Mar Elia-L.B. Kaye)  Murray Hill  $800,000
330 East 38th Street  (Corinthian)  4-bedroom, 4-bath, 2,328-sq.-ft. condo in a 4-year-old building; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, dining room, 3 exposures; common charge $812, taxes $4,872 (Broker: Corcoran Group)  Upper East Side  $510,000
26 East 63d Street  (Leonori)  2-bedroom, 2-bath. 1,100-sq.-ft. prewar condo; 24-hr. doorman, concierge; common charge $728, taxes $5,400 (Brokers: Walter &amp; Samuels-Charles H. Greenthal)  Upper West Side  $365,000
221 West 82d Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,800-sq.-ft. prewar duplex-penthouse; 24-hr. doorman, dining room, fireplace, wrapped terrace; maintenance $2,696, 60% tax-deductible (Broker: Hunt/Kennedy Inc.)  West Side  $173,500
140-42 West End Avenue (66th St.)  (Lincoln Towers)  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,100-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, dining alcove, terrace; maintenance $789, 55% tax-deductible (Broker: Rivkin &amp; Denenholz)  BRONX  Parkchester  $25,000
2090 East Tremont Avenue  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 700-sq.-ft. condo in a prewar building; elevator, eat-in kitchen, Manhattan skyline view; common charge $280, taxes $480 (Broker: Marland Real Estate)  Wakefield  $165,000
814 East 229th Street  2-family detached brick house; 3 bedrooms in primary unit; 2 bedrooms in other; dining room, 1 bath in each; 25- by 114-ft. lot; taxes $1,640 (Broker: ERA/Best Match)  BROOKLYN  Brooklyn Heights  $172,000
60 Pineapple Street  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,500-sq.-ft. prewar co-op in a former hotel; dining area, exposed-brick walls; maintenance $700, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: Tabak Realty)  Park Slope  $460,000
583 6th Avenue  2-family, 4-story brick house; 3 bedrooms, 1 1/2 baths, double parlor in each duplex unit; 22- by 90-ft. lot; taxes $2,000 (Broker: Brooklyn Properties of 7th Avenue)  QUEENS  Corona  $195,000
37-51 102d Street  3-family semi-attached brick house; 2 bedrooms on first floor; 3 bedrooms and 4 bedrooms in upper-floor units; 1 bath in each; 2-car garage, 25- by 108-ft. lot; taxes $2,100 (Broker: Kremer Real Estate)
Forest Hills Gardens  $925,000
15 Olive Place  6-bedroom, 4-bath, one-family detached stucco-frame house; dining room, library, solarium, sunken living room, 2 fireplaces, 2-car garage, 80- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $4,500 (Broker: Madeleine Realty)  STATEN ISLAND  Great Kills  $136,500
28 Sandlewood Drive  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 6-year-old one-family attached town house; dining area, wall-to-wall carpet, c/a, 16- by 95-ft. lot; taxes $850 (Broker: Century 21/Appleseed Agency)  Heartland Village  $85,000
81 Country Drive South  (Town &amp; Country)  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 1,368-sq.-ft. condo in a 7-year-old building; dining room, eat-in kitchen, pool; common charge $134, taxes $819 (Broker: Salmon Real Estate)


Foreign-Born Adopted Kids' Identity Struggle
To the Editor:
As the adoptive parent of a Korean- born child and the author of numerous books and articles on intercountry adoption, I do not completely agree with Howard Alstein when he says that intercountry adopted children remain proud of their ethnic, racial and national origins ("Rescuing Romania's Orphans," Op-Ed, Nov. 28).


QE2 Accident
To the Editor: Like Kathleen Pavelec (Letters, Oct. 27), my father and I were passengers on the ill-fated QE2 voyage of Aug. 7.
And, like Ms.
Pavelec and her son, we were left on the ship all day.
My father needs help with his wheelchair, and yet throughout the crisis Cunard treated him with extraordinary neglect.
We were not adequately informed of the emergency procedures: while on the ship, we actually had to listen to the radio for news about what was happening to us.
We later learned that had my father been on the first ferry to shore, he could have been wheeled down a ramp to the boat.
As it turned out, the later boats were not equipped to handle wheelchair passengers.
My father had to be lowered three feet from the ship to the deck of a launch, in pitch black and extremely choppy seas.
This was terrifying.
After all this, we had a five-hour wait aboard a train in Providence, during which we were continually assured that we would be leaving shortly.


Still Trapped in a Vast Wasteland
The recent yanking of CBS's "Brooklyn Bridge" and the uncertainties surrounding NBC's "I'll Fly Away" are combining to produce a public epiphany in this country.
Commercial television, buffeted by new technologies that offer viewers attractive alternatives, is caught up in a frantic, and probably fruitless, drive to keep audiences and increase profits.
Now the network system, released from regulatory handcuffs during the Reagan-Bush era, is shackled by its own programming handcuffs instead: play safe, focus on undemanding formulas, minimize risks and dump series that fail to show immediate ratings potential.
The "Brooklyn Bridge" and "I'll Fly Away" situations provide an invaluable insight into the networks' predicament precisely because these are not trailblazing, controversial series.
They are good, solid family shows, the kind that get enthusiastic endorsements from influential watchdog organizations of irate viewers like the Fairfax Station, Va., group called Viewers for Quality Television.


Is a Cinematic New Wave Cresting?
While the Hollywood studios spent much of 1992 churning out the most forgettable home video fodder in recent memory, a funny thing was happening out on the fringes.
American independent film makers enjoyed an exhilaratingly good year, marked by receptive audiences, critical encouragement and the promise of even better things to come.
Why did we see such a confluence of impressive new talent?
Maybe it was just coincidence.
It may even have signaled the emergence of yet another cinematic new wave.


Life at Hard Labor
TRIALS OF THE EARTH
The Autobiography of Mary Hamilton.
Edited by Helen Dick Davis.
Illustrated. 259 pp.
Jackson: University Press of Mississippi. $25.


How 'Outsiders' Opened a Door On Imagination
Most big-theme exhibitions have problems, especially when they set out to trace a specific line of influence through several generations of artists.
But few spiral as completely out of control as "Parallel Visions: Modern Artists and Outsider Art," which examines the influence of untrained, sometimes mentally disturbed, artists on 20th-century art.
The show, at the Los Angeles County Museum of Art, includes nearly 250 works from the turn of the century to the present by 34 professional artists (from Paul Klee to Julian Schnabel) and 40 outsiders -- mental patients, recluses, spiritualists driven by inner necessity to paint, make sculpture or draw.
It delivers many thrills and insights, most of them due to the range and quality of its outsider works, which include sizable selections by Adolf Wolfli, Martin Ramirez and Henry Darger, three outsider geniuses.
But its superficial treatment of a complex subject, its unimaginative criteria for selection and its scattershot, often insulting installation are confusing and infuriating.


A Carbon Copy as Good as the Original
BREEDING and class count, and both are apparent at Stresa in Manhasset, the offspring of Navona in Great Neck and Il Tulipano in Huntington.
Even before Stresa opened, a stockpile of experience, expertise and professionalism went into it.
A top-notch service staff was assembled and is proving ready and able to smoothly accommodate the crush of diners that crowd this instantly popular restaurant every night.
Even at 8 P.M., when the flood is at its peak, the staff is amiable, efficient and never harried.


Caroling In the Heat And Sand
WANT TO HEAR SOME REAL CHRISTMAS music?
How about a Bedouin chant or a nice blast on the shofar?
In the telling of the Christmas story, we manage to go back 2,000 years; but in musical celebrations of it, Christians are stuck somewhere between the Middle Ages and "Silent Night."
Every December, in our imaginings, the hot desert of the Holy Land is magically covered by snow, and the snow by rosy-cheeked carolers in mufflers.
"O Come, All Ye Faithful" is the exhortation, but come to what?
The Christmas carol may sing about Bethlehem, but what it inspires in most of us is neither A.D. 1992 nor the year 0.


Yeltsin Bargains With Congress, Reducing Pressure at the Meeting
President Boris N. Yeltsin and Russia's militant Congress today backed away from the most serious confrontation yet in their stormy coexistence, striking a bargain that reopened the issue of the selection of a Prime Minister and called a referendum on a new Constitution for April.
The deal, brokered and announced by the chief justice of Russia's young Constitutional Court, Valery Zorkin, drew applause from relieved supporters of Mr.
Yeltsin and howls of rage from hard-line Communists, who had used the two-day stalemate to push against the Government on every legislative front.


Lisa W. Manson, Kevin J. Degen
Lisa Witmer Manson, a vice president and the unit manager of the Bank of Boston International, and Kevin Joseph Degen, a senior vice president of Sumitomo Bank Leasing and Finance, a financial services company, both in New York, were married there yesterday.
Msgr.
George F. Bardes performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of St.
Thomas More.
Mrs.
Degen graduated from the University of New Hampshire.
She is a daughter of Geraldine W. Manson of Fair Haven, N.J., and William Manson Jr., of Palm Beach, Fla.
Her father is the chairman of the Kari Corporation, an insurance consulting company in Washington.


Foreclosures May Have Hit the Bottom
"IN one day last month, a doctor, a dentist and an architect were among those who lost their homes," said Roger H. Sirlin, a lawyer in Mamaroneck who represented the lenders in the foreclosures.
"What that shows," he continued, "is that foreclosures run right through stratas of society. People are losing $30,000 co-ops, and others have lost million-dollar mansions. There are no typical foreclosure prototypes."


Philipp C. Jung, Set Designer, 43
Philipp C. Jung, a set designer for dozens of theater, opera, dance and film productions, died on Thursday at a hospital in San Luis Obispo, Calif., where he lived.
He was 43.
He died of complications of AIDS, friends said.


New &amp; Noteworthy
MURTHER &amp; WALKING SPIRITS, by Robertson Davies. (Penguin, $10.) The narrator suffers his own murder on the opening page, then sees the lives of his ancestors pass before him -- on a movie screen, no less, in the company of the critic who killed him.
"Mr. Davies is a tremendously enticing storyteller," Anthony Bailey said here last year, noting his novel's "splendid tidbits."
ELIZABETH I, by Anne Somerset. (St. Martin's, $14.95.) Was England's most revered female monarch really the champion of her people or a timid, indecisive ruler?
Anne Somerset, a British historian, has crowned Good Queen Bess with glory again, presenting her as the heroine of her time.
Earlier this year our reviewer, Cynthia Herrup, described this book as "the most comprehensive, the most reliable and the most readable biography of Elizabeth since Sir John Neale's" -- which, incidentally, has just been restored to print.
His QUEEN ELIZABETH I (Academy Chicago, $13.95) was praised in The Book Review in 1934 by P. M. Jack: "It is entirely delightful, witty and gallant in defense, and nothing better has been said on the side of Elizabeth, on this side of idolatry."


Lincoln Square
To the Editor:
"Trading Low-Income Housing for Bonuses" on Nov. 1 cites the city's inclusionary housing bonus program, which enables developers to build up to 20 percent additional floor area in exchange for constructing permanent low-income housing, as a major contributor to the size of the Lincoln Square project.
While the program did provide the project with a zoning bonus, the problems with the height, massing and commercial usage of the building reflect the developer's marketing and financial objectives.


Focus: Charleston, S.C.; A Village Proposed for a Pastoral Island
THE completion of the Mark Clark Expressway last June linking the pastoral Daniel Island with downtown Charleston just minutes away across the Cooper River has paved the way for a proposal to build a village over the next three decades to support as many as 17,000 residents.
Daniel Island is now home to two caretakers, deer, pigs, cattle and birds.


Tackling Problems We Thought We Solved
'So this Salvadoran woman calls up and she has a 9-month-old baby with diarrhea, and the doctor on call gave her the right advice, said go to the pharmacy and buy Pedialyte.
She had Medicaid, the doctor called the pharmacy, but when she got there, they said they couldn't give it to her for free without a written prescription.
So she takes the kid home, and over the next 36 hours the baby gets worse.
She doesn't call back -- she should have called back.
The kid appears in the emergency room 36 hours later, moribund, and dies three days later." Alan Meyers, M.D., is an assistant professor of pediatrics at Boston University School of Medicine, and one of the primary care pediatricians at Boston City Hospital. The baby he is describing was a patient in the primary care system at this hospital, the child of an immigrant mother, growing up in inner-city Boston.
"My wife and I drove up there to that neighborhood, we went to every pharmacy. The rehydration solutions cost up to $6.30 a liter. It's obscene charging this much for a product that ought to be cheaper than Coca-Cola -- it has less in it." A baby dies of dehydration from diarrhea in an American city in the last decade of the 20th century.
A mother cannot afford $6 worth of water and electrolytes, does not understand where to go for help.
It is a particularly sad, pointed illustration of what anyone who cares about children already knows: growing up in extreme poverty is bad, stunting, dangerous.


GARDENING
THERE is a word in the plant kingdom that gardeners will have to learn.
It is "dioecious," a word rooted in Greek which means two households.
For a gardener, the term means that two will have to be planted, that is, a male plant and a female plant since the male and female flowers are borne by different plants.
For the majority of plants grown in the garden there is no need to worry about this pairing.
Most of the plants have what are called perfect flowers, that is, male and female parts in the same flower.
But there are exceptions, and when the plant kingdom comes up with one of these glitches, unless there are two there will be no fruit.


Sports of The Times; An Athlete Named Nnenna Becomes a Rhodes Scholar
CECIL Rhodes would have been comfortable with the famous American male athletes named Byron White and Bill Bradley and Tom McMillen who earned the scholarships he founded.
But what would he have thought of a black woman with a first name from the Ibo tribe in Nigeria?
Something tells me Rhodes did not foresee Nnenna Lynch, a star long-distance runner from Villanova University and New York, who last week was among the 16 women and 16 men awarded Rhodes Scholarships to Oxford University in England.


Vanessa Green, Alexander Spiro
Gary and Shia Green of Potomac, Md., have announced the engagement of their daughter Vanessa Daryl Green to Alexander Charles Stiefel Spiro, a son of Herbert J. Spiro of Austin, Tex., and Elizabeth Spiro of Oslo.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
Green, 28 years old, is an associate in the law firm of Sidley &amp; Austin in New York, as is her fiance.
She graduated from Vassar College and received a law degree from Fordham University.
Her father is the director of the legal department of the Air Line Pilots Association in Washington.
Her mother is a psychotherapist in Gaithersburg, Md.


Is Neilson's Alarm Bell Too Rude an Awakening?
Last weekend, the Rangers arrived on Saturday at their practice facility in Rye, N.Y., and were greeted by an angry Roger Neilson.
Practice was canceled.
The Sunday morning skate was canceled.
Sunday afternoon hotel rooms, a courtesy on game days, were canceled.
Basically, Neilson told the players that he didn't want to see them until they arrived at Madison Square Garden for last Sunday night's game against Toronto.
It was an unprecedented move by Neilson, who was disgusted with the team's play in Washington that Friday night.
Neilson thought a lesson was in order.
But the worst was to come.


The Grooves. The Box. Ribbon-Ready.
Boxed sets have become a holiday gift-giving staple.
Here are some new choices for this season.
Prices are suggested retail.
'Hitsville U.S.A.: The Motown Singles Collection' Motown 3746336312; four CD's ($49.98) or cassettes ($39.98).


Oil Slick Spreads Havoc Along Spanish Coast
Next to a pile of oil-drenched rubber slickers, Juan Bonome gazed out across the small harbor of Mugardos, 35 miles northeast of La Coruna on the northwest coast of Spain.
Workers had just finished loading another 14-ton tanker truck with oil skimmed up by cleanup boats.
For a week, six to eight trucks a day had hauled away the black goo.
A faint smell of oil permeated the raw mist and oily muck an inch thick oozed around the shoreline and covered much of the beach.
A few oil-stained gulls squawked overhead.


When Using Pears, Plan Ahead
PEARS are among the more reliable of fruits to select for cooking and baking.
But because pears are best picked when they are still hard and allowed to become fully ripe off the tree, using them takes planning.
When pears figure in the menu, shopping for them is best done two or three days in advance to avoid a futile search for ripe ones in the market and to allow very firm specimens time to ripen at home.
This strategy also prevents buying pears that have become shopworn, battered and bruised on their way to ripening in the store.


Marcie Rosenthal, Bradley Pickard
Marcie Jill Rosenthal, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Allen M. Rosenthal of Dix Hills, L.I., was married there yesterday evening to Bradley Jon Pickard, the son of Dr.
Maurice Pickard and Dr.
Sheila Pickard of Highland Park, Ill.
Rabbi Simcha Weinberg performed the ceremony at the Dix Hills Jewish Center.
Mrs.
Pickard is an associate in the Chicago law firm of McDermott, Will &amp; Emery.
She graduated magna cum laude from Brown University and received a law degree from Columbia University.
Her father is a lawyer in Brooklyn.


Action Urged on L.I. Sound Cleanup
AFTER seven years and $15 million, a long-awaited and controversial plan to clean up Long Island Sound is about to be released, even though a specially commissioned computer model -- due two years ago and essential for developing certain proposals for the ailing estuary -- is still not finished.
While members of the Long Island Sound Study policy committee say they are frustrated by the delays in the computer model, they have taken a long-range approach to solving the estuary's problems.
They are confident that in the years to come their plan, which has been financed by the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, will reverse at least some of the environmental damage suffered by the 1,300-square-mile waterway.


Home Wrecker


The Grooves. The Box. Ribbon-Ready.
Boxed sets have become a holiday gift-giving staple.
Here are some new choices for this season.
Prices are suggested retail.
Elvis Presley: 'The King of Rock-and-Roll: The Complete 50's Masters' RCA 66050; five CD's ($79.98) or cassettes ($69.98).


Corrections
A chart on Nov. 29 headed "Preventive Measures," with an article about the condom market, defined the "sterilization" category incorrectly.
The category included tubal ligation, preferred by 15 percent of American women, and vasectomy, 10 percent.
Hysterectomy should have been included in the "other" category.


Moody Observations of Nature
AT a glance, the Edward Mitchell Bannister retrospective at the Whitney Museum's Champion Branch, in Stamford, would seem to be routine revisionism.
Bannister was a Barbizon-style painter, who was born around 1827 and died in 1901.
But on closer examination, almost nothing in the exhibition, which runs through Jan. 27, is what it appears to be.
Bannister's landscapes exude a melancholy that often resembles more the imaginary scenes of Blakelock and Ryder than works by the original exponents of Barbizon, itself a branch of French Realism and the precursor of Impressionism.
Also, their ups and downs are not in accord with the artist's general development, although the discrepancies may have to do with the lack of biographical information.


GARDENING
THERE is a word in the plant kingdom that gardeners will have to learn.
It is "dioecious," a word rooted in Greek which means two households.
For a gardener, the term means that two will have to be planted, that is, a male plant and a female plant since the male and female flowers are borne by different plants.
For the majority of plants grown in the garden there is no need to worry about this pairing.
Most of the plants have what are called perfect flowers, that is, male and female parts in the same flower.
But there are exceptions, and when the plant kingdom comes up with one of these glitches, unless there are two there will be no fruit.


Late Blooming


THE STORM'S HAVOC: Drenched and Stunned on New York's Shore; Community Firehouse In Bronx Is Weary Place
At the firehouse in Edgewater Park in the Bronx, which served as a combination shelter and emergency command post, a sober weariness yesterday replaced Friday night's frantic, adrenalin-fueled excitement.
Yesterday many of the volunteers who showed up to help their neighbors had had a chance to see in daylight what the furious storm had done.
Almost all of the damage came between 9 A.M. and 2 P.M.
Friday, and yesterday's bad weather seemed merely an annoyance.
It was estimated that 70 of the 675 homes in the neighborhood had suffered water damage.


MOST LIKELY TO SUCCEED
When Bill Clinton and Frank Aller "agonized" over their respective decisions regarding the draft, one was toughing it out morally while the other was engaging in complicated career calculations.


We Need a Slimmer but Still Capable Air Force; Dangerous Isolation
To the Editor:
As a former attack helicopter pilot, I agree with "Who Needs Four Air Forces?" (editorial, Nov. 30).
Our Joint Chiefs learned the hard way the virtues of less separation and greater interservice coordination during the 1983 Grenada operation.
With radios that couldn't talk between the branches and naval fuel nozzles that didn't fit Army aircraft, it became apparent that the services had expanded in dangerous isolation from each other.


150 Years of Music
The New York Philharmonic throws a birthday celebration for itself, Dec. 7.


Radio Host Tries to Close a Generational Gap
PEOPLE older than 50 now make up about 25 percent of the population of the United States, and those over 65 now outnumber teen-agers for the first time in American history.
Carole Bobruff cites these statistics as she urges people to look harder at both the power and the needs of older Americans.
She says it is time to forget myths, recognize markets, tap skills and stop ignoring problems.
Since 1990, Ms.
Bobruff has been the producer and host of "Senior Focus," a twice-weekly hourlong talk show, aimed at those 50 and older, on radio station WSUB in Groton.
For the show, which she said was the only one of its kind in Connecticut, she writes scripts, schedules guests, takes calls from listeners, solicits advertising and operates the equipment.
Recent guests have included a lawyer discussing tax laws and asset protection, pharmacists talking about drugs, and a lawmaker who urged area agencies for the elderly to work together.


A Disabling Football Injury Doesn't Close the Gym Door
IT is the day before the Canterbury School junior varsity basketball team plays its opening game against Taft in Watertown, and the Canterbury jayvee coach, Frank Bice, is not too happy with the way his team is practicing.
"How come we're dogging it?" Coach Bice yells out to his charges in the gymnasium on the Canterbury campus in New Milford, which is about 15 miles north of Danbury.
"Let's go! Let's wake up! We've got our first game tomorrow."


...And Another Resounding Jeer
To the Editor:
Louis D. Enoff, Acting Commissioner of Social Security ("The Word From Social Security," Letters, Nov. 29), is apparently unaware of the effect of Social Security taxes on the individual employee and on all other taxpayers as well.


Whips, Chains and Domestic Pets
To the Editor:
Caryn James is right about one point: Madonna does hit many nerves.
Ms.
James's review is, unfortunately, a prime example of this phenomenon.
Although she begins on a sophisticated, world-weary note ("Madonna's book is less the display of an erotic imagination than a cliched catalogue of what the middle class -- her target audience, after all -- is supposed to consider shocking"), Ms.
James soon exposes herself as a world-weary wannabe.
The barely contained discomfort with which she deals with the lesbian and sadomasochistic imagery in Madonna's work establishes Ms.
James as -- yes! -- a shocked member of the (presumably heterosexual and, to use her own terminology, "nonviolent") middle class.
The most extreme moment occurs during Ms.
James's defensive discussion of Madonna's "rough-edged fantasies," in which the reviewer frantically seeks to dissociate herself from the material she has been given to review: "Of course, some of us actually like the opposite sex; some of us believe it is possible to have great sex without whips, third parties or domestic pets." Fine.
But why is it that most homosexuals do not feel the need to announce their distaste for heterosexuality before reviewing a book dealing with heterosexual themes?


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
THE TWILIGHT OF SOVEREIGNTY How the Information Revolution Is Transforming Our World.
By Walter B. Wriston.
Scribners, $25.


Providing Havens for the Old and the Young
Like many widows, Eleanor F. faced a deep cut in income after her husband's death.
First, she had to sell furniture to pay the rent.
Then she found herself at a pawnshop, handing over the engagement ring she had worn since 1948.
But with help from The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund, she now lives in an apartment she can afford.
The fund also filled a void for Brennan Page, a teen-ager overwhelmed by the death of his mother and grandfather.
His life began again, he said, when he went to summer camp.
Articles, page


Amy M. Ludwig, Tedd Weisman
Amy Michelle Ludwig, a daughter of Doreen and William Ludwig of West Orange, N.J., was married last evening to Dr.
Tedd Lowell Weisman, the son of Diane and Herbert L. Weisman of Great Neck, L.I.
Rabbi Barry Friedman performed the ceremony at the Fair Lawn (N.J.) Jewish Center.
Mrs.
Weisman, 29 years old, is an assistant vice president at Morgen-Walke Associates, an investor-relations firm in New York.
She graduated from the University of Michigan.


POSTINGS: Land-Use Guidebook; Keeping the Hudson Valley Intact
In Washington Irving's 1819 story, Rip Van Winkle awakes after a 20-year sleep and finds his Hudson River Valley home completely different.
These days, Rip could probably get by on 20 (or 40) winks and still be shocked at the changes.
Or at least such is the concern of the Columbia Land Conservancy and the Dutchess Land Conservancy, which have issued the "Hudson River Valley Rural Design Guidebook" to urge the use of new zoning and other methods to make those rapid changes more pleasing to the eye and the environment.
Noting the "scenic beauty, environmental quality, productive agriculture" and "rich historic legacy" of Columbia and Dutchess Counties, the groups say that "after more than two centuries as an essentially rural and agricultural region," the valley faces "unprecedented and potentially destructive land development pressures." There has been, they say, "a two-pronged pattern of unchecked growth and speculation: vacation homes, and suburban tract development spreading out" from Albany and Poughkeepsie.


THE STORM'S HAVOC: New Jersey; Jersey Shore's Rich and Poor Respect Impartiality of Weather
The foghorn at Manasquan Inlet today sounded its mournful bleat every 20 seconds over a community where the rich and poor took stock of what the sea stole from them in the worst winter storm in memory.
Robin Snow and Ron Cortese stood glumly on a hill of sand in the underground parking garage of their $250,000 oceanfront condominium and wondered aloud what they could have salvaged if they had gotten out of bed 10 minutes earlier Friday morning.


The Sage and the Bull Moose
JOHN BURROUGHS
An American Naturalist.
By Edward J. Renehan Jr.
Illustrated. 356 pp.
Post Mills, Vt.: Chelsea Green Publishing Company. $24.95.


GARDENING
THERE is a word in the plant kingdom that gardeners will have to learn.
It is "dioecious," a word rooted in Greek which means two households.
For a gardener, the term means that two will have to be planted, that is, a male plant and a female plant since the male and female flowers are borne by different plants.
For the majority of plants grown in the garden there is no need to worry about this pairing.
Most of the plants have what are called perfect flowers, that is, male and female parts in the same flower.
But there are exceptions, and when the plant kingdom comes up with one of these glitches, unless there are two there will be no fruit.


One Language. One Faith. No Unity.
THE marines who went ashore in Mogadishu last week went to a land that stands as an emblem not only of human tragedy but also of one of Africa's most fraudulent political myths.
For years, Somalia's leaders tried to promote it as something different in a jigsaw-continent of competing tribes -- a homogeneous nation united by language and Islam, so sure of its identity that it aspired to spread its banners over parts of neighboring lands that it called its national turf.
The points of the Somali star, printed on everything from the flag to matchboxes, stood in part for its irredentist claims on parts of Kenya, Djibouti and Ethiopia, and the country's traditionally prolific poets were instructed to lyricize these claims as the national dream.


Ms. Johnson, Andrew Tennant
Bruce A. Johnson of Dorset, Vt., has announced February wedding plans for his daughter, Sharon Kay Johnson, and Andrew Wellman Tennant, a son of Donald and Barbara Tennant of Carlsbad, Calif.
Ms.
Johnson, 36 years old, is the head of design at KM Krizia, a men's sportswear manufacturer in New York.
She graduated from Skidmore College.
She is also the daughter of the late Judith K. Johnson and a stepdaughter of Diane Johnson of Dorset.
Her father is a retired vice president for Prudential-Bache Securities in New York.


The Gender Chronicles
The drag trend may be peaking.
Charles Busch, the actor and author who has steadfastly played female characters since his Off Broadway play "Vampire Lesbians of Sodom" opened in 1985, will portray a man in his next play.
Tentatively titled "A Name For Himself," the show features Mr.
Busch as a young electrologist living in Greenwich Village.
"He has all these strange people who come to him to have their body hair removed," said Mr.
Busch, who hopes to open the play in New York in the fall.


What to Expect
Airports
La Guardia: Expected to operate at reduced capacity today and may resume normal operation tomorrow.
For information on flights, call the airline, or (718) 476-5000.
Kennedy: Sporadic delays. Call (718) 244-4444.


'The Change'
To the Editor:
I took the thyroid-replacement medicine, the anti-inflammatory for what might be arthritis, the calcium tablets and the vitamin D to help process the calcium.
Now I can settle down and reply to Natalie Angier's review of "The Change: Women, Aging and the Menopause" (Oct. 11).


'The Change'
To the Editor:
Mark Twain would probably disagree with Germaine Greer's comment about the sexual advantages possessed by silver-haired men.
He lamented a man's loss of ability while envying a woman's continued sexual competence: "After 50 his performance is of poor quality, the intervals between are wide, and its satisfactions of no great value to either party." In suggesting that women's sexual pleasures with male partners are dependent on nubile breasts or silicone implants or youth, Ms.
Greer seems to have ignored much feminist writing.
Post-menopausal women can and do enjoy sex with men.
LAURA B. MAIER Walla Walla, Wash.


The Grooves. The Box. Ribbon-Ready.
Boxed sets have become a holiday gift-giving staple.
Here are some new choices for this season.
Prices are suggested retail.
'Fleetwood Mac -- 25 Years -- The Chain' Warner Brothers 45129; four CD's ($72.98) or cassettes ($62.98).


Upstaging the Exhibit
Eye-catching outfits grace the Metropolitan Museum's Costume Institute benefit, Dec. 7.


Where the Menu Crisscrosses the Map
WHEN the restaurant called Gates first opened its wrought-iron doors in New Canaan in 1979, you could count the restaurants in town on one hand with fingers to spare.
Gates became an instant hit, based on a combination of appealing dishes, inviting atmosphere and friendly staff.
Today one block of Forest Street and the parallel block on Main Street constitute practically a restaurant row.
In light of all the competition, we decided to see how Gates was holding up.
On the basis of business on a weekday, weeknight and weekend, it seems evident that Gates continues to do well.
Its attached bar (with dining tables) is very much a gathering place.
Atmosphere has much to do with a restaurant's success, and in this Gates has exercised a masterly touch.
A spacious room, separated into smaller areas by the use of huge terra cotta urns filled with ivy, uses colorful paintings and ceramic plates on cream-colored walls, apple-green checked cloths on glass-topped tables and large white globe lights overhead to provide visual appeal.
Two large ficus trees and a skylight over the high ceilinged end of the room add airiness.


Shoreham Fuels Nuclear Proliferation
The Long Island Power Authority wants to get rid of the partially used nuclear fuel at its decommissioned Shoreham power plant.
So it proposes to ship the fuel to France, where the plutonium in it can be extracted by reprocessing for use as nuclear fuel for other power plants.
That may solve the immediate problem of what to do with Shoreham's radioactive residue.
But it could open the way for a dangerous worldwide trade in plutonium that can be diverted into bomb-making.


2 South Americans Win Copa Tourney
TWO South American grandmasters, Alonso Zapata of Colombia and Jaime Sunye Neto of Brazil, shared first place in the Copa Gobernador International Tournament, which finished Oct. 15 in Linares, , Mexico.
Each scored 10 1/2-4 1/2 in the round-robin tournament of 16 players from the Western hemisphere.
Third place was shared by the Cuban grandmaster Reynaldo Vera and the Canadian international master Deen Hergott, who each tallied 9 1/2-5 1/2.


No Headline
Legalizing a Lease  Question: Over 10 years ago my married daughter signed a lease for a Manhattan Mitchell-Lama apartment.
Her unmarried daughter, who has the same name as her mother, then moved in and has been paying the rent.
The rent is based on the income of the mother, which is higher than her daughter's.
Is there any way to legitimize the daughter's position and get her name on the lease? . . .
Aaron Galuten, Manhattan  Answer: Probably not.
As you have described the situation, your daughter and granddaughter have violated Mitchell-Lama rules, as they apply to both state- and city-supervised housing.


When Using Pears, Plan Ahead
PEARS are among the more reliable of fruits to select for cooking and baking.
But because pears are best picked when they are still hard and allowed to become fully ripe off the tree, using them takes planning.
When pears figure in the menu, shopping for them is best done two or three days in advance to avoid a futile search for ripe ones in the market and to allow very firm specimens time to ripen at home.
This strategy also prevents buying pears that have become shopworn, battered and bruised on their way to ripening in the store.


The Sounds of Christmas Ring Out In a Chorus of Global Voices
HOLIDAY music programs in churches and concert halls throughout Connecticut increasingly reflect the diversity of members of their audiences.
Carols and songs of different countries and cultures are included in almost every seasonal service and concert, supplementing the traditional carols and religious masterworks.
Participation by congregations is increasing, too.
"People want to sing," said Judith Willour, music director at St.
Paul's on the Green in Norwalk.
"They have asked for carols like 'O Holy Night,' which we never played, thinking it was too old-fashioned."


How a 'Rainbow Curriculum' Turned Into Fighting Words
THREE years ago, not long after the killing of a young black man in a white neighborhood in Bensonhurst, a group of teachers and administrators in New York City began writing a curriculum to teach first graders to respect the city's myriad racial and ethnic groups.
The result, called "Children of the Rainbow," offers teachers games, songs and other lessons to teach racial harmony among their 6-year-old charges -- from Irish ballads to the Mexican hat dance, the recipe for Greek New Year's Day bread to the Japanese version of rock, scissors, paper.


Old Mill Town Revived By Foreign Investment
AT one time Connecticut's textile industry was world renowned, employing tens of thousands of people and accounting for much of the state's manufacturing base.
Today, textile employment in Connecticut has shrunk to 2,600 jobs -- representing less than 0.2 percent of all employment in the state -- with a loss of more than 100 jobs in the last year alone.
It would seem like a dying industry for Connecticut.


A Giant Tune With the Wrong Notes
People blow on their hands in Arizona, too.
During the second quarter of today's Giants-Cardinals game, the temperature was barely 50 degrees, the 20 mile-an-hour wind made a hissing sound in the players' helmet earholes, and the Sun Devil Stadium sod was mush.
This was the atmosphere when New York rookie quarterback Dave Brown entered a 0-0 contest with 11 minutes 26 seconds remaining before halftime.
And not only was Brown ankle deep in mud, his Giants were mired even deeper in their own territory -- at the 2-yard line.


Sweet Dreams
Before the last whiff of turkey fades, the sweet smell of brown sugar, butter and nuts wafts through my mother's kitchen.
She starts baking Christmas cookies the day after Thanksgiving.
Barring disasters, she always produces 22 different types by the time her brood gets down to serious plea bargaining with Santa.
With six children, disasters were part of everyday life.
Even so, I can't remember a Christmas without a panoply of cookies to be arranged on platters for guests, mounded on plates to deliver to relatives and friends, or stolen from their tins by my brothers and me.
"Maybe we have mice," we'd suggest, whenever the issue of diminishing Christmas cookies came up.
It was apparent who the mice were from the types of cookies missing -- our individual preference for Swedish nut balls or burnt sugar lace cookies filigreed with chocolate was as well known as the color of our eyes.


Sally L. Mumma, Francis P. Stacom
Sally Louise Mumma, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Richard D. Mumma Jr. of Long Beach Island, N.J., was married yesterday to Francis Patrick Stacom, a son of Ellen Stacom of New York and the late Peter Stacom.
Msgr.
John Cooke, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at Holy Trinity Lutheran Church in Brant Beach, N.J.
The Rev.
Jeffrey Elliot, a Lutheran minister, also took part.
Mrs.
Stacom is a training and organization development specialist and her husband is a power systems engineer at the New York Power Authority in New York.
Mrs.
Stacom graduated from New York University, from which she also received a M.A. in communications.


Christine Moyles, Kenneth Kovan
Philip V. Moyles of New York has announced the engagement of his daughter Christine Anne Moyles to Kenneth Edward Kovan, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward F. Kovanic of Rumson, N.J.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss Moyles, 26 years old, was until recently an assistant in Brussels for Sotheby's, the auction house.
She graduated from Kenyon College.
She is also a daughter of Anne K. Moyles of Monmouth Beach, N.J.
Her father is of counsel to the New York law firm Lambos &amp; Giardino.
The bride's grandfather, Thomas J. Kane of South Palm Beach, Fla., is a retired vice president and general manager of the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel in New York.


Insiders, Outsiders
IN forming his economic team, President-elect Bill Clinton seemed to have two goals in mind: to break the political deadlock between Congress and the White House and to assure the financial markets that the economy would be run on a steady course.
So for the top economic policy jobs, Mr.
Clinton turned last week to Congress and Wall Street.
But for the next round of appointments he reached out into the country for people with limited Washington experience.


Maria A. Voles, Rodney Ferguson
Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Voles of Murrell's Inlet, S.C., have announced the engagement of their daughter Maria Angela Voles to Rodney Keith Ferguson, a son of Alma Lou Bennett of Huntsville, Ala., and James R. Ferguson of Orlando, Fla.
A May wedding is planned.


A Stockingful of Holiday Favorites
A GLANCE at the concert schedule makes it clear the holidays are coming.
For starters, the Stamford Center for the Arts is presenting the Stamford City Ballet production of Tchaikovsky's "Nutcracker" in the Palace Theater with guest artists from the New York City Ballet at noon and 4 P.M.
Handel's "Messiah" is offered this evening at 7 with James David Christie conducting the Ensemble Abendmusik of Boston at St.
John's Roman Catholic Church (325-4466).
Audiences will find a competing "Messiah" at the Norwalk Concert Hall this afternoon at 4 with Johannes Somary conducting the Fairfield County Chorale and the Norwalk Symphony (866-2455).
If one would rather sing along, the Yale Glee Club's 1oth annual "Messiah Sing-In" starts at 3:30 P.M. in Battell Chapel (432-4136).
Selections from the Handel oratorio are also part of the "Traditional Candlelight Christmas" that the Pro Arte Singers are celebrating today at 4 P.M., although the group's music director, Arthur Sjogren, has balanced the program at First Presbyterian Church of Stamford with seasonal pieces by such later masters as Holst, Respighi and Saint-Saens (323-7955).


A Big Market and an Incubator for Fast Food
IRA NIERMAN of Huntington is "hooked" on fast food.
"Once I ate fast food 21 days in a row," he said.
"I thought I was addicted to the hot sauce on the chicken burrito at Taco Bell. On the 22d day I stopped eating there, and I did not experience any serious side effects or withdrawals, so I knew I was O.K."
Gail Meirovitch of Great Neck takes her two daughters to dinner at McDonald's or a pizzeria two to three nights a week.
"I can spend all day cooking a meal, and my kids won't eat it," she said.
"So I end up cooking something else fast, and it usually turns out to be something that is not that nutritious. With fast food, at least I know they will eat it."


INSIDE
Concern in the Board Rooms
Many executives say Bill Clinton cannot simultaneously address job growth and deficit cutting.
Page 40.
U.S.
Stiffens Stand on Serbia
The United States will back a United Nations resolution to enforce a ban on Serbian flights in Bosnia.
Page 24.
Torretta Wins Heisman
Gino Torretta, the Miami quarterback, won college football's 58th Heisman Trophy.
SportsSunday, section 8.


POSTINGS: Preservation Awards; Tenants And Church
The New York Landmarks Conservancy presented 11 Lucy G. Moses preservation awards Wednesday evening.
Testament to the growth of preservation is the fact that James Marston Fitch, a giant in the field for many years, shared honors with the tenant association at 41 Convent Avenue, in Harlem, which has been restoring its building, and the congregation of the New Lots Community Church in the East New York area of Brooklyn, which has struggled to maintain its sanctuary, built in 1823.
Mr.
Fitch, 83 years old, directed Columbia University's graduate program in preservation, which was the first of its kind.
"Historic preservation, 40 years ago, was considered in many circles as an esoteric activity on the part of little old ladies with blue hair and tennis shoes," he said.
"In the interval, it's become authentically a mass movement, to the extent where I now consider it to be a dominant force in the field of urban activity."


A la Carte; Seasoned Hands Take On New Restaurant Ventures
DESPITE the recession and softness in restaurant business, the big are growing bigger on Long Island.
The expansions, evident in recent months, are far from over.
These are some changes in the last few weeks:
*The owners of Navona in Great Neck and Il Tulipano in Huntington opened Stresa in Manhasset.


When Opera Was Truly Grand in London
WHAT WAS A Londoner's experience of grand opera in Covent Garden's heyday?
Americans have a certain sense of it, because we read so many British writers on opera, from Henry Chorley and G. B. Shaw to John Steane.
We're conversant with the highlights: young Thomas Beecham's daring introduction of "Elektra"; the unexpected advent of Luisa Tetrazzini, the middle-aged soprano superstar; the revelation of Fyodor Chaliapin in "Boris"; the pomp of the 1937 Coronation Season.
Pearl Records, the busiest and in some ways the best of the historical CD labels, has set out to answer the question not in prose but in sound for the years 1870 to 1939.
The four-volume set (GEMM CDS 9923/6; 12 CD's in all) is one for the holiday gift list -- but give it to an opera lover who is not yet fascinated by historical recordings; anyone who is will likely have bought it as soon as it appeared.
And having bought it, will have dived in and emerged hours later, senses sharpened, full of gushy enthusiasm and pointed criticisms at the same time.


Action Is Put Off on a House 'C-Span' Rule
Backing down after protests from the Republican leadership, House Democrats have agreed to postpone a proposed rule change curbing the ability of members to express their views after business hours, customarily to an empty chamber but before a national C-Span audience.
On Wednesday the Democratic caucus decided to limit the use of the practice, which is called "special orders," to three hours, up to 9 P.M., Eastern time.
Republicans frequently use the time to speak on a variety of subjects.


Jennifer Hough, Francis Conley
Mr. and Mrs.
John D. Hough of New Canaan, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Jennifer Keyes Hough, to Francis Joseph Conley, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William P. Conley of Stonington, Conn.
A July wedding is planned.
Miss Hough, 26 years old, graduated from Sweet Briar College and is a master's degree candidate in social work at Fordham University.
Her father owns Jack Hough Associates Inc., a corporate communications concern in Norwalk, Conn.


Update; Construction to Begin At Closed Raceway
After nearly five years of controversy, construction on two new retail outlets is about to begin at the long-closed 172-acre Roosevelt Raceway, the largest tract of undeveloped commercial property in Nassau County.
The Hempstead Town Board has approved plans for a major retail development by Wal-Mart and Sam's Club.
Together they will put 1,000 construction workers back on the job and create 650 permanent jobs once completed, said Joseph N. Mondello, the town's presiding supervisor.


Broadway Is Just the Beginning
As image problems go, the one Walter J. Turnbull describes is not the worst, however inconvenient it may be.
"Perhaps we just look too successful," Mr.
Turnbull, the founder and director of the Boys Choir of Harlem, said recently.
"We're on television too much. The boys look good, and all the publicity is great. But people don't know what goes on, the time and energy it takes to make that happen. We have a problem getting the kind of money we need."


A Kid Commissioner's Coup
WHEN Matthew J. Scheckner, then all of 23 years old, became the founding executive director of the New York Sports Commission five years ago, he was dubbed "The Kid" by Alair Townsend, now publisher of the weekly Crain's New York Business.
His rivals might now call him "Billy the Kid," after he all but stole the 1998 Goodwill Games recently.
The Sports Commission is a not-for-profit corporation founded in 1987 that acts on behalf of the New York area to bid on Olympic-style events.


Heisman Handoff To Torretta
He had already earned a chance for immortality by throwing the football.
But in the final hours before Gino Torretta's senior year at the University of Miami would forever be remembered as a Heisman season, the quarterback was forced to do some scrambling.
Torretta became the winner of the 58th Heisman Memorial Trophy Award yesterday by a surprisingly comfortable margin over Marshall Faulk of San Diego State, but not before the storm throughout the Northeast forced a change in his itinerary and threatened to disrupt his personal victory tour.


Snow Must Go On, but So Do Games
The nor'easter that lashed the New York metropolitan area with high winds and driving rains on Friday before shifting into snow gear yesterday morning caused only sporadic travel disruptions for teams coming into the area or leaving for weekend games.
That was largely because many had fortuitously chosen to use Newark International Airport.
As the most sheltered of the area's three major airports, Newark was less affected by the storm.


A Disabling Football Injury Doesn't Close the Gym Door
IT is the day before the Canterbury School junior varsity basketball team plays its opening game against Taft in Watertown, and the Canterbury jayvee coach, Frank Bice, is not too happy with the way his team is practicing.
"How come we're dogging it?" Coach Bice yells out to his charges in the gymnasium on the Canterbury campus in New Milford, which is about 15 miles north of Danbury.
"Let's go! Let's wake up! We've got our first game tomorrow."


Computerizing the Maze Of Savings and Loan Data
WHEN the Resolution Trust Corporation chose JBS &amp; Associates to auction off $800 million worth of bad consumer, commercial and real estate loans from failed savings and loans, it handed the seven-year-old Chicago real estate consulting and auction firm the largest such assignment in history.
To make things easier on everyone, Joel D. Zegart, president of JBS, has brought computer technology to bear to make it easier for potential bidders to plan for the fire sale of the 43,000 debts last week in Atlanta.


McNally's 'Lips Together' in Chappaqua
THE Coyote Theater's production of "Lips Together, Teeth Apart" offers a welcome chance to hear the play.
Terrence McNally's "comedy that hurts," about the prejudices and terrors of two upscale heterosexual couples, has been favored with praise and even prizes.
But the glittering performances and spiffy production values of last year's first-class Off Broadway production might have diverted attention from the playwright's words.
Enough, in fact, to suggest that, in their comments on how contemporary life is hazardous to physical, mental and emotional health, these rarefied folks in a beach house in one of Fire Island's gay communities, are suffering mostly from the delusion of depth.


Byrd's Intention: No Presumptions
To the Sports Editor:
I take exception to Dr.
Joseph Torg's statement that "Byrd was aiming with his head" ("Experts Disagree on Football Injury Prevention," The Times, Dec. 2), a conclusion that he reached from watching the videotape.
Torg should know that Scott Mersereau was not the objective of the tackle.
Byrd's body ended up facing Mersereau's because the quarterback stepped up into the pocket.
For Torg to conclude that Dennis Byrd was aiming with his head borders on irresponsible.


What's Under The Tree? Stiffs And Hoods
Two years ago, the big movie that opened on Christmas Day was a cheerful extravaganza, "The Godfather, Part III." Well, it
was
about a family.
And the Corleones are always sitting around eating a lot, so maybe it wasn't such an odd holiday choice, except for the back-stabbing and shooting and dead people.
Last year's holiday season brought that lovable gangster in "Bugsy." And the tradition goes on.
This year you're getting Jimmy Hoffa for Christmas.
Coming up are movies filled with bloodshed, betrayal and music -- something for everyone, from the tiniest incipient Mafioso to the most corrupt patriarch.


Nets Find That Close Loss to Bulls Has Positive Side
The Nets were not a depressed team after their 95-89 loss to the Bulls in Chicago on Saturday night.
Incredibly enough, they were somewhat buoyant.
A loss is a loss, but sometimes there are good ways to lose.
New Jersey hung with the Bulls, the National Basketball Association's defending champions, until the final six minutes of the game.
At that point, Michael Jordan picked up the defensive intensity and the other Bulls followed his lead.
The Nets, still without Derrick Coleman, wilted under the pressure and lost.


Flooding and Snow Stagger Massachusetts
One of the longest and most sweeping storms in two decades pounded southern New England this weekend, flooding most coastal areas in Massachusetts and burying the central part of the state in snow.
Before the storm subsided today, hundreds of people were forced to evacuate their homes because of flooding and power failures, and there were at least two storm-related deaths -- one man from Savoy and another from Lowell died after suffering heart attacks while shoveling snow.


Rate Request by Empire Poses Problems for Cuomo
In a few weeks, the New York State Insurance Department will rule on an issue that state lawmakers thought had been resolved by their landmark insurance law last summer: whether to impose a major rate increase on 1.4 million customers of Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield, the state's largest insurer.
The request has placed Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and the state Superintendent of Insurance, Salvatore R. Curiale, in a seemingly intractable bind.
Either they allow the rate increase, leaving many customers priced out of insurance altogether, or they deny the request, possibly forcing Empire into a crisis beyond repair.
With officials predicting that the state budget deficit next year may be as high as $4 billion, a third solution -- a cash bailout -- seems highly unlikely.


From Storms to Skating, Winter Sure Has Its Moments


World Economies


AFTER THE STORM: Long Island; Almost 3,000 Homeless In a North Shore Town
National Guard trucks slowly made their way through the flood waters this morning, a rowboat in tow for rescue operations.
The guardsmen called out to those few residents who chose to stay behind and kept an eye out for looters.
"Need a lift out?" shouted Sgt.
Luis Serrano-Perez, of the 242d Signal Battalion from Hempstead.


They Moved With the Beat to Raise Money


Topics of The Times; A Big Grant for Russian Science
One good way to curb the proliferation of nuclear arms is to keep talented Russian scientists at home in Russia doing research rather than selling their knowledge and their services to renegade states bent on acquiring nuclear arsenals.
With Russia's economy tottering and its research budgets cut to the bone, the only hope is for the West to provide research grants to keep the scientists gainfully employed on civilian projects.
That would help Russia through a difficult time and make the world a bit safer for everyone.


Accusations Against Hawaii Senator Meet a Silence in His Seat of Power
Behind the stage set of fragrant flowers, balmy trade winds and turquoise lagoons, there is another Hawaii: a world of bare-knuckle, one-party politics where the Democrats dominate and one formidable man, Senator Daniel K. Inouye, reigns supreme.
And so when this war hero, this influential committee leader who brings home the bacon, this icon in Hawaii's powerful Japanese-American community was hit with allegations of sexual misconduct shortly before his November re-election, Senator Inouye's colleagues and constituents were confounded by what to say and do.


Review/Pop; Irish Folk Meets Pop (Naturally)
The Irish folk-pop singer Maura O'Connell has a mop of red hair, a clear ringing voice that carries a distinct tang and an unerring ear for obscure, quality songs.
She is also about as unlike a diva as a pop singer could be.
And last Monday evening at the Bottom Line, where she performed with two guitarists and a bass player, she projected the naturalness of someone who had just dropped into her local pub with a few friends to knock off some favorite tunes.
Miss O'Connell, who comes from a working-class family in County Clare, brings a clear-eyed realism to everything she sings.
But if her Irish folk roots are evident, there is nothing provincial about her style.
Her taste in material runs from the best progressive country songs to folk-rock numbers by Paul Brady, the Irish singer, songwriter and cult hero whose songs have also been recorded by Bonnie Raitt.


The Other Clinton Helps Shape the Administration
After thanking Bill Clinton for inviting her to join his Cabinet, Donna E. Shalala put in a word for the Presidential adviser who helped get her the job.
"I'd like to say something about the other Clinton -- a woman of immense talent, my friend Hillary," Ms.
Shalala said Friday after the President-elect had announced her appointment as Secretary of Health and Human Services.


Dance in Review
New York City Ballet  'The Nutcracker' New York State Theater
Although the Sugarplum Fairy has a plum part in George Balanchine's "Nutcracker," her Cavalier does not.
Yet the Cavalier is a necessary presence, for his partnering skills help show off the ballerina in the climactic pas de deux.


Lost Year Still Has Lingering Question
No matter how much Coach Ray Handley insists that his players are giving a good effort, no matter how much those players say they are trying, the Giants have given up on the season.
Saturday's 19-0 embarrassment against the Phoenix Cardinals was their fifth straight loss and dropped their record to 5-9, and Handley's job seems sure to vanish after the two remaining games.
The execution will probably come quickly.
If the National Football League's club owners and players agree on a free-agency system, as seems imminent, it will be important to have a head coach and assistants in place quickly to help in assessing incumbent and available talent for next year.


Dance in Review
Pascal Rioult  Theater of the Riverside Church Morningside Heights
If Pascal Rioult keeps on creating the kinds of dances he has been choreographing with such authority and grace for a mere three years, he may have to leave his job as a soloist with the Martha Graham Dance Company and become a full-time choreographer.
His latest program, presented on Friday night, was a civilized, beautifully wrought joy.


The Eagles Get Past Themselves
Eagles 20, Seahawks 17
SEATTLE, Dec. 13 (AP) -- Roger Ruzek kicked a 44-yard field goal as overtime expired to give the Philadelphia Eagles a 20-17 victory over the Seattle Seahawks today.
The Eagles (9-5) overcame a club-record 191 penalty yards on 17 penalties and 10 sacks of quarterback Randall Cunningham to give their playoff hopes a big boost after they trailed, 17-10, late in the fourth quarter.


Dance in Review
Reggie Wilson  'The Clearing' Bessie Schonberg Theater
Troubled people filled "The Clearing," the compelling dance program that Reggie Wilson presented on Friday night.


Review/Television; Debating What to Do About the Deficit
With President-elect Bill Clinton's television special on the economy beginning today, tonight's two-hour "Firing Line" debate at 9 on PBS could not be smacker on the news.
Viewers who stay with it -- not as arduous an obligation as it might seem from the proposition "Resolved: Reducing the Federal Deficit in the Next Four Years Is a Top Priority" -- should come out better equipped to assess the new Administration's approach to the overriding issue of the campaign.
As talk-show fans must know by now, the problem facing Mr.
Clinton is whether to give priority to reducing the $4 trillion Federal debt, which could mean prolonging the recession, or promptly trying to stimulate the economy, which would mean a continuing increase in the deficit for a while at least.


AFTER THE STORM: The Overview; WEAKENING STORM LEAVES NORTHEAST WITH HUGE DAMAGE
Blue skies returned to a storm-ravaged New York metropolitan area yesterday, but at least 112,000 homes had no power, surging tides again flooded coastal communities, and residents and public officials surveyed a monstrous toll of damage from two days of pounding by hurricane-like winds, rain and snow.
The fierce storm, which caused six deaths and scores of injuries in the tri-state region and disrupted travel, business and countless lives, was gone, 500 miles out to sea by midafternoon, its trailing, weakening winds flicking final backhand insults at the twin forks of eastern Long Island.


Review/Dance: The Hard Nut; Mark Morris Toys With Tradition
Boring choreography: That is certainly what you don't expect from Mark Morris but that is certainly what you get, sight gags aside, at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, where Mr.
Morris's sitcom, "The Hard Nut," had its American premiere on Friday night.
Look at a current aspect of the international dance scene that hovers on intellectual bankruptcy and you find retellings of the ballet classics like Mats Ek's "Giselle," set in an insane asylum, and now, Mr.
Morris's conceptual "Nutcracker" that begins in a vaguely 1960's suburban American living room.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week:  Monday  None  Tuesday  Business Inventories . . .
Oct.
Wednesday  Housing Starts . . .
Nov.
Industrial Production . . .
Nov.
Thursday  Weekly Jobless Claims  Friday  None


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11  DONORS FORCE RUSSIA TO WAIT
Political uncertainty and a global recession have pushed large-scale aid to Russia off the international agenda -- even though experts agree that it is essential for the transformation of the country to a free-market economy.
A1  Officials see hope in President Yeltsin's accord with lawmakers.
A10


Where a War Has Bred Famine, Green Somali Fields Offer Hope
The fields astride the swollen Shebelle River stretched emerald green today with corn, onions, green peppers and lettuce, and the red soil remained soggy from the generous rainy season.
In famine-stricken Somalia such abundance just 30 miles from Mogadishu seemed implausible.
"The problem is not food," said Yusuf Ali Yusuf, a Government agronomist who now works with a relief agency to distribute seeds.
"It's a question of law and order. You have to pay a lot to guard all this. You have to buy bullets every day."


System for Political Asylum Is Improving, Report Finds
Refugees fleeing persecution now have a better and better chance of getting a fair hearing and winning political asylum from a system long assailed as hostile and biased, says a Harvard Law School report being made public today.
Nonetheless, the Immigration and Naturalization Service's asylum system remains seriously backlogged and overly influenced by foreign policy considerations, says the report by the Harvard Law School's National Asylum Study Project.
And even in the two years since the immigration agency created a national cadre of asylum officers, many political refugees are still throwing their fate to chance because the quality of the officers varies drastically.


Rangers Offer Many Happy Returns
Maybe the Rangers arranged this as a gift for Mike Richter, who returned from a three-game exile, confidence certainly shaken, to face the third-best team in the National Hockey League at Madison Square Garden last night.
Richter must have felt blessed, for one evening at least.
Maybe, too, this performance was designed to impress Kevin Lowe, who arrived from Edmonton over the weekend and watched his first game as a Ranger from the bench.
Lowe certainly liked what he saw.


Victims' Reminder
To the Editor:
Arguing against victims' rights in criminal prosecutions, David L. London (letter, Nov. 27) revealed the need for a new required course at Ivy League law schools: "Reality." How else to explain the fatuous legalism, "Any crime committed by a defendant is first and foremost a crime against the state."


Doubts On Funds For Roads
The additional $80 billion that Bill Clinton promised to spend during the next four years on public works elated many manufacturers during the Presidential race.
Now, as campaign oratory shifts to policy-making, many executives of manufacturing companies say they have doubts about how much of the money will actually materialize and how much such a program will increase employment.
The President-elect's plan is straightforward: Stepped-up spending on refurbishing the nation's highways and bridges will swell companies' workloads, quickly creating tens of thousands of jobs and giving a jolt to the economy.
But many executives of manufacturing companies -- even those whose core business centers on products essential to any program to rebuild the infrastructure -- say that the money will come slowly, at best, and that the impact on their companies will probably be modest.


Tax Breaks Ahead, But How Big and for Whom?
For the makers of corporate jets, President-elect Bill Clinton's promise to restore an investment tax credit could not come at a better time.
As corporate America suffered in the recession, its jet makers suffered even more.
They are just winding up their worst year in memory and are pining for investment credits, which they say increased their annual orders by up to 50 percent in some years.


Bridge
Contrary to popular belief, fact, on average, is not stranger than fiction, although a great deal commoner.
The same is true of Swiss Team matches, which are played in abundance at every weekend tournament.
A fictional version, using actual deals, has appeared monthly for many years in The Bridge World, and its author, Jeff Rubens, has now collected some of them in "Swiss Team Challenge" ($13.75 including mailing from The Bridge World, 39 West 94th Street, New York, N.Y. 10025).
The diagramed deal, in which the author himself was the declarer, is one of the most difficult in the book.
West leads the heart king and shifts to a trump.
East takes his winners and lead his last trump, preventing any ruffs in the dummy.
West throws his two heart losers, and reluctantly gives up the club eight when South plays another trump.
South must then plan his play in this position:
[ DIAGRAM ]
South's primary chance is a normal diamond split, since he can set up the fifth diamond with a ruff and return to the club ace.
But he should consider the possibility that somebody, probably West, has five diamonds.
If that is true he could be squeezed in the red suits by cashing the ace and king of clubs followed by trumps.
But removing the ace of clubs is fatal if East began with four diamonds.
South should give himself an extra chance by cashing the club king, seeking a little more information, and then leading a trump.
That ruins West, for if he throws a club South can cash the ten.
This is a clash squeeze, a very rare bird indeed.


Baltimore's Lead in Contraception
A girl who grows up in Baltimore, has all too strong a chance of becoming a mother before she reaches adulthood.
In 1990, 1 in 10 of the city's 15- to 17-year-olds gave birth.
So it was welcome news two years ago when contraceptives became available at health clinics in the city's six high schools and two middle schools.
Although Maryland law allows youngsters to receive birth control devices without an adult's permission, 95 percent of the students O.K.'d the schools' request to talk to parents.


Few Tie-Ups Remain
Most services were expected to return to normal today.
Here are some of the problems: New Jersey PATH: No PATH service today between Hoboken and Manhattan.
Until service is restored more shuttle buses will operate between Hoboken and the Port Authority Bus Terminal in New York between 5:30 A.M. and 9 A.M. today.
Information: (800) 234-PATH.
Rail: The North Jersey Coast Line between Long Branch and Bay Head was expected to reopen by this morning.
Information: (201) 491-7400.
Airports La Guardia: One runway may remain closed.
General airport information: (718) 476-5000.
New York City Subways: No L line service in the tunnel between Manhattan and Brooklyn.
Commuters should transfer from the L line at the Broadway-Eastern Parkway station to the A, C or J trains, or to the M line at Myrtle Avenue in Brooklyn.
Information: (718) 330-1234.
Roads: Franklin D. Roosevelt Drive open.
Department of Transportation: 566-2525; storm hot line: 374-2303.
Long Island Railroad officials did not know whether service on the Long Beach line would be restored by this morning.
Information: (718) 217-LIRR.


Rioting Threatens India's Secular Foundation; Economic Frustration
To the Editor:
"Pulling Down India's Temple" (editorial, Dec. 8) and your front-page news article of the same day fail to recognize the economic frustration of quotas and other mechanisms developed by political leaders to woo minorities in India.
You overlook the influence of invisible political manipulations of "divide-and-rule" that have governed this other major democracy for five decades.


John R. Connolly, 53, Charity Fund-Raiser
John R. Connolly, a professional fund-raiser for charitable causes and educational institutions, died on Friday at Tisch Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 53 and lived in Manhattan.
He died of complications of AIDS, said his companion, Richard Clausen.


By the Time They Got To Phoenix, Forget It
As bad as Ray Handley's season has been, it became worse with the Giants' lethargic 19-0 loss Saturday to the Phoenix Cardinals, an earnest team with limited talent.
Here are some of the other highlights (or lowlights) of this year's downfall of the Giants and their coach:
The players, accustomed to the hands-on style of Bill Parcells, regarded his successor as a cold fish.
Pro football players are essentially children in men's bodies and need daily stroking and cajoling to motivate them to play with intensity.
They did not get that from Handley and resented it.


Dance in Review
Susan Hefner and Dancers  'Marrow Clamor' One Dream Theater TriBeCa
Although there were bright ideas in "Marrow Clamor," which Susan Hefner and Dancers performed on Tuesday night, most of this eveninglong production was a dull hodgepodge.
It shouldn't have been, for Ms.
Hefner sought to present both serious and satirical choreographic images of women and she found much to praise and censure.


Architecture Award to Kevin Roche
Kevin Roche, an architect noted for corporate headquarters and skyscrapers that epitomize the evolution of modern architecture in the postwar decades, has been named the recipient of the 1993 Gold Medal from the American Institute of Architects.
His best-known buildings include the Ford Foundation Building in New York, the Oakland Museum and the General Foods Corporation headquarters in Rye Brook, N.Y.
Mr.
Roche, who is 70 years old and was born in Ireland, first came to prominence as a partner of Eero Saarinen, whose firm he joined in 1950.
After Saarinen's death in 1961, Mr.
Roche took over the design of several major Saarinen projects, including the CBS Building in New York and the TWA Terminal at Kennedy International Airport.
In 1966 Saarinen's firm was renamed Kevin Roche John Dinkeloo &amp; Associates.
That same year saw the completion of the Ford Foundation headquarters, a building that secured Mr.
Roche's reputation as a leading American modernist.
A Change in Approach
Since then, Mr.
Roche's Connecticut-based firm has designed a number of major projects in New York, including the United Nations Plaza Hotel, the American Wing of the Metropolitan Museum, for which he also devised the master plan, the Central Park Zoo, the Morgan Stanley Building and a new addition to the Jewish Museum.
In his more recent projects Mr.
Roche has departed from an early adherence to modernism's crisp geometric lines, and the exteriors of his buildings reflected a richer, more eclectic approach.


Review/Recital; Exploring the Subtleties Of a Pianist's Musicianship
Mitsuko Uchida made her reputation as a Mozart pianist when she recorded sensuous, smart interpretations of the complete sonatas for Philips early in her career.
But as her recital at Carnegie Hall on Friday night reminded listeners, she is also a Schumann pianist, a Schubert pianist and even a Webern pianist.
She is, put simply, a musician.
But this is not a musicianship easy to characterize.
In her powerful performance of "Carnaval," she accepted neither of Schumann's fictional personae -- the introspective Eusebius or exuberant Florestan -- whose rival temperaments the composer imagined struggling within the music.
There was, of course, much dreamy reflection: in fact, the piece bearing Eusebius's name was limpid and eloquent, suspending one's breath on turns of phrases.
There was also much energy and drive: the Promenade was grandly scaled, the final march exuberant.
The performance, though, was held together by an entirely different temperament.


Sports of The Times; Giants' X Factor: The Health of Young
FOR the Giants, suddenly two moments of truth are approaching.
Not only the moment of truth when Ray Handley's future as coach is determined, but also the moment of truth when George Young's future as general manager is clear.
Young's health problems have added an X factor to the identity of both the 1993 general manager and coach.


Dance in Review
'Fresh Tracks'  Bessie Schonberg Theater
There was not much that was fresh about Fresh Tracks, an evening of work by new and little-known choreographers and performance artists that was presented on Tuesday night.
The program had its well-apportioned shares of technical expertise, comedy, angst and sheer campy exuberance, but much of it looked at least a little dated.


Clinton's Chief of Staff Ponders Undefined Post
When Thomas F. McLarty 3d learned that his old friend Bill Clinton intended to name him White House chief of staff, he began his homework right away.
Mr.
McLarty, the 46-year-old chairman of a natural gas company, bought a copy of "Chief of Staff," a recounting of a 1986 symposium involving eight men who had held his job.
For good measure, he also picked up a cassette tape of the proceedings.
And he plans to call on his predecessors soon for more personal lessons.


Experts Gather For Conference On the Economy
Business leaders, economists, public interest advocates and labor organizers began to gather here today for an economic conference that is shaping up as a nationally televised gabfest about just how bad the economy is and what to do about it.
At last count close to 400 people had been invited by President-elect Bill Clinton to the two-day conference, which starts Monday.
But no one is sure of the number because Mr.
Clinton keeps wanting to add more people.


Theater in Review
'Noel and Gertie'  York Theater Company at Theater at St.
Peter's Church Lexington Avenue at 54th Street Through Sunday Devised by Sheridan Morley; directed by Brian Murray; musical director, Michael Kosarin; choreography by Janet Watson; set by James Morgan; costumes by Barbara Beccio; lighting by Mary Jo Dondlinger; technical director, John Miller; production stage manager, John Kennelly.
Presented by the York Theater Company, Janet Hayes Walker, producing director; Molly Pickering Grose, managing director, and One World Arts Foundation, W. Scott McLucas, executive director.
WITH: Jane Summerhays and Michael Zaslow.
Anyone familiar with the recordings that Noel Coward made with Gertrude Lawrence in the 1930's is bound to be struck by the tone of mischievous intimacy that the playwright shared with the actress who was his sometime muse.
Perched at the pinnacle of cafe society, these charming and talented entertainers seemed the quintessential voices of a philosophy whose cardinal rule was that nothing in life be taken too seriously.


Rabbi, 62, Is Stabbed In Manhattan
In what the police are investigating as a bias incident, a 62-year-old rabbi, described as a pious man who spent much of his time visiting and helping the elderly, the sick and the lonely, was stabbed Saturday night while walking near the one-room synagogue on the Lower East Side he has helped to keep alive.
The rabbi, Shaya Apter, of Monsey in Rockland County, a leader of Boyaner Kloiz, a synagogue at 247 East Broadway in Manhattan, was listed yesterday in stable but guarded condition at Beth Israel Medical Center with two stomach stab wounds.


Topics of The Times; Ethics in the Clinton Administration
The revolving door that allows Government officials to cash in on their access to decision makers after leaving office could be slowed considerably by the ethics rules unveiled last week by President-elect Clinton.
The new rules -- the strictest by any Administration -- will be set out in an Executive Order when Mr.
Clinton takes office.
They will cover 1,100 high officials, ranging from Cabinet officers to the general counsel and deputy assistant secretaries in each department.


CHRONICLE
The man at the other end of the phone back in 1956 insisted on a personal meeting, so STANLEY H. LOWELL, a deputy mayor under Robert F. Wagner, finally agreed to see him.
"It was Joseph Papp, and he wanted to put on free Shakespeare in Central Park," Mr.
Lowell said the other day.
"He told me he had found a spot on a hill but said he needed help with chairs, stage, lighting, a whole laundry list of items. I said, 'That sounds wonderful but let me talk to the Mayor.' Joe was put out. He thought I was sloughing him off.
"When I approached the Mayor," Mr.
Lowell continued, "he said, 'What do you mean by free?' The budget was no better then than it is now. When I explained, he said, 'It sounds terrific.' So I called everybody I could think of, people in electricity, chair suppliers, lighting, public defense, and that summer New York got hit with Shakespeare."


Likely Changes in Business Taxes
Many important changes in corporate taxation can be expected next year because of President-elect Bill Clinton's campaign promises and because Congress is very likely once again to approve parts of the tax legislation that President Bush vetoed this year.
Here are some highlights:
*Half the investments of small start-up companies are likely to be exempt from capital gains taxes.


Probation to Be Urged for Woman Who Killed Addicted Daughter
Seeking a merciful end to a tortured tale of family tragedy, the Queens District Attorney said yesterday that he would recommend against prison for an elderly Queens woman who told the police she fatally shot her crack-addicted daughter after enduring years of desperation and despair.
District Attorney Richard A. Brown said his office would recommend a probation deal when the woman, 68-year-old Daisy Hutson, appears in State Supreme Court in Jamaica today on manslaughter charges, in a case that has drawn wide attention as a graphic example of the impact that drugs can have on a family.


Teachers Are Troubled By Technology Trend
As a fascinated modern world encroaches on an ancient game, golfers bent on improving are being caught between a classical approach that was simple, natural and artistic and a new one more complex, mechanical and scientific.
Where a pure swinger like Sam Snead achieved his fluidity by telling himself to "feel oily," today's top players can learn about their tempo and any other aspect of their swings by getting in front of a camera and hooking themselves to a computer.
Where old pros used to bounce their notions about mental toughness off one another on the long car rides between tournaments, today's players can take standardized tests to strengthen their minds in competition.


TRANSACTIONS
Football  National Football League  DETROIT LIONS -- Activated Reggie Barrett, wide receiver, from injured reserve.
INDIANAPOLIS COLTS -- Placed Ron Solt, offensive lineman, on injured reserve.
Activated Bill Schultz, offensive lineman, from injured reserve.
SAN DIEGO CHARGERS -- Activated Anthony Blaylock, cornerback, from injured reserve.
Waived Robert Claiborne, wide receiver.
TAMPA BAY BUCCANEERS -- Activated Todd Harrison, tight end, from the practice squad.


Instant Reaction May Haunt a Mayor
A REPORTER, so inundated with answers that he had run out of questions, once jokingly asked Mayor Edward I. Koch to name his favorite color.
Unfazed, Mr.
Koch responded (blue) -- assuming by then that virtually no subject was too big or too small to command an opinion.
New Yorkers expect their mayor to espouse a foreign policy and rarely to have an unspoken thought.
But in responding to two events a month apart, Mayor David N. Dinkins came under fire, first for failing to convey sufficient outrage -- when a Brooklyn jury on Oct. 29 acquitted the accused killer of a rabbinical student -- and then for hastily overreaching by branding the assault on a black man on Dec. 1, apparently by Hasidic Jews who maintained that he was burglarizing a yeshiva, as a "repugnant" bias crime because, the victim told the police, his assailants had hurled racial epithets.


Rioting Threatens India's Secular Foundation; Muslims' Special Rights
To the Editor:
A vast majority of Hindus in this country will join me in condemning the violent and hate-inciting destruction of the Ayodhya mosque.
The basis of the Hindu way of life is tolerance and respect for all religions.
Yet I think you have missed the fundamental issues relative to the series of events culminating in this tragedy.


Frank C. Wright, 59, A Finance Executive
Frank C. Wright Jr., a finance executive, died on Friday in Newport News, Va., where he was on business.
He was 59 and lived in Manhattan and Mantoloking, N.J.
He died of heart failure, his family said.


The Mixed Outlook on Municipals
There are a lot of reasons to be positive about the outlook for tax-exempt municipal bonds, including the prospect of a decline next year in new issues, which reduces supply, and a jump in Federal tax rates, which makes tax-exempt securities even more attractive.
But analysts warn that there is also an issue to worry about: credit quality.
"The quality of municipal risk has been deteriorating because of the deteriorating condition of state and local governments," said Peter B. Coffin, a senior vice president and municipal bond portfolio manager at Massachusetts Financial Services in Boston.
"You simply cannot take it for granted that because it is a municipal bond you are going to get paid."


Blame Shifting on the Homeless
New York City officials are outraged that they have been faced with contempt of court for mismanaging homeless programs.
They insist they are victims of an unrealistic state mandate that requires them to provide housing on demand to virtually all who declare themselves homeless.
But that defense won't wash.
The state directive is no mindless mandate to house all comers -- nor does it excuse poor management.


METRO DIGEST
STORM LEAVES, BUT ITS DAMAGE REMAINS
As officials surveyed a monstrous toll of damage from two days of pounding by hurricane-like winds, rain and snow, at least 112,000 homes still had no power because of a storm that ravaged the metropolitan area.
But the fierce storm, which caused six deaths in the New York region and disrupted travel, business and countless lives, was 500 miles out to sea.
As Federal and state disaster officials began damage surveys and thousands of residents returned to flooded homes and began cleaning up the mess, there were no official estimates of the storm's cost.
But unofficial estimates, some local damage assessments and comparisons with previous storms suggested that private and public losses were likely to run into hundreds of millions.
A1. 3,000 HOMELESS ON LONG ISLAND
Almost 3,000 residents of Bayville, on Long Island's North Shore, remain homeless, their houses still under water left by Friday's storm.
And throughout the island, more than 19,000 residents remained without electrical power.
B5.
NEW YORK CITY  RABBI ATTACKED IN MANHATTAN
In an assault that the police are investigating as a bias crime, a 62-year-old rabbi was attacked and stabbed by a man while walking near the one-room synagogue on the Lower East Side he had helped to keep alive.
The rabbi, Shaya Apter, was listed in stable but guarded condition at Beth Israel Medical Center with two stab wounds of the stomach.
B3.
LITERARY SUBTEXT TO CONTRACT ISSUE
When a subcommittee of the New York City Board of Education begins considering whether to renew the contract of Chancellor Fernandez, the debate will take place in the shadow of a book.
Mr.
Fernandez and the panel have fought this year over a string of issues, but their relationship was strained further this month by the publication of dismissive remarks about the board, Mayor Dinkins and Governor Cuomo in Mr.
Fernandez's autobiography.
B3.
A MAYOR'S RESPONSES, AND THEIR IMPACT
In responding to two events a month apart, Mayor Dinkins has come under fire, first for failing to convey sufficient outrage when a Brooklyn jury on Oct. 29 acquitted the accused killer of a rabbinical student and then for hastily overreaching by branding the assault on a black man on Dec. 1, apparently by Hasidic Jews, as a "repugnant" bias crime.
Arguably, mayors might benefit from a self-imposed moratorium on their instant responses to daily peppering by reporters in the nation's most competitive media market.
Metro Matters, B3.
Prosecutors to recommend against prison for woman charged in daughter's shooting.
B3.
REGION  MATCHING UP THE MENTALLY ILL
When Robin Kravitz describes her struggle to pierce the solitude of mental illness, she is a study in turmoil.
The blind dates, synagogue dances and a doomed romance make her fingers shake.
Each attempt to bridge the gulf between her and "the normal world," as she puts it, seemed a contract for defeat.
And then along came Alice Cohen, matchmaker for the mentally ill.
In a program that is raising doubts among doctors as well as gratitude among its users, Mrs.
Cohen's dating service for the mentally ill, the Friendship Exchange, matches up people with schizophrenia or severe mood disorders.
One of the first programs of its kind in the nation, it charges no fees and Mrs.
Cohen, whose son is mentally ill, collects no salary.
A1.
THE EMPIRE RATE QUANDARY, AGAIN
In a few weeks, the New York State Insurance Department will rule on an issue that state lawmakers thought had been resolved by their landmark insurance law last summer: whether to impose an enormous rate increase on 1.4 million customers of Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield.
The request has placed Governor Cuomo in a bind: Either he allows the rate increase, leaving many customers priced out of insurance, or they deny the request, possibly forcing Empire into a crisis beyond repair.
B4.
Neediest Cases B2


Police Officer Arrested in Bias Attack Case
An off-duty police officer involved in a predawn street fight outside a bar in the Bronx, a dispute in which an off-duty transit officer and another Hispanic man were injured, was arrested yesterday and charged with assault and violation of the victims' civil rights, the police reported.
Officer James Power, 25, who is white, and a friend, Brian Handley, 20, of the Bronx, became embroiled in an argument with several Hispanic men outside the Terminal Bar at 242d Street and Broadway about 2:20 A.M., the police said.


Is Family Structure Rooted in Patriarchy?
To the Editor:
"After Kinship and Marriage, Anthropology Discovers Love" (Science Times, Nov. 24) recalls Schopenhauer's provocative dissertation "On the Metaphysics of the Love of the Sexes." Of course, that philosopher wrote without the benefit of a theory of evolution, or knowledge of the age of the earth and human life.


To Each According to His Shares
Though Russian headlines for the last week have been dominated by the political upheavals at the Congress in the Kremlin, history of a quieter sort has been in the making at a pavilion across town, where Russians have been learning that capitalism can be a piece of cake.
The event is the first public auction of a state-owned enterprise in which shares in the company can be bought only with "privatization checks," the vouchers issued to all citizens of Russia in the last two months.
Each person's voucher represents a nominal 10,000 rubles' worth of state property.


SALVADOR REBELS DELAY DISARMING
Just before the ceremony to bring a formal end to the civil war here, the toughest fighting sector of the Salvadoran guerrilla movement is resisting demobilization and has turned to the United States to resolve concerns about its safety and economic security.
After a meeting on Friday of leaders of one guerrilla movement with an official of the United States Embassy, it was not clear whether the ceremony would take place as planned on Tuesday, or would be further delayed.


Review/Pop; The Queen of Latin Music Takes It From the Top
Celia Cruz, universally known as the queen of Latin music, likes to call out "Azucar!" ("Sugar!") in and between her songs.
But her music doesn't devote itself to sweetness; it's about strength, resilience and the tenacity of Afro-Cuban roots.
Along with a smile that could light up Carlsbad Caverns, Ms.
Cruz has an alto voice that combines raw energy and rhythmic dexterity, sustaining lines like crucial incantations when she belts a song's melody, then skipping amid the syncopations.
Her concert at Alice Tully Hall on Saturday night, presented by Jazz at Lincoln Center, was a kind of "This Is Your Life." Ms.
Cruz performed with three backup groups: La Sonora Matancera, with whom she made a reputation in Cuba in the 1950's; Orlando (Puntilla) Rios y Nueva Generacion, which plays traditionalist Santeria chants and secular music, and Tito Puente's big band, her most frequent current collaborators.
It was a chance to trace Latin music's development from West African roots and Cuban elegance to New York drive.


U.S. and Russia Fail to Narrow Gap on Arms Cuts
Hopes that the Bush Administration will sign a far-reaching nuclear arms reduction agreement with Russia dimmed today as Secretary of State Lawrence S. Eagleburger and Foreign Minister Andrei Kozyrev failed to bridge technical but important concerns raised by Moscow.
In a briefing with reporters after their three-hour meeting, the two officials said that resolution of the differences was still possible in the 37 days remaining in the Bush Administration and suggested that they might meet again on the matter.
But neither side was willing to say whether any of the technical demands made by Russia in September had been settled.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity offerings are expected this week:
ACS Enterprises Inc., 1 million common shares. Gerard Klauer Mattison.
Alco Standard, 3.5 million shares of $50 depositary preferred, each representing 1/100 share of series AA step-up perpetual convertible preferred.
Goldman, Sachs.


INSIDE
Indonesia Quake Kills 1,200
The death toll in an earthquake on an eastern Indonesian island leaped to more than 1,200.
Rescue workers arrived a day after tidal waves swept away entire villages.
Page A3.
Clinton's Chief Hits Books
When Thomas McLarty found out that Bill Clinton was going to select him as his chief of staff, he looked to his predecessors at the White House for lessons.
Page B6.
In Inouye's Hawaii
Daniel K. Inouye so dominates his party and state that few know what to make of the sexual misconduct accusations against him.
Page A15.
Racing's Whitney Dies
Cornelius Vanderbilt Whitney, a founder of Pan American Airways and a prominent figure in horse racing and the arts, died at 93.
Page B8.


INVESTMENT NEEDS FOR A NEW RUSSIA ARE MOSTLY UNMET
Large-scale foreign economic and financial aid to Russia, which many economists still believe is essential for a transformation to a market economy, has been pushed off the international agenda by political uncertainties here and by a global recession that affects potential donors.
The political struggle in Russia between pro-market forces, led by President Boris N. Yeltsin, and legislators who resist the painful aspects of change leaves many Western investors and diplomats skeptical about investing large amounts.


Rutgers a No. 1 Opponent For No. 1-Ranked Teams
Need somebody to play the No. 1-ranked college basketball team early in the season?
Call Bob Wenzel.
His Rutgers teams have done it four times now, and this is only his fifth season at the helm of the Scarlet Knights.
Rutgers has a 2-3 record after losing to Duke (4-0), 88-79, before 19,000 fans Saturday night at the Byrne Meadowlands Arena in East Rutherford, N.J.


Recalls of Books Often Turn Into Publishers' Nightmares
Penn and Teller's most recent humor book, "How To Play With Your Food," did not turn out to be all that funny for its publisher, Villard Books.
The book is a series of food tricks that people can play on the unsuspecting, and pages 134 and 135 were to feature a classic trick: the sugar packet that won't open.
Only thing was, in the case of this book, the packet attached to those pages did open, and what was inside was not sugar but silica gel dyed with cobalt chloride, a potential health hazard if ingested.
And no, this was not another of the comedy team's hoaxes.
A Financial Nightmare
Villard immediately notified booksellers, stressing that the problem was not Penn and Teller's fault and agreeing to replace the defective packets or take back the books.


It's Rough, but It's Democracy
To Westerners, the news out of Moscow in the last few days has sounded ominous.
The Russian Congress rebuffed President Boris Yeltsin and economic reform by refusing to confirm his choice for Prime Minister.
Angrily, he resolved to appeal directly to the Russian people.
The two sides then compromised because neither was certain of winning a national vote or prepared to face a complete collapse of government.
It's politics of the coarsest kind, and it may retard the development of a market economy.
But for all the rough and tumble, Russia is evolving into a crude parliamentary democracy.


Rioting Threatens India's Secular Foundation
To the Editor:
We are deeply shocked at recent events in India culminating in the vengeful destruction of a 450-year-old mosque at Ayodhya and bloody riots in various parts of the country.


BMW Narrows Agency Search
BMW of North America Inc. has settled on 5 finalists from a list of 30 or more contenders to pursue its account, which has billings estimated at $80 million to $85 million.
The account, which was unexpectedly placed in review in late October, had been handled by Ammirati &amp; Puris Inc. in New York for almost 18 years.
Although Ammirati was asked to participate in the review, the agency, which created the "Ultimate Driving Machine" identity for the German maker of luxury cars, shocked the advertising world by declining to compete.


U.S. Finds Energy Industry Subsidies Are Small
An Energy Department study of Government subsidies to the energy industry has concluded that the amounts involved are small and do not affect consumption much.
But an evaluation by a prominent electricity analyst finds enormous subsidies for the nuclear industry, along with enormous costs incurred directly by the utilities.
The question of which energy forms the Government should support is drawing increased attention with the change of administrations.
President Jimmy Carter won huge increases in Federal support for renewable energy resources and plans to replace oil with fuels derived from coal and other sources.
As Presidents, Ronald Reagan and George Bush vigorously backed nuclear power.
President-elect Bill Clinton and Vice President-elect Al Gore have talked about returning to renewable fuels and promoting natural gas and conservation.
A Contrarian View
The Government study, released Wednesday, contradicts some conventional thinking about Washington's role in energy prices.
It found, for example, that the oil industry, thought of as pampered with Government support, paid more in taxes than it got in benefits.


TV's Sweeps Results Are In and, Well, Don't Ask
CBS's hot new series were not quite as hot as it had hoped.
NBC's courtship of younger viewers had all the chemistry of a blind date gone bad.
Fox's giddy fall lineup produced 8 of the 10 lowest-rated shows in prime time.
Now that the results of the November sweeps are in, the networks are busily sifting through the fall ratings, trying to figure out how to make good on their guarantees to advertisers.
With the exception of those at ABC, which unexpectedly won the sweeps and now has 6 of the 10 top-rated shows, these discussions are bound to have a wistful tone.
When analysts and advertising executives talk about the fall season, one of the phrases that seems to crop up most often is "below expectations."


Patents; A Fast Way To Identify Tuberculosis
USING a genetic fragment from the bacteria that cause tuberculosis, researchers at the University of Arkansas have patented a way to diagnose the contagious respiratory illness far more quickly.
The researchers contend that the new technique should help doctors treat patients more effectively and could help health officials slow the disease's spread.


Corrections
The Advertising Column in Business Day on Thursday, about the Center for Science in the Public Interest's Lemon awards for deceptive advertising, misidentified the agency that created consumer advertising for Egglands Best, an egg producer.
It is N. W. Ayer.


Little Emotion and Even Less Offense for the Jets
A week after soaring to a victory over Buffalo on their heartfelt emotions for injured teammate Dennis Byrd, the Jets were left to their own devices today against Indianapolis, and they fell flat on their face masks.
The New York offense turned in a performance as empty as Giants Stadium, which was cavernous with 43,207 no-shows, and the Jets lost to the Colts, 10-6.
It was the scarcest crowd at Giants Stadium for a Jets game since 30,250 were on hand for a game against New England on Dec. 23, 1990.
The year before that, 21,148 fans showed up on Dec. 23 for a game against Buffalo.


Arabs Seize and Vow to Kill Israeli if Sheik Isn't Freed
In a daring challenge to Israel's authority in the occupied territories, Islamic militants kidnapped an Israeli soldier on Sunday and threatened to kill him unless the army quickly released the imprisoned founder of a dominant Muslim group in the Gaza Strip.
The abductors' deadline passed Sunday night with their demand unmet, but there was no sign that they had carried out their threatened slaying.


Washington Talk; The Freshman Agenda: First, a Minor Rebellion
They are supposed to be seen and not heard.
But in their first week on the job, a good number of the 110 House freshmen -- many of whom are single and under-40 graduates of the Dr.
Spock generation -- displayed a streak of irreverence.
As they gathered for organizational meetings last week, the new Republicans challenged the seniority system by successfully pushing for term limits for ranking committee members.
And the new Democrats successfully lobbied for coveted committee positions despite the raised eyebrows of the formidable Representative Dan Rostenkowski, chairman of the Ways and Means Committee.
The 24 new female members, meanwhile, banded together to demand that all laws prohibiting sexual harassment be applied to Congress.


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for this week:
MONDAY
General Mills Lincoln Natl Conv Secs Lincoln Natl Inc Fd New


Erbil Journal; Wintry Classrooms Warmed by Kurdish Dreams
Armed with a few tattered Iraqi schoolbooks, Maria Talat sets out each morning to do battle against an educational system that often seems to be an arm of Saddam Hussein's vast propaganda machine.
"I took the books with maps of the Middle East and redrew the boundary between Iraq and Kuwait myself," said Miss Talat, 26, a Kurdish primary-school teacher, referring to Baghdad's claim that Kuwait is part of Iraq.


Redskins' Drama Brings Curtain Down on Dallas
His first instinct was to simply dive into the end-zone pile and pick and claw for the football.
But then Danny Copeland saw the ball squirt free once again, and he snatched and cradled it and made the scoring play that finally brought the Washington Redskins all the way back in their thrilling 20-17 victory over the Dallas Cowboys this afternoon at Robert F. Kennedy Stadium.
"More than anything, I was lucky to get it," said Copeland, a Redskins safety.
His recovery of the second of two Dallas fumbles in the end zone on a single play with 3 minutes 14 seconds remaining turned a 17-13 Dallas lead into a 20-17 Washington edge.
His effort provided the final bizarre, stunning and decisive play in a game with playoff implications and more that unfolded and finished as if it were, indeed, a post-season affair.


Review/Opera; A 'Walkure' Outlives The Sneers
Greeted several years ago with audible yawns and sneers, the Metropolitan Opera's newly designed "Ring" cycle seemed a timid, somewhat dowdy reaction to the boldly futuristic Wagner interpretations all around it.
Literal in its re-enactment of Wagner's mid-19th-century world and conservative in its dismissal of metaphors for our time, the Met's "Ring" was a Brooks Brothers suit in a room full of Armani.
Trends come and go, and two in particular have occupied us for the last 20 years.
Operating in a kind of historical contrary motion, period instruments and updated opera have gone their opposite directions, one seeking truth by going backward in time, the other looking for it in the present.


Koreans in Watershed Vote: Is the New Democracy Real?
On a recent chilly afternoon at Seoul National University, rippling banners advertised English courses and technology seminars, a standing-room-only crowd filled the hushed library and students at tables were selling Christmas cards.
One of the few signs of the approaching election, the most important in years, was a cluster of students half-heartedly selling roasted sweet potatoes to raise money for a little-known candidate.
Five years ago, during the last presidential election, South Korea's campuses were aflame with political passion.
Students were in the vanguard of the crowds filling the streets of most major cities, braving riot troops and the haze of tear gas as they vowed to bring down the military-dominated Government that had ruled for nearly three decades.
A Transformed Country
In many respects, this election is presenting to the world a transformed country.
On Dec. 18, for the first time in decades, South Koreans will vote while pondering not how to express their feelings on authoritarian rule, but how to make a choice based on issues like housing costs, interest rates, the proposed breakup of the industrial conglomerates, and whether a southerner should sit in the Blue House, the presidential mansion.


Review/Dance; Locked in Darkness and to Each Other
Susan Marshall told stories about emotional relationships early in her career as a modern-dance choreographer.
She later became less specific, choosing to work with more purely physical constructs like athletic competition.
The two new dances performed by Susan Marshall and Company on Thursday night at the Kitchen were a potent blend of both, burning with troubled concern, sadness and affection rooted in physical exchanges.
In "Standing Duet" two men stand side by side, arms locked together then hands touching each other's faces and arms in gestures of exploration, tenderness and self-affirmation.
Their heads are cast down.
Luis Resto's score gives them a vast, dark landscape through which to move, though minimally.
The fact that they danced before a closed curtain, slightly to the side of center, gives their duet a look of impermanence.
It is as if the two men feel each other breathing.
When one falls and rises, the other grasps his body and holds it, swimming in air, off the ground.
The men's partly glimpsed shadows echo their dance, like memory, at both sides of the stage.


Yanks No Closer on Boggs
The agent for Wade Boggs left Tampa, Fla., yesterday, and there was no indication the Yankees were much closer to signing the free-agent third baseman as the limited competition for the five-time batting champion inched along.
Alan Nero, Boggs's agent, said Saturday that he expected to be contacted yesterday by the Yankees' managing partner, Joseph Molloy.
The agent had presented proposals to Molloy in Tampa on Friday.
But Nero had checked out of his Tampa hotel early yesterday afternoon and was unavailable to comment on whether Molloy had responded.
Molloy has not returned telephone messages seeking comment.


Theater in Review
'A Backers' Audition'  American Jewish Theater 307 West 26th Street Chelsea Book, music and lyrics by Douglas Bernstein and Denis Markell; based on an idea by Martin Charnin, Mr.
Bernstein and Mr.
Markell; directed by Leonard Foglia; musical direction by Michael Sansonia; set by James Noone; costumes by Deborah Shaw; lighting by Russell Champa; artistic consultant, Jack Temchin; production stage manager, Joseph Millett.
Presented by the American Jewish Theater, Stanley Brechner, artistic director; Lonny Price, associate artistic director.
WITH: Tom Riis Farrell, Stan Free, Charles Goff, Gretchen Kingsley, Tom Ligon, Sheila Smith, Alice Spivak and Ray Wills.
Lore has it that before Broadway musicals became multi-million-dollar corporate investments, producers held what were known as "backers' auditions." Friends would gather in a Park Avenue apartment, slosh back a few drinks, listen to some songs from the new show and write a check.
It was the theater set's equivalent of a Tupperware party.


Somalia? In the South Bronx, They Ask, Why Not Aid Us?
In the South Bronx neighborhood surrounding St.
Ann's Episcopal Church, the staccato beat of gunfire fills the air nightly, disrupting dreams of peace.
Inside the church, at East 140th Street and St.
Ann's Avenue, the minister recently asked the parishioners to share their thoughts on American intervention in Somalia in what he calls a "dialogue sermon." The topic was hope, justice and transformation, and the response of the congregation came as no surprise to the Rev.
Luis Barrios.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Sweet Ending for Stich  Michael Stich made his disappointing season a little less so yesterday by winning $2 million with a straight-set victory over Michael Chang in the Compaq Grand Slam Cup final in Munich, Germany.
Stich, a German who won Wimbledon in 1991 but previously only a minor event this year, defeated Chang, 6-2, 6-3, 6-2, in 2 hours 7 minutes to collect the biggest prize in tennis.
Chang won $1 million.
Although Stich has fallen to No. 15 in the world ranking, he defeated four top 10 players to earn the championship.
Before the final, Stich beat Stefan Edberg, Richard Krajicek and Pete Sampras.
Chang, ranked No. 6, lost last year's final to David Wheaton.


Test Makers Need Sterner Test Too
To the Editor:
I heartily agree math tests should be revised so that the teacher has a way to evaluate the thinking process of the student.
I hope, however, that the writers of the new tests use more analytical thinking than was shown in the example in "A Sterner Test for Tests" (editorial, Nov. 28).


49ers May Not Be Perfect, But They Still Are Winning
Right now, the San Francisco 49ers are one of the class teams of the National Football League.
They have receiver Jerry Rice.
They have a good coach in George Seifert.
They have Steve Young, the National Football League's top-rated passer.
And they are on a roll, especially after their 20-17 victory over the Minnesota Vikings here today before 60,685 fans at the Metrodome.


Europe's 2 Faces: Economic Skill, Political Inertia
After this weekend's meeting of European leaders here in the Scottish capital, the 12-nation European Community seems more than ever fated to remain a political dwarf, even as it becomes an economic giant.
At the turn of the year, the Europeans will establish and begin expanding a free-trade single market now with 340 million people.
But when it comes to making decisions on common foreign and military policy, many of the Europeans still profess helplessness and look to the United Nations and to the United States, notably to the soon-to-be Clinton administration.


A Quiet Taste of Capitalism
In a test of its plans to sell 230,000 state-owned companies to its citizens, Russia put Moscow's "Bolshevik" bakery on the block.
Page D1.


Mason Goes Up, And So Do the Knicks
When Anthony Mason walked into a shopping mall last week, it took about 30 seconds for a fan to recognize him.
Two years ago, only friends, acquaintances or very brave strangers bothered the Knicks' muscular forward.
Now he is in demand.
People want his autograph.
They want to shake his hand.


CHRONICLE
Dr.
CHARLES MacCORMACK has been named president and chief executive officer of Save the Children and will take the reins of the domestic and international child assistance, community development and emergency relief organization on Jan. 1.
For the last 15 years, Dr.
MacCormack, who is 51, has held the same positions at World Learning, an organization that was known as the Experiment in International Living until its name was changed in September.


The Neediest Cases Teach Alternatives to Violence
Sylvester Doyer meets twice a week after school with black teen-agers in Crown Heights, Brooklyn, to help them channel their feelings about the neighborhood's racial tensions into constructive dialogue.
By helping the youths communicate openly, Mr.
Doyer and staff members at the Graham Windham Neighborhood Family Service Center said they believe they can avoid a repeat of the violence that once gripped Crown Heights.


The Fernandez Memoirs Color Debate on Contract
When a subcommittee of the New York City Board of Education begins considering this week whether to renew the contract of Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez, the debate will take place in the shadow of a book.
Mr.
Fernandez and the seven-member panel have fought this year over a string of issues, but their relationship was strained further, perhaps irrevocably, by the publication this month of dismissive remarks about the school board, Mayor David N. Dinkins and Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo in Mr.
Fernandez's autobiography.


AFTER THE STORM: Disaster Aid; Officials Inspect the Damage Before Asking for U.S. Help
Taking the first step in petitioning for Federal disaster assistance, government officials traversed the region yesterday, trying to quantify the blow dealt to homeowners, businesses and localities by last week's ferocious storm.
Their inspections began a process that could lead President Bush to decide as early as this week to declare parts of New York, New Jersey and Connecticut disaster areas, making homeowners, businesses and local governments eligible for millions of dollars in emergency Federal funds or low-interest loans.


Alfa Romeo Selects Einson Freeman
Following a secretive seven-month review, Alfa Romeo Distributors of North America named Einson Freeman Inc. in Paramus, N.J., to handle its entire integrated marketing communications account, which had been at the Ross Roy Group in Bloomfield Hills, Mich., since May 1989.
Einson won out over the incumbent in the competition, along with Henderson Advertising in Greenville, S.C. and Waring &amp; LaRosa in New York.
Though the billings were not disclosed, R. Craig Morningstar, a spokesman for Alfa Romeo in Orlando, Fla., said the account was "relatively small as far as automobile manufacturers are concerned."


Health-Care Planners Urge A Tax on Workers' Benefits
A plan for health care reform that is gathering momentum around the country has at its heart a little-known but politically explosive proposal: taxing the health benefits employers give their workers.
Under current rules, workers do not pay taxes on health insurance provided by employers.
And the employer can write off the cost, often thousands of dollars, from the company's taxable income.


Promises, Promises: Transit Funds in Peril
When is a promise not a promise?
When it is made by the State of New York.
Or more precisely, when it is made by the State of New York in times of fiscal distress.


Bloom FCA Names Creative Head
Ending a four-month search involving a top creative position, Bloom FCA in New York named Richard Sabean executive vice president and executive creative director.
Mr.
Sabean will head the creative work, assuming the daily responsiblities from Penny Hawkey, the agency's president.


Rae Tina Eskreis, Eric M. Nelson
Rae Tina Eskreis, an associate at the New York office of Sedgwick, Detert, Moran &amp; Arnold, a San Francisco law firm, and Eric Mark Nelson, an associate at Davis &amp; Gilbert, a New York law firm, were married yesterday.
Rabbi Gerald Skolnik performed the ceremony at Temple Israel of Great Neck (L.I.).
Mrs.
Eskreis-Nelson, who received her law degree from Whittier College, graduated from New York University, from which her husband received his law degree.
She is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Naftali Eskreis of Forest Hills, Queens.
Her father is a psychiatrist there.


No Headline
"The ocean still looks savage. I saw huge chunks torn out of seawalls because the ocean was impatient to get to the property." -- GOVERNOR CUOMO, after flying over New York's storm-battered shores.  [ A1:3. ]


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for this week:
MONDAY
General Mills Lincoln Natl Conv Secs Lincoln Natl Inc Fd New


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
A politically explosive proposal lies at the heart of a plan for health care reform that is gaining momentum: taxing the health benefits that employers give workers.
Under some proposals, workers would pay taxes on part of the money employers spend on health care benefits -- anything over what it costs to buy the least expensive plan.
Or employers may lose tax deductions on what they pay.
Supporters say the idea makes economic sense, since it would force consumers to choose more carefully.  [ Page A1. ]
Manufacturers were elated during the Presidential campaign by the prospect of an additional $80 billion for public works projects.
Now, with Bill Clinton shifting from campaign oratory to policy-making, many manufacturing executives express doubts about how much of the money will materialize and how much such a program will increase employment.  [ D1. ]


The Talk of Hollywood; Tensions Are Rising in the Great Aspen Boycott
The town is already packing up for the holidays.
And tensions over the Aspen crisis are worsening.
Over the weekend, the town was talking, once again, about Barbra Streisand.
For Ms.
Streisand, there was no more weaving and bobbing about supporting a boycott of Colorado.
She's now the most visible and powerful star to endorse a boycott.


Hundreds of Thousands Protest Against Rightists in Germany


U.S. Defends Pace of Troops
Rejecting appeals from besieged aid workers, the commander of American forces in Somalia said he would not speed troops to a central town until he mustered enough force to deal with gunmen there.
Page A8.


Ware Returns to Work And Picks On the Browns
Lions 24, Browns 14
PONTIAC, Mich., Dec. 13 (AP) -- Andre Ware's first start in three years -- and his best ever as a pro -- couldn't have come at a worse time for Cleveland.
Ware passed for 138 yards and 2 touchdowns and ran for 68 yards as Detroit dimmed Cleveland's hopes for an American Football Conference wild-card playoff spot with a 24-14 victory today.


General Is Wary of Sending Force to Somali Interior
The commander of the United States troops here said today that he would not be pushed into sending soldiers into the center of the Somali famine before he had sufficient force to deal with armed resistance in the interior.
Western aid agencies who run feeding stations and health posts in Baidoa, the center of the suffering, said the military's buildup before tackling Baidoa, 150 miles west of here, seemed slow and somewhat out of proportion to the threat.


Haute Couture Is Set Aside For an Entire Issue of Vogue
With a toss of its imperial head and a clear-eyed look at where fashion is headed, Vogue will devote its entire April issue to clothes and other items that cost less than $500.
The magazine, which is better known for showcasing designer clothes with price tags in the high four figures, says it is making a major fashion statement.
"This is about style," said Anne Sutherland Fuchs, the publisher.
"There has never been this much fashion at this price. We will make it chic by doing this."


Matchmaker's Niche: The Lonely Mentally Ill
When Robin Kravitz describes her struggle to pierce the solitude of mental illness she is a study in turmoil.
Talk of the blind dates, the synagogue dances and a doomed romance make her fingers shake; she lights a cigarette and lets it smolder; her voice trembles, as if memories cracked open might swallow her whole.
Each attempt to bridge the gulf between her and "the normal world," as she puts it, seemed a contract for defeat.
And then along came Alice, matchmaker for the mentally ill.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Press Notes; Criticism Is Sharp, Ax Is Well Ground
Photocopy machines are overheating in newsrooms across the country as reporters busily copy pirated galleys of the latest diatribe against the corporate influence over newspapers.
"Read All About It! The Corporate Takeover of America's Newspapers," to be published next month by the Times Books division of Random House, is by James D. Squires, editor of The Chicago Tribune until he was forced out in 1989.
Mr.
Squires was also Ross Perot's spokesman, and he has cast himself as a sort-of Ross Perot of journalism carrying a painful message.
"The press as an institution," he writes, "appears ready to trade its tradition and public responsibility for whatever will make a buck."


Essay; Working the Room
"These occasions have value," said Katharine Graham of The Washington Post Company, in a toast at her dinner party for the Clintons and Gores last week.
"They create relationships beyond the office."
Because she was generous enough to invite some of the journalistic competition to the party for 100 at her Georgetown home, I set about creating relationships.
Transition time is a very sensitive moment for pundits; you cannot appear eager to make contact, lest you be accused of sucking up, but neither should you allow your precious independence to be construed as aloofness or hostility, lest you miss out on a news-rich phone call from the highest authority.


Thrifty Tries to Shake Up Its Image With Serious Fun
TAKE Thrifty Rent-A-Car System -- please.
The New York agency CME-KHBB Advertising did just that recently, winning the Thrifty account with a promise to help the company overhaul its advertising and project a more light-hearted image.


Treasury to Auction Only Bills This Week
Treasury financings this week are confined to the bill markets, beginning with today's regular auction of three- and six-month bills.
By late in the day Friday, the rate on the three-month bill outstanding was 3.23 percent and on the six-month bill, 3.39 percent.


Abroad at Home; Maurice The Waiter?
A friend writes, as The New Yorker used to say.
An old friend: Stanley Karnow, longtime foreign correspondent and author of superb books on Mao's China, Vietnam and the Philippines.
"Years ago when I was in Indo-China," Mr.
Karnow writes, "I knew a C.I.A. man in Laos. I saw him again later, and he told me this story. After we first met, he requested authorization from headquarters to continue seeing me, since I might have some useful information. O.K., he was told, but be careful of Karnow.


Florio Agrees To Revisions In School Act
Under pressure from political and legal challenges to the sweeping school financing changes he made barely a year ago, Gov.
Jim Florio has agreed to a largely Republican-inspired revision of the plan.
The Governor, a Democrat, and the Republican legislative leadership -- Senate President Donald T. DiFrancesco and Assembly Speaker Garabed (Chuck) Haytaian -- reached the compromise on Friday.
It came only a day after the Republican-controlled Legislature began an assault on Mr.
Florio's financing plan, known as the Quality Education Act, when the education committees of both chambers approved a plan that would replace the act.


Accounts
*
Bristol-Myers Products, New York, to J. Walter Thompson New York, to handle its Theragran multivitamin account, previously handled by Saatchi &amp; Saatchi New York.
Thompson, which already handles Bristol-Myers's Nuprin analgesic account, was awarded the account without a review.
Billings were estimated at $4 million to $5 million. *
O.
M.
Scott &amp; Sons Co., Marysville, Ohio, a manufacturer of lawn and garden products, to Partners &amp; Shevack Inc., New York, to consolidate its consumer business group's account, previously handled by Fallon McElligott, Minneapolis.
Partners already handles the company's Hyponex organic products account.
Billings were estimated at more than $8 million.


As Racer, Mears Reaches End of the Road
When Rick Mears won his fourth Indianapolis 500, in 1991, tying him with A. J. Foyt and Al Unser Sr. for the most victories in the event, the only question at the time seemed to be when he would break the tie and officially establish himself as the greatest driver in the nation's greatest race.
Last Thursday, at a Christmas party at his team's headquarters in Reading, Pa., Mears answered that question: most likely never.


In Disney's Hockey Venture, The Real Action Is Off the Ice
The announcement Thursday that the Walt Disney Company had been awarded a National Hockey League franchise in Anaheim, Calif., immediately brought to mind images of Mickey, Minnie and Goofy strapping on shinguards and helmets and elbowing each other in the mouth.
But behind the jokes and familiar cartoon characters is a series of shrewd decisions that say a lot about sports as a business, how merchandise is sold and how corporate executives try to build good will in their home communities, hoping for tax breaks and new roads.
Encouraged by the Sharks
Disney, which will pay a $50 million fee to enter the league, was no doubt encouraged by the San Jose Sharks, which joined the league last season and despite a dismal on-ice performance sold more merchandise than any other team in the league.
Indeed, the Sharks finished second in all of professional sports -- in merchandise sold -- to the Chicago Bulls, the two-time National Basketball Association champions, who had $300 million in sales last year.
The Sharks' merchandise sales, $150 million, were 27 percent of the league's total.


From Somalia to U.S. Khat Finds a Foothold
In a small cafe in Harlem, fragrant with the aroma of spicy tea and decorated with a framed photograph from Mecca, a man named Amhat offers a takeout item that looks like a handful of watercress, but promises to produce extra energy and a few hours of mild euphoria.
The leafy stalks are khat, a stimulant that has come to America's attention because of its use by the glassy-eyed, trigger-happy young gunmen who have been hijacking relief supplies in Somalia.
But khat has also been finding a foothold here in recent years.


Market Place; Software Business Is Turning Tough
CAN anyone besides the Microsoft Corporation make money in software anymore?
That was one plaintive question raised at the Technologic Partners' Personal Computer Outlook conference held here last week.
As if in answer, Borland International Inc. announced on Wednesday that it would lay off 15 percent of its workers and take a $35 million charge for the quarter; it blamed a price war started by Microsoft.
"In 1993, we better be lean and mean and aggressive or everybody will disappear except Microsoft," Philippe Kahn, Borland's chief executive, said.


Leonard Safir, 71, Early TV Producer And an Anthologist
Leonard Safir, a veteran radio and television producer who was a public relations executive, died yesterday at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in Manhattan.
He was 71 and lived on the Upper East Side.
Mr. Safir died of lung cancer, said his younger brother, the columnist William Safire.


Ellis G. Arnall, 85, Ex-Governor of Georgia, Dies
Ellis G. Arnall, who sliced through red tape and Southern tradition as Governor of Georgia from 1943 to 1947, died yesterday in Atlanta.
He was 85 years old.
He died of pneumonia at Emory University's Wesley Woods Health Care Center, where he had lived for two years since suffering a stroke, his family said.


With a 99.9, Yamaguchi Is Gliding Right Along
The five-hour extravaganza lasted into this morning, but when the World Professional Skating Championships were done, there was still a batch of patient preteens outside the interview area at the Capital Centre squealing for the autograph of Kristi Yamaguchi.
It had been quite the professional debut for Yamaguchi, who was given a hospitable welcome by both the audience and judges.
She earned a series of perfect-10 scores late Saturday night for both her technical and artistic programs, capturing the women's competition with 99.9 points out of a possible 100.


CHRONICLE
BILL COSBY is the winner of the Pennsylvania Society's 1992 Gold Medal for Distinguished Achievement.
The 55-year-old comedian, actor and writer received the award at the society's 94th annual dinner in New York on Saturday, The Associated Press said.


Tiny Island In a Stream Is in Court
In late fall, Stack Island, a six-mile-long finger of land separated from downtown Lake Providence by a levee and a narrow channel of the Mississippi River, is partly submerged.
The willows, cottonwoods and hackberry trees rise out of the shallow water in low-lying sections of the island while deer graze and foxes cavort in dry clearings.
There is a certain serenity about the place despite the ever-present thunder of the river.


Compromise Empowers The People (and Yeltsin)
A compromise between President Boris N. Yeltsin and his legislative opposition, presented with much drama and some confusion late Saturday, holds the promise of an end to Russia's long constitutional crisis and the development of more ordinary democratic politics, some Government officials and senior Western diplomats said today.
By scheduling a popular referendum on major constitutional questions for April 11, the country's squabbling leaders have allowed the people of Russia a crucial say in their future that was previously denied to them.
Yeltsin Still Holds Reins
In the meantime, the status quo before this venomous session of the Congress of People's Deputies began on Dec. 1 will essentially be restored, with Mr.
Yeltsin keeping his powers of decree over economic policy and very possibly keeping his Acting Prime Minister, Yegor T. Gaidar.


Some Pointed Advice for Baseball, From Its Own Select Committee
While Washington politicians are beginning to question baseball's exemption from antitrust laws, the committee that studied the sport's economics for two years suggests that baseball use the exemption to enhance its income from local television and radio rights.
"It is ironic," the committee's report states, "that of the major sports, the only one with a judicially sanctioned antitrust exemption is the one which makes available its entertainment product on the least controlled, least effectively marketed basis."


New York Should Enact a Gay Rights Law
To the Editor:
New York State should join the 6 states and 110 municipalities with laws protecting the human rights of gays and lesbians.


Review/Film; Physically Paralyzed, But Spiritually Freed
May-Alice (Mary McDonnell) was on her way to a leg-waxing appointment when her life changed forever.
Hit by a car as she got out of a taxicab in New York City, May-Alice was left permanently paralyzed.
She formerly worked as a soap-opera actress, but nothing she simulated on television can match the drama her real life now offers.
She is seen in a hospital, waking up to the daunting facts of her new life, as John Sayles's "Passion Fish" begins.
Stunned at first, May-Alice soon develops a caustically bitter way of dealing with her frustration.
She keeps to herself and drinks too much.
She remains angry and proud.
She mocks those who try to help her and, even more mercilessly, she mocks herself.
"It's important that we have clean walls," she snaps at one of the many nurses she employs briefly, then fires or scares away.
"I'll be climbing them soon."


Books of The Times; Michael Caine, a Working-Class Artist, Tells His Own Story
What's It All About?
An Autobiography  By Michael Caine  Illustrated. 521 pages.
Turtle Bay Books/Random House. $24.
Perhaps the most amusing story the film actor Michael Caine tells in his autobiography, "What's It All About?," which comes from the title of the song in his hit film "Alfie," is the account of his first appearance as a professional actor.
In 1952 at the age of 19, he stepped onto a stage in a small country town in Sussex, England, with his fly unbuttoned.
The laughter in the audience that this provoked made him forget the single line he was supposed to speak, "Come along with me, sir." He reports, "When one of the actors whispered it to me, his voice was so soft I did not hear what he said and I replied, 'What?' in a normal voice." Though the play was not a comedy, the audience's laughter swelled.


C.V. Whitney, Horseman And Benefactor, Dies at 93
Cornelius Vanderbilt Whitney, a founder of Pan American Airways, a Truman Administration official and for nearly three-quarters of a century a prominent figure in horse racing and the arts, died yesterday at his home in Saratoga Springs, N.Y.
He was 93.
A family spokesman said Mr.
Whitney died of natural causes at Cady Hill House, the stately old country manor that had been his principal residence in recent years.
It was one of several homes he maintained in the United States and abroad, but it was the one he favored as the center of the business and social activities that he directed with his wife, Marylou, one of society's busiest and best-known hostesses and arts patrons.


Theater in Review
'Lightin' Out'  Judith Anderson Theater  422 West 42d Street Clinton  Book and lyrics by Walt Stepp; music by Mr.
Stepp and John Tucker; directed by Kevin Cochran; set by Campbell Baird; costumes by Thom J. Peterson; lighting by Paul Bartlett; sound by Jim van Bergen; additional music by Gregory Tucker; additional musical staging by Catherine Ulissey; production stage manager, Marjorie Goodsell Clark; music direction and arrangements by Robert Meffe.
Presented by the Dauphin Company.
WITH: Beth Blatt, Tony Fair, Karen Looze, Robert Roznowski, Gordon Stanley and Robert Tate.
If a few hummable tunes, a small but aggressive instrumental ensemble, a stunning set and enthusiastic actors could add up to a fine musical, "Lightin' Out" would be terrific.


Exploring Alcoholism Among the Elderly
He has withdrawn from his circle of friends.
She shows the bruises and scars of many bumps and falls.
He has gradually stopped shopping for food and appears malnourished.
She has recently been dousing herself in a cloud of perfume.
In the elderly, medical researchers say, these can be signs of hidden alcoholism, a problem whose dimensions in the lives of men and women over 65 is little understood.
Now the Center of Alcohol Studies at Rutgers University has begun the country's first research project into the treatment of alcoholism among the elderly, hoping to learn more about the problem and help the subjects of the study at the same time.


Don't Raid the Bench for Talent
When Patricia Wald, a respected Federal judge in Washington, removed herself from consideration as Attorney General, she dashed one of the Clinton transition team's brightest hopes for appointing another prominent woman to high office.
That's a setback for the Clinton administration; Judge Wald has won wide and unstinting respect.
But it's nevertheless a blessing for the judicial system.
As the search resumes, the President-elect needs to reconsider the wisdom of using the Federal bench as a talent pool for executive appointments.
It's generally a poor idea to raid the judiciary to fill law enforcement or other executive branch positions.
Judges may add probity and prestige to a President's roster, but at a risk to the independence of their courts.
The Constitution grants life tenure to protect that independence, but a Federal judge who lusts for executive office could be tempted to trim his or her rulings to please a President.


Embargo Is Eased After Hanoi's Help on M.I.A.'s
Significantly easing the 17-year-old trade embargo against Vietnam, the Bush Administration said today that it would permit American companies to sign contracts to do business there.
The move is a response to what the Administration sees as greater Vietnamese cooperation in the search for the 2,264 American servicemen still listed as missing from the Vietnam War and makes renewed diplomatic ties increasingly likely.


CUNY Panel Never Urged Conversion to a 'Super-University'
To the Editor:
With the concurrence of my five faculty colleagues on the City University of New York Chancellor's Advisory Committee on Academic Program Planning, I write to say that your Dec. 8 news article on the proposed overhaul of the 19-campus CUNY system seriously misrepresents our committee's report.
It is wrongly stated that the report undermines individual campus autonomy.


Trenton Senate to Let Voters Decide on Sports Gambling
Without a vote to spare, the Senate approved a resolution today that would allow voters to decide whether to permit sports wagering at Atlantic City casinos.
The vote today, a victory for the powerful casino industry, begins a complicated legislative process aimed at placing the issue on the ballot in November 1993.
If voters approve the measure, New Jersey would become the second state after Nevada to allow casinos to offer wagering on professional and college sporting events.


Marshall Star Is No. 1
Marshall quarterback MICHAEL PAYTON, the career leading passer in the Southern Conference, won the Walter Payton Award yesterday as the top player in Division I-AA.
Payton has led Marshall to the I-AA championship game for the second straight year. (AP)


Hispanic Pragmatism Seen in Survey
An overwhelming majority of the Hispanic population in the United States says there is too much immigration, according to a nationwide public opinion survey being made public today in Washington.
And in another response that poll takers said was likely to confound expectations in an era when ethnic identity has been emphasized, a large proportion of Hispanic citizens and residents say people who live in this country should learn to speak English.


Tsongas Is In Hospital; Condition Is Stable
Former Senator Paul E. Tsongas was reported in stable condition today at a Boston hospital where he is being treated for an infection that developed from chemotherapy he underwent in his latest battle against cancer.
Mr.
Tsongas, a candidate for the 1992 Democratic Presidential nomination, was admitted to the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute on Thursday.
Hospital officials did not issue a statement until today, after an article was published in The Boston Globe.


At Side of the Rink, Hardy Confronts End of the Road
In one locker stood Kevin Lowe, newly arrived from Edmonton, excitedly speaking of his first opportunity to play in a New York Rangers uniform.
Next to him sat Mark Hardy.
Quiet.
Reserved.
Over his head, at the top of his locker, he has taped a newspaper clipping that reads: "God put me here to play." This is his credo.
After 14 years with assorted National Hockey League teams, he cannot imagine not playing the game.


Marshall Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Pop and Jazz in Review
'In Their Own Words' 'A Bunch of Songwriters Sittin' Around Singin' '  Bottom Line 15 West Fourth Street Greenwich Village
Songs are like rooms that writers build as shelters for themselves, temporarily holding the unpredictable elements of romance, joy or suffering within.
Once performed or recorded, songs become common property, their meanings rearranged by each listener like so much furniture.
They can be made into love nests, chapels or meeting halls, making space for emotions that people might not otherwise let themselves feel.


Continental Pharma Cryosan reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Sharing a Magic Moment During the Holiday Season at the White House


Electors' Lesson in Civics: There Is No Free Lunch
Democracy has its price. In New York today it cost about $9,000.
That was what the state, which is facing a multibillion-dollar budget deficit next year, spent on a ceremony that even the participants described today as anachronistic -- the quadrennial meeting of the Electoral College to cast ballots for President and Vice President.
Many other states have minimal costs or none, with some requiring either electors or political parties to foot the bill.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
BOSTON RED SOX -- Agreed to terms with Bob Melvin, catcher, to a two-year contract.
CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Agreed to terms with Mike Bielecki, pitcher, on a minor-league contract.


Cold-War Words Jolt the West
Russia's Foreign Minister stunned envoys with a combative anti-Western address in Stockholm.
Half an hour later, he told the audience the speech had been a ruse.
Page A16.


For Ewing, 4 Quarters Are Better Than 2 Aspirin
Patrick Ewing was weakened by the flu, but the Knicks still managed a healthy performance last night.
Relying on strong defense and its bench, New York coasted to a 106-89 victory over the Denver Nuggets at Madison Square Garden.
With five players reaching double figures, the Knicks (13-7) completed their longest homestand of the season with a 4-1 record and some momentum going into tonight's eagerly awaited showdown in New Jersey against the Nets (11-9).
Instead of overlooking the Nuggets (7-12), the Knicks overwhelmed them.


Desormeaux Improves
Jockey KENT DESORMEAUX, who suffered several hairline skull fractures when he was kicked by a horse in a fall at Hollywood Park, continued his improvement yesterday, a track spokesman, MIKE MOONEY, said.
As expected, Desormeaux was moved from the intensive-care unit to an observation unit at Centinela Hospital Medical Center in Inglewood, Calif.
Assuming his improvement continues, he will be moved to a private room today, Mooney said.
Desormeaux, 22, is expected to be hospitalized for at least a week and be sidelined from four to six weeks.


Politics and the Curriculum Fight
The standoff between a defiant Queens school board and Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez over a study guide that teaches respect for gay and lesbian life styles is the vortex of a larger political and legal struggle over conflicting social agendas.
On one side, Roman Catholic Church leaders and laymen have placed their moral and, indirectly, their legal weight behind the opposition of some parents and local school board members, who say that they alone should decide what their children learn about such sensitive subjects as homosexuality and AIDS.


Corrections
A caption on Saturday with the About New York column, about a former addict who has abandoned crack and assumed custody of his baby daughter, described the picture incompletely.
It was taken in May 1991, when the child was just over 1 year old.
She is now a healthy 3-year-old.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
7.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
4.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.00
2.76
4.62
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.23
3.23
4.15
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.40
3.39
4.16
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.49
6.44
6.71
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.46
7.43
7.75
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.43
8.40
8.80
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.37
n.a.
6.80
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Big Collusion Winners: Clark, Parrish, Dawson
Jack Clark, Lance Parrish and Andre Dawson have emerged as the biggest winners in the first stage of proposed payments from the $280 million in damages clubs had to pay players for their collusion against free agents in 1985, 1986 and 1987.
Barring changes from objections claimants can file to the proposed awards, Clark will receive $800,000 each for 1986 and 1987, for a total of $1.6 million; Parrish will receive $191,666 for 1986 and $1,191,666 for 1987, for a total of $1,383,332, and Dawson will receive $1 million for 1987.


AFTER THE STORM: The Overview; 12,000 Homes Said to Sustain Storm Damage
The violent storms that swept through the New York region last week significantly damaged or destroyed more than 12,000 homes, the Red Cross estimated yesterday.
And Federal officials said that many, if not most, of the properties may not be covered for flood damage.
As the waters receded, the cost of two days of wind, rain and snow began to emerge in greater and grimmer detail.
According to the Red Cross estimate, which was based on interviews with relief agencies, inspections of damaged areas and aerial surveys, 4,000 homes in New York City were hit, 3,460 in Connecticut, 3,500 in New Jersey, 1,000 in Long Island and 100 in Rockland County.


C.M.L. Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


25 Years to Life in Slaying
An unemployed handyman received the maximum sentence of 25 years to life in prison yesterday for the murder of a Hasidic woman who was stabbed to death in February in Crown Heights, Brooklyn.
The defendant, Romane LaFond, was convicted on Nov. 11 of slaying the woman, Phyllis LaPine, who was killed during a burglary in her apartment on Feb. 6.
The crucial evidence in the eight-day trial was the defendant's bloody palm print, which was found on a wall next to Mrs.
LaPine's body.
Justice Francis X. Egitto, who conducted the trial, imposed the maximum sentence on the 24-year-old defendant in State Supreme Court in Brooklyn.


Football; Who's In, Who's Out, Who Still Cares
Whether or not "Ray Must Go," the Giants won't.
And even if no fans are calling for the head of Bruce Coslet, the Jets will get no closer to the playoffs than their TV sets or a complimentary ticket.
There might be no local excitement, but with only two weeks left in the National Football League's regular season, only one of six division races has been decided (Pittsburgh in the A.F.C. Central) and only 5 of 12 playoff spots have been clinched (by Pittsburgh, Buffalo, Dallas, New Orleans and San Francisco).


Richard Hughes Called a Man For All People
Richard J. Hughes, former New Jersey Governor and Chief Justice, was remembered more as friend and family man than as public official in a funeral today that was attended by hundreds of people whose lives he touched.
The Right Rev.
Leonard R. Toomey, who delivered the homily, recalled that in 1962 when Mr.
Hughes moved into Morven, the former Governor's Mansion in Princeton, with his wife, Betty, and their 10 children, "the vibrancy of activity in that staid, old mansion made people think the Second Battle of Princeton since the Revolutionary War was being enacted."


No Headline
There is also a growing sentiment that diverse employee teams tend to outperform homogeneous teams of any composition.
Managers tell us that homogeneous groups may reach consensus more quickly, but often they are not as successful in generating new ideas or solving problems, because their collective perspective is narrower. -- ROBERT L. LATTIMER, who advises corporations on diversity.  [ D20:5. ]


Grand Casinos reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 1


Patterns
Louis Licari's Award
They call him the King of Blondes.
Louis Licari is probably the most famous hair colorist in the country.
With salons on both coasts, he gilds the tresses of such well-known personalities as Ivana Trump, Ellen Barkin and Kim Basinger.
What is less known is that he devotes one night a month to beautifying women in a New York City shelter for the homeless.
And last week he was honored for his volunteer work by the Cosmetic Executive Women Foundation at a lunch on Wednesday at the Waldorf-Astoria.
For three years, the foundation has been sponsoring the Casa Rita shelter in the South Bronx, paying for the renovation of the building and running monthly Image Workshops.
Which is where Mr.
Licari comes in.
He is the first recipient of the foundation's Special Service Award.


New U.S.-Russian Effort in Space
To the Editor:
I follow your coverage on the relationship of our countries very closely, particularly in the areas of space and nuclear energy.
Your optimistic assessment for future cooperation has been based not only upon the tremendous benefit these activities hold for Russia and the United States, but also upon the necessity to assist Russia with overall structural and economic change.


Admitting Wrongdoing
To the Editor:
Richard E. Mooney's Editorial Notebook on "mealy-mouthed conditional" public apologies ("If This Sounds Slippery . . ." Nov. 30) is one more despairing result of the Reagan decade.
The manipulation of admitting nothing while apologizing is a symptom of a general lack of integrity that sadly has become normative behavior for public figures.
If citizens emulate them, we are indeed in big trouble.
Even Mr.
Mooney's plea for candor misspeaks.
Admission of wrongdoing is not a matter of being "candid," but of explicitly stating that one takes responsibility for one's actions.
The Notebook's descriptive generosity points up the trickery that "if" involves.
JANE A. BOWLING  New York, Dec. 3, 1992


Chip Makers in 'Flash Memory' Pact
The National Semiconductor Corporation said today that it would join forces with the Toshiba Corporation to enter the hotly contested market for a new type of chip called flash memory.
Flash memories are considered one of the most exciting products in the computer chip business.
They do not lose their contents when a computer's power is shut off, unlike dynamic random access memories, the main type of chips now used to store computer data and programs.
Could Replace Disk Drives
Such chips could eventually take the place of disk drives, which are now used for permanent information storage in computers.
Flash memories are already catching on in battery-powered hand-held computers because they are smaller and use less power than disk drives.


ConEd Request Faces Challenge
Consolidated Edison will seek a 6.5 percent increase in electricity rates in hearings that begin today, and the request has won preliminary approval from the Public Service Commission as the second of three increases over three years.
But two consumer advocates are preparing to challenge the request and the concept of a three-year rate agreement, contending that they are harmful to consumers' interests.
The challenge comes from Richard M. Kessel, executive director of the state Consumer Protection Board, and Peter L. DiCapua, president of the Owners Committee on Electric Rates, a group of large commercial customers.
Mr.
Kessel said yesterday that if Con Ed had to ask for increases annually, it probably would not have asked this year.


Empire Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Clinton Team to Tackle Drug Pricing
President-elect Bill Clinton's transition team has put the drug industry on notice that Mr.
Clinton intends to limit increases in prescription drug prices as part of any plan to revamp the nation's health-care system.
Aides to Mr.
Clinton met recently with drug company executives, described his ideas and invited their reaction.
Details of the meeting were provided today by Clinton aides and company executives.


Executive Changes
BELOIT CORP.
Milwaukee, a unit of Harnischfeger Industries, named J. Weldon Cole president and chief operating officer.
ESPN, New York, the cable television sports network, named John A. Lack executive vice president for marketing and programming.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
The U.A.W. agreed to sweeping early-retirement incentives at General Motors.
It was not immediately clear how many workers would retire early, but the package is one way the auto maker hopes to shrink its hourly work force about 13 percent by 1995.  [ Page A1. ]
Boeing will impose a contract proposal rejected by employees.
The move set the stage for a strike by engineers and technical employees, possibly as early as today.  [ D1. ]


By Design; Alaia's Devoted Fans
For Azzedine Alaia fans, time is not of the essence.
While the fall leftovers of other equally well known talents are languishing on the sales racks, Alaia's autumn oeuvres are only now arriving.
But whenever this famous Paris designer's clothes make it to New York stores, they are snapped up by waiting customers.
There are two good reasons why Alaia commands such a devoted fan club.
Serious followers of fashion know that he has an uncanny way of picking up on a style trend at least a season before the rest.
The other is pure sex appeal.
Both these qualities are obvious in the new Alaias.
Fitting as snugly as plaster to the ribs and waist, the jackets and coats flare out over the hips in princess lines.
They evoke late-1930's and 40's silhouettes.
Yet, they are as curvy as all get out, calling attention to the bosom and hips.
They are a fascinating amalgam of ladylike dressmaking and unmistakable allure.


Hydro Flame Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Jay Tarses's Play: It's Personal, but It's Not
The title of Jay Tarses's new play, "Man in His Underwear," comes from a line of dialogue: "Man in his underwear is man at his most vulnerable," delivered by an orthopedist to a half-dressed patient with a back problem.
The play itself centers on the patient, a middle-aged man with a troubled marriage and family life who is having an affair with a younger woman, the doctor's daughter, who also happens to be an orthopedist.
"I think it has resonance for people in my age bracket; I'm 53," Mr.
Tarses said of the play, the first he has ever written after a substantial career in television.
Like Al Kirkland, the central character, Mr.
Tarses is a Baltimorean, recalls fondly the great Baltimore Oriole teams of the 1960's, has two daughters and has lately had some back problems.
But firmly, seriously, without flashing the wide, wicked smile that lets you know he's putting you on, something he's fond of doing, he added: "But this is not autobiographical in any way." TV Shows Beloved, by Some
Mr.
Tarses is a somewhat renowned television iconoclast; that is, he's not renowned enough to be a hit maker.
His comedies -- "Buffalo Bill," "The Slap Maxwell Story" and, most notably, "The Days and Nights of Molly Dodd" -- have been fiercely loved (though not by enough people), all of them funny in a way that's a bit darker, a bit more absurd than network television can comfortably accommodate for long.


After Stall, Koreans See Need For Economic Reforms, Too
To see the hope of South Korea's economy, one must put on a special pair of pants, a jump suit, a hood, facial mask, booties and two pairs of gloves, pass through three separate air showers and walk over three sticky floor mats.
Only then, completely free of dust and other particles, can one enter the space-age super-clean factory in which dozens of young women are making screens for notebook computers using a technology that is so advanced that only the Japanese have mastered it.


New Clues to Agent of Life's Worst Extinction
A QUARTER billion years ago, something so terrible happened on earth that up to 96 percent of plant and animal species were wiped out.
The cause of this greatest of all global catastrophes remains unknown, but evidence is mounting that the main culprit was a monstrous volcanic eruption that covered much of Siberia with molten rock, touching off an ice age and a worldwide deluge of lethal acid rain.
This mass extinction, which occurred at the end of the Permian period, was the subject of papers presented last week at a meeting of the American Geophysical Union and in the journal Science.


Paragon Mortgage Corp. reports earnings for Year Sept 30


North West Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 24


Still Needed: A Fair Deal on Transit
It's cliffhanger time again for New York City bus and subway riders.
Faced with a $266 million Transit Authority operating deficit, the Metropolitan Transportation Authority's finance committee voted yesterday to set public hearings -- the first step toward a possible 25-cent fare increase by next April.
But the real deficit is in Albany's leadership.
Much is at stake today as Gov.
Mario Cuomo meets with State Senate Republicans to try to break the deadlock over a financing package that would avoid the fare increase and finance a vigorous long-term capital program for the M.T.A.'s regional transportation network.


Researchers Discover New Therapies to Avert Repeated Miscarriages
MISCARRIAGE, a disappointing and distressing experience for anyone, is especially devastating for the 1 in 300 couples who experience three or more miscarriages in a row.
Half such couples are told that no cause for the miscarriages can be found, and they are typically advised to keep trying even though their chance of producing a live baby diminishes greatly with each miscarriage.
Now, thanks to a better understanding of immunological factors that protect or destroy the developing embryo and fetus, researchers using simple new therapies are reporting very high rates of successful pregnancies among thousands of women who have experienced previously unexplained recurrent miscarriages.


People
*
Tim R. Garde, executive vice president at NC &amp; A Advertising Inc., Philadelphia, was promoted to president, succeeding Ed Cohen, who was named to the new position of chairman.


Auto Insurer Reaches Pact In New Jersey
In a partial victory for Gov.
Jim Florio in his sweeping revision of automobile insurance, New Jersey's largest automobile insurer, the Allstate Insurance Company, has agreed to continue writing insurance for at least two years in the state.
The agreement is a result of several compromises.
Allstate will get a 6.5 percent rate increase early next year; its request for an 18 percent increase had been refused.
The company will drop several lawsuits against the state, and the state will sever Allstate from a lawsuit involving the defunct state-run pool for high-risk drivers.
Allstate, meanwhile, will pay the state $75 million to help cover the pool's debts.


Fernandez Softens Tone With Board
The dispute between Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez and a mutinous local school board in Queens took on a more conciliatory tone yesterday, with both sides offering procedural concessions that may bring about negotiations over a curriculum that teaches respect for gay people.
Mr.
Fernandez, who was urged by one Board of Education member to be less "stiff necked" in his approach to the Queens district, backed away from setting deadlines for a resolution, something his earlier letters had included.
And he expressed willingness to hold a mediation meeting in the office of the Queens Borough President rather than his own office.


Somali Peacekeepers to Need U.S. Support Troops
United States support troops will have to stay in Somalia to provide logistical backing for the United Nations peacekeeping force that is to take over from American combat units, an American military commander said today.
The commander, Gen.
Joseph P. Hoar, head of United States Central Command, told reporters that while many nations were offering to send troops to Somalia as part of a peacekeeping force, most were unable to provide the necessary logistical support.


Labor Notice Is Filed, Raising Trust Question
Maybe it will turn out to be a formality; maybe it will turn out to be the first move in the eighth work stoppage in the last eight labor negotiations between baseball's club owners and players.
Donald Fehr, the head of the players' union, disclosed yesterday that the clubs last week sent a notice to the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service that must be filed 60 days before one side can engage in a work stoppage against the other.


Review/Dance; An Ailey Anthology Of Motion and Moods
The Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater honored its founder by presenting a program called "Ailey Classics" on Saturday night at the City Center.
The evening, which concluded with a complete presentation of the ever-popular "Revelations," was otherwise devoted to excerpts from works.
This resulted in a theatrical anthology that provided dancegoers with samples of Ailey's achievements from the late 1950's until his death in 1989.
Ailey was skilled at bringing out the best in performers.
Dudley Williams demonstrated this by dancing "A Song for You," a choreographic sigh of a solo that is part of the suite "Love Songs." Mr.
Williams, who joined the Ailey company in 1964, continues to set an example for all the newer members of the troupe through his ability to make every gesture dramatically meaningful without forcing effects.
And he knows how to let tensions subside effectively and how to build them toward emotionally shattering climaxes.


YELTSIN ABANDONS HIS PRINCIPAL AIDE TO PLACATE RIVALS
Outmaneuvered in the end by the hostile Russian Congress, President Boris N. Yeltsin today surrendered Yegor T. Gaidar, the architect and symbol of his economic program, and in his stead named a veteran manager of the state energy sector to be Prime Minister.
The stunning reversal, and the question mark it raised over the continuation of the already limping program of economic change, concluded a two-week power struggle between Mr.
Yeltsin and the bellicose Congress of People's Deputies, during which the tide of battle shifted frequently and furiously.


Cardis Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Bridge
Six partnerships from the New York metropolitan area have earned expense-paid trips to Kansas City, Mo., in March.
They will compete in national playoffs in the Grand National Pairs, thanks to finishing first or second in one of the three divisions of the district finals played on Sunday in Farmingdale, L.I.
The six pairs are: Flight A, Alex and Mitchell Pollenz of Wantagh, L.I., and Michael Moss and Jon Greenspan, both of Manhattan; Flight B, James Scott and Harry Apfel, both of Manhattan, and Donald Ross and Dennis Ernai, both of Manhattan; Flight C, Jeffrey Bakalchuck of Brooklyn, and Bill Rittenhouse, also of Manhattan, and John Boyer and Ellyn Plato, both of Manhattan.


The Salt Gene
Sometimes scientists have to switch a gene from one species to another to discover how it works.
To study a plant gene that controls the flow of potassium into cells, researchers plucked genes from the plant Arabidopsis thaliana, spliced them into yeast DNA to find the one they wanted, then tested the gene in frog cells.
Work on the newly discovered gene could aid development of new human drugs as well as help develop salt-tolerant plants.


Estimates of Warming Gain More Precision And Warn of Disaster
SCIENTISTS may be zeroing in on a tighter estimate of just how much the earth's climate stands to be warmed by industrial waste gases that trap the sun's heat.
Such estimates are usually made by computers programmed to simulate the world's climate.
These computer models, however impressive, are no better than the assumptions fed into them.
Now comes a substantial independent check on the models: an analysis of how the earth's climate responded to changes in atmospheric heat-trapping carbon dioxide and other influences in the distant past, based on geological and geophysical evidence.


Questions on Early Parole Eligibility
New York State officials said yesterday that a man convicted of manslaughter for the Howard Beach racial attack had been granted parole two years before he was eligible.
They said they would hold a hearing that could lead to revocation of his parole.
The original parole-eligibility date of Feb. 3, 1993, was canceled yesterday and re-calculated to April 14, 1995.


AM International reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


BRIEFS
Debt  *
Delta Air Lines Inc., Atlanta, is offering $175 million in 30-year 10 3/8 percent debentures at 99.887 to yield 10.387 percent through Goldman, Sachs.
The noncallable debentures are rated Baa-2 by Moody's Investors Service, BBB by Standard &amp; Poor's Corp. and BB+ by Duff &amp; Phelps.
*
Ryland Mortgage Securities Corp., a unit of Ryland Group Inc., Columbia, Md., filed a shelf offering with the Securities and Exchange Commission for up to $1 billion of mortgage participation securities.


Judge's Sex-Abuse Trial Shocks a Town
Over the last 50 years the name Lanier has often figured prominently in this city of 16,000.
And by turns, the family's personal passages, passions and sibling rivalries have captured the attention of this northwest Tennessee city.
Consequently, its residents are now enwrapped in the current Lanier story, one that has been unfolding in Federal District Court 80 miles to the south.
But this time, their talk is quiet and tentative, partly out of respect for the family, partly out of good manners, since it is impolite to gossip, and partly for fear of getting on the family's bad side.


Jets Are Dismal but Won't Point Fingers
The downcast looks from most of the players in the Jets' locker room told the story of the season.
It's the same expression they've worn 10 times this season: They sit on their metal stools in front of their lockers, heads down, staring at nothing in particular, waiting for reporters to ask questions they have no answers to.
Why do they lose? Don't ask.


Board to Hear Bid for Parole From a Central Park Killer
Either today or tomorrow, Robert E. Chambers Jr. will walk, alone, into a drab room at the Clinton Correctional Facility in the small upstate town of Dannemora, N.Y., and sit for the first time across a table from a state parole board.
After questioning the tall, handsome, often charming young man, the board will judge whether he is a remorseless killer or a penitent who should go free.
The story of Mr.
Chambers, who pleaded guilty in 1988 to first-degree manslaughter in the killing of Jennifer Levin and was sentenced to 5 to 15 years in prison, became a virtual parable of privileged youth gone bad.
The case, which became known as "the preppy murder," at once captivated and repelled the public, and was made into a television movie.


Texas A&amp;M: Perfect Year, Imperfect Matchup
Unbeaten, untied and unimpressed with the wisdom of the electorate in the polls that define big-time college football, R. C. Slocum, the coach of Texas A&amp;M, clings to his conviction and his first-place vote.
He is not one of those voters who laterals coaches-poll ballots to the hired help until the season gets serious.
Slocum said he carries the ballot in his briefcase, checks the scores himself, then casts his vote.
When the last regular-season USA Today/CNN coaches poll was complete, with the first-place votes in parenthesis, this is what happened:
1. Miami (59)
2. Alabama
3. Texas A&amp;M (1)
"I was that one lone vote," Slocum said yesterday in Manhattan while promoting the (Large Oil Company) Cotton Bowl.
"We're 12-0. That's my vote."


Books of The Times; Explaining All the Fuss About Shakespeare
The Friendly Shakespeare  A Thoroughly Painless Guide to the Best of the Bard  By Norrie Epstein  550 pages.
Viking. $22.50.
Norrie Epstein's high-spirited new book, "The Friendly Shakespeare," aspires to do what Joseph Papp did with his free productions of Shakespeare in the Park: Bring the Bard to the masses, make his plays accessible and, well, provide fun for "the reader whose only contact with Shakespeare was through Cliffs Notes and the reader who wonders what the Shakespeare fuss is all about."


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on the Media Business page of Business Day yesterday about recalls of defective books included an incomplete identification for one publisher.
She is Diane Reverand, publisher and editor in chief of Villard Books.


Sibiu Journal; Romania's Monuments Make Strange Bedfellows
Like mushrooms in the surrounding forests, monuments to those who were killed in the anti-Communist revolution of December 1989 have sprung up all over this Transylvanian city.
On the Great Market Square, two plaques, incongruously attached to a statue of a 19th-century Romanian educator, recall the names of 64 men and women who were shot by the military and the police in the rising that ousted President Nicolae Ceausescu.


Andrew Litton to Lead The Dallas Symphony
Andrew Litton, the principal conductor and artistic adviser of the Bournemouth Symphony in Britain, is to assume the position of music director and conductor of the Dallas Symphony Orchestra, the orchestra has announced.
Mr.
Litton's three-year contract as the orchestra's 15th music director is to take effect on June 1, 1994, and it includes an option to renew in 1997 for two years.
He will be replacing Eduardo Mata, who, after 16 years in the post, is leaving in June 1993.
For the 1993-94 season, Mr.
Litton, as music director-designate, along with other guest conductors, will appear with the 92-year-old orchestra.


Saudi King Ousts 7 Senior Clerics For Acts of Criticism by Omission
For the fourth time in two years, King Fahd of Saudi Arabia has stepped into a confrontation with militant Muslim fundamentalists, quietly removing seven of the highest religious figures after they failed to support his Government against criticism by the religious right.
The seven members of the Supreme Authority of Senior Scholars, the highest-level religious body in the kingdom, were quietly removed by royal decree on the pretext of "poor health."


Lakers Aren't for Sale, Team Spokesman Says
Reacting swiftly to a published report that Sony Pictures Entertainment was said to be showing interest in buying the Los Angeles Lakers, a club spokesman said yesterday that the National Basketball Association team isn't for sale.
"I guarantee you that JERRY BUSS will not sell the Lakers," said BOB STEINER, a public relations director for the team's owner.
"He loves them too much."


Luby's Cafeterias reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


RESULTS PLUS
HOCKEY  Flames Shut Out Wings
Mike Vernon made 33 saves for his fifth career shutout as the Calgary Flames beat the slumping Red Wings, 3-0, last night in Detroit.
Vernon's last shutout was also against Detroit, on Jan. 5, 1991, in Calgary.
Detroit hadn't been shut out since Feb. 16, 1991, a span of 133 games.
The Flames are 4-1-2 in their last seven games, all with Vernon in goal.
Detroit is just 2-7-1 in its last 10 games.
Calgary opened the scoring on a 2-on-1 break with the unlikely combination of Ronnie Stern and Craig Berube.
The two enforcers combined for just 6 points in 49 games, but Stern slid the puck through defenseman Mark Howe's legs, and Breube tapped it under Vincent Riendeau for his second goal of the season at 14 minutes 54 seconds of the opening period.


On My Mind; The Special Interests
President-elect Clinton is stuffing his cabinet with people who represent powerful special interests.
The new Secretary of the Treasury is a friend of the oil and gas industries.
The new Secretary of Commerce has represented a fat bank account worth of business lobbies, American and foreign.


Market Place; Leaving Behind Problems at Arkla
JAN. 20, 1989.
In Washington, George Bush was being sworn in as President.
And on the New York Stock Exchange, shares of Arkla Inc., a gas pipeline company, closed at $20.875.
Almost four years later, fortunes have changed.
Mr.
Bush is getting ready to leave the White House as the country's chief executive, having lost the election on concerns about the economy.
And at Arkla, the chief executive is also packing, leaving behind investors who have seen their share price collapse by more than 50 percent since then, closing yesterday at just $8.25 a share.


Wall Street Finds Ways Of Muddling Through
The storm that swept across New York on Friday was a reminder that on Wall Street, as on other battlefields, there is an advantage to the high ground.
Firms in several low-lying buildings, including 55 Water Street, 100 Wall Street and 2 New York Plaza, were disabled when salty water from the rising tides of New York Harbor found its way into basement vaults holding electrical transformers and telephone equipment.


The Last Cold War President
George Bush can secure a place in history as the President whose diplomacy ended, at long last, the nuclear arms race.
One crucial piece of the puzzle eludes him -- completing a second strategic arms treaty.
Start II could be his most important legacy.
Yet this magnificent opportunity might slip away unless he personally intervenes.
Secretary of State Lawrence Eagleburger and Foreign Minister Andrei Kozyrev of Russia have failed to resolve a few remaining technical issues.
These pale next to the larger significance of the treaty.
Start II would ban all land-based multi-warhead missiles and reduce the total of warheads on each side to between 3,000 and 3,500 -- down from 11,000-plus today.


ISRAELIS SEAL OFF OCCUPIED REGIONS
As the army and the police hunted unsuccessfully for the Arab kidnappers of an Israeli border policeman, Israel sealed itself off today from its occupied territories and debated worriedly whether the Palestinian uprising had taken a menacing new turn.
A day after Sgt.
Maj.
Nissim Toledano was abducted after leaving his house in Lod for work, there was no word about his fate.


Will Jawboning Ease U.S. Credit Squeeze?
Last Thursday, the Small Business Administration ran out of money and stopped issuing approvals to guarantee new bank loans to businesses until after Jan. 1, when more funds become available.
The agency is still encouraging new applications, but at its recent pace of lending -- $25 million a day -- it will exhaust the $817 million loan quota for January through March well before that quarter ends.
During the recession, the S.B.A. has stepped in as banks became more wary of lending.
And its budget shortfall is just one reminder that after two years of clamor about how the credit crunch has hurt the economy, there is not a cohesive Federal program to address the issue.


Spartech Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Sports of The Times; Baseball Owners as Comedians
LAST week, David Letterman, who is funnier even than some baseball owners, agreed to a contract with CBS for $16 million a year.
On learning of this, there was not a wholesale uproar that I was aware of, with callers to radio talk shows wailing that Letterman was making too much money, that it would increase the prices of the goods sold by his sponsors, and where would it all end?
But at roughly the same time, Barry Bonds signed a contract with the San Francisco Giants to bash baseballs for $44 million for six years, an average of more than $7 million a year, or less than half in a year of what Letterman would be earning for laughing at his own jokes.
The switchboards for radio talk shows lit up: Such money for a ball player was unwholesome, was unpalatable and ought to be unbaseball, too.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on the Media Business page of Business Day yesterday about recalls of defective books included an incomplete identification for one publisher.
She is Diane Reverand, publisher and editor in chief of Villard Books.


CHRONICLE
LINDA ELLERBEE learned she had breast cancer in February and underwent a double mastectomy and chemotherapy.
So she was especially pleased to be asked to serve as host for a videotape in which 12 women who have had cancer offer practical advice and guidance drawn from their own lives.
"It seemed like such a wonderful idea," said Ms.
Ellerbee, the television producer, author and former anchor who is the founder and president of Lucky Duck Productions.
"I had just gone through the whole process myself, and I would have loved to hear other women talk directly to me about their experiences."


Key Serbian Official Backs Moderate Yugoslav Leader
President Dobrica Cosic endorsed Prime Minister Milan Panic today in his election bid to oust the nationalist president of Serbia, Slobodan Milosevic, Yugoslavia's main news agency reported.
The elections are scheduled for Sunday.
Opponents of Mr.
Milosevic, who has been branded internationally as most responsible for the violent breakup of Yugoslavia, have said Mr.
Cosic's endorsement is absolutely necessary if Mr.
Panic is to unseat Mr.
Milosevic and fulfill his promise to bring peace to Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Serb's Peace Proposal
In Belgrade today, the leader of the Serbs who are striving to dismember Bosnia proposed that Serbian forces unilaterally stop fighting in an effort to end the eight-month war.
The leader, Radovan Karadzic, said at a news conference that he would propose that the Serbs agree Thursday to stop shooting.


A Storm to Remember
First, while the wind howled and the rain poured, they called it "the storm of the century." Later, when the facts were in, it was downgraded to the worst in 40 years.
It was nonetheless ferocious, spreading wreckage and tragedy up the Atlantic Coast from Cape May to Montauk.
The nameless nor'easter that swept into the New York City area on Friday and stayed for most of the weekend was a catastrophe for some.
Dozens of families lost waterfront homes.
For others the storm brought tragedy, a life snuffed out.
But for the millions who make the New York area the densest in America, it was only a huge inconvenience, nothing like Hurricane Andrew.


Exploring Scriptures In Electronic Form
FOR family members 7 and up who want to test and extend their knowledge of the Bible, there is a game that will do it.
With Bible Builder, from Everbright Software of Redwood City, Calif., you assemble fragments of a biblical verse, jigsaw-puzzle style, by correctly answering multiple-choice questions about the Bible and gathering the hints scattered in colorful animated scenes.
The Angel Michael asks the questions and provides background information.


Metropolitan College Report
Fordham
Fairleigh Dickinson celebrated Turn Back the Clock Night last Monday in its game against Montclair State, but the theme applied to Fordham University, too.
The Rams defeated St.
John's, 60-55, in Rose Hill Gymnasium.
It was Fordham's first victory over the Redmen in 21 years.


List of Some of Those at Meeting
Following are some of the people attending President-elect Bill Clinton's economic conference here:
Paul A. Allaire, chairman and chief executive, the Xerox Corporation.
Robert E. Allen, chairman and chief executive, A.T.&amp; T.


Ico Inc. reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


Boldly or Demurely, The Midriff Bares Itself
Arms have been out in the open for a long time.
And thanks to deep slits at the front, sides or back of long skirts, along with the prevalence of sarong drapes and translucent fabrics, legs are now almost as visible.
But the newest area of exposure in fashion is the midriff.
Baring the midriff still has the ability to startle, designers have found, even though this part of the body is not considered to be a particularly erogenous zone.


Corrections
An article on Sunday about Thomas F. McLarty 3d, President-elect Bill Clinton's choice as chief of staff, referred incorrectly in some editions to the year Mr.
Clinton's family moved from Hope, Ark., to Hot Springs.
It was 1952, not 1968.


Corrections
An article on Sunday about Thomas F. McLarty 3d, President-elect Bill Clinton's choice as chief of staff, referred incorrectly in some editions to the year Mr.
Clinton's family moved from Hope, Ark., to Hot Springs.
It was 1952, not 1968.


James Cass Dies at 77; College Guide Author
James Cass, a co-author of "Comparative Guide to American Colleges," died Dec. 4 at his home in New Paltz, N.Y.
He was 77.
His daughter, Julia Cass-Liepmann, said that her father died of heart failure after suffering a series of small strokes in the last year.


Dinkins to Appeal Contempt on Homeless
The Dinkins administration will appeal a state judge's decision to hold four city officials in contempt for the city's failure to adequately shelter homeless families, averting for now the court-ordered penalty: an overnight stay for the officials in offices where hundreds of homeless families have had to sleep while they wait for shelter.
On Nov. 20, Justice Helen E. Freedman of State Supreme Court in Manhattan ordered the city to stop leaving families to sleep on tables and chairs in the offices and to place them promptly in shelters.


Steinbach Is the Latest To Jilt Yanks
Wade Boggs could join the Yankees today or tomorrow and potentially solve their third-base question, but the team's catching problem will apparently linger because Terry Steinbach decided yesterday that he did not want to play in New York and would instead remain with the Oakland A's.
In what has become a distressing trend, Steinbach joined Greg Maddux and an unknown number of players who have turned down larger offers from the Yankees to sign with other teams.
Steinbach agreed to a four-year, $14 million contract with the A's after the Yankees had offered him a four-year deal for $17 million on Saturday.


Medical Research Boosts New York Economy
To the Editor:
I was delighted, at long last, to see mention of the contribution of medical scientists to the economic health of New York City (news article, Nov. 17).
It is unfortunate, however, that the first mention of the vast sums that individual scientists, directly and indirectly, bring to the city was in an article with a negative cast.


Michael B. Ross, 83, Ex-Textile Executive
Michael B. Ross, a retired textile executive, died on Thursday at his home in Tamarac, Fla.
A former resident of Hewlett Bay Park, L.I., he was 83.
He died of cancer, his family said.


Queens Mother Gets Probation In a Slaying
Her court case ended yesterday with probation, removing one burden from the shoulders of Daisy Hutson.
Now all the 68-year-old Queens woman faces is the memory of her crack-ravaged daughter, and the fact that Mrs.
Hutson herself shot the woman to death.
On Aug. 4, Mrs.
Hutson, of South Jamaica, confronted her daughter, Renee, 48, on a St.
Albans street and shot her in a moment of desperation.


Dairy Mart Convenience Stores reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Neediest Fund Shelters Refugees of the Storm
When waves began crashing through barriers in Sea Gate, Brooklyn, on Friday, some people sought refuge at the nearby Abraham Residence, where they were greeted with warm clothes and hot drinks by men and women who knew how it felt to be stranded in the middle of the night with no place to go.
The Abraham, at 3915 Neptune Avenue, houses 75 formerly homeless people, and when the storm hit, residents turned their building into a makeshift emergency center, setting up cots in the dining room and work stations for the rescue workers who descended on the neighborhood.


INSIDE
Drug Prices Face Scrutiny
Clinton aides have told the drug industry that the new Administration intends to limit increases in prescription drug prices.
Page B12.
Voice of Hispanic-Americans
A large majority of the Hispanic population in the United States says there is too much immigration, according to a survey.
Page A20.
Mexican Acquitted in U.S.
A Mexican doctor, kidnapped at American behest to stand trial in the killing of a drug agent, was acquitted by a judge in Los Angeles.
Page A20.
Clinton Chooses Arkansan
Dr.
Jocelyn Elders, head of the Arkansas health department, has been chosen to be Surgeon General, transition sources said.
Page B11.


Hurco Cos. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Dehere Stays Right on Target in Seton Hall's Rout
Most of Terry Dehere's shots, 10 of 16, went swishing through the hoop tonight at Byrne Meadowlands Arena, and when that happens, the Seton Hall Pirates are a formidable basketball team.
Tonight, they routed St.
Peter's, 88-54, as Dehere, the senior shooting guard, led all scorers with 27 points.
It was the seventh victory of the young season for the Pirates against one loss, to Indiana.
Afterward P. J. Carlesimo, the Seton Hall coach, said: "We're not where we want to be. But we're getting there."


German Asylum: Too-Liberal Policy?
To the Editor:
"Our German Crisis" by A. M. Rosenthal (column, Nov. 24) warns of one side of the German crisis: rising Nazism.
But he fails to show that in contrast to the 1930's, the crisis in large part stems from Germany's policy on political asylum, the most liberal in all Europe.


Genesee Brewing Narrows Its Review
The Genesee Brewing Company in Rochester said yesterday that it had narrowed its review for its $2 million to $3 million Genesee beer and ale account to three finalists.


AFTER THE STORM: City Island; Friends Saw Their Ocean Turn Enemy
John Burke frowned as a green crab skittered across the damp wooden floor of Rosenberger's Boat Livery on City Island, which likes to call itself the oldest boat rental shop in America.
The crab had washed in, along with nearly three feet of frothing ocean, last Friday.
Yesterday, Mr.
Burke grabbed it by a claw and whizzed it through the back door, back into the sea.
"At least something survived," said Mr.
Burke, the shop's owner.
Then he walked out to look at the damage: a 200-foot pier racked off its pylons, 30 of his 80 boats missing, another 10 destroyed, a shed that once held 40 outboard motors blown into splinters.


A Nominee for Biggest Organism
WHAT is the world's largest living organism?
Scientists in Colorado have nominated a new candidate for the title: a 106-acre, 6,000-ton stand of genetically identical quaking aspens, cloned naturally from a single individual and growing from a single root system in Utah.


Fire Island Record Tides Are Toppling More Homes Into the Sea
Beach homes on Fire Island continued to topple into the sea today as record tides and a ravenous surf ate away at the sand dunes along the fragile barrier beaches from Kismet to Southampton.
More than 100 summer homes have been washed away since the fierce nor'easter, which local residents are calling "the storm of the century," hit the area on Friday with hurricane-force winds.


CHRONICLE
A tear came to the ol' blue eyes of Ol' Blue Eyes during the long standing ovation he received at his 77th birthday party and concert at the Desert Inn Hotel and Casino in Las Vegas, Nev., on Saturday.
FRANK SINATRA was concluding a weeklong engagement at the resort, where he made his Las Vegas debut in 1951.


Ex-Head of Chinatown Gang Is Guilty of Leading Drug Ring
A man described as the former head of a major Chinatown gang called the Flying Dragons was convicted yesterday of being a leader of a drug ring that smuggled hundreds of pounds of heroin into New York City.
The defendant, Johnny Eng, known as Onionhead, was "a pivotal character in the Chinatown underworld," said a prosecutor, Catherine E. Palmer.
She said that the Flying Dragons, with more than 100 members, engaged in heroin trafficking, loan sharking and gambling operations, primarily in Chinatown in Manhattan.


Slight Progress for Jets' Byrd
Dennis Byrd, who broke a vertebra in his neck in a game on Nov. 29 and has been partly paralyzed since, is showing signs of slight improvement in rehabilitation, according to a statement issued by the team yesterday.
The Jets released a statement from Dr.
Kristjan Ragnarsson, chairman of the Department of Rehabilitation Medicine at Mount Sinai Hospital.
Ragnarsson is in charge of Byrd's rehabilitation.


Judge Clears Mexican in Agent's Killing
Halting an extraordinary adventure in the projection of American legal power, a Federal judge today threw out charges against a Mexican doctor who was kidnapped from his country in 1990 to stand trial here in the torture and murder of a United States drug agent.
Judge Edward Rafeedie of United States District Court said the evidence presented during two weeks of testimony against the doctor, Humberto Alvarez Machain, had been based on "hunches" and the "wildest speculation" and had failed to support the charges that he had participated in the torture of the drug agent, Enrique Camarena Salazar.


Man in the News; Kremlin's Technocrat: Viktor Stepanovich Chernomyrdin
Viktor S. Chernomyrdin, Russia's new Prime Minister, has had a long and successful career as a manager and Cabinet minister in charge of the country's huge gas and energy complex.
What was striking today was how few of the legislators who voted for him know very much about him.
But many said they knew the type: a strong, experienced administrator who ran a vital industry with wide international contacts, but who was no Communist Party hack.


As Simple as Drag, Drop and Draw
THE phrase "drag and drop" is increasingly popular these days.
Although the term may aptly describe the way your children manipulate objects, it also applies to a software technique for moving objects on the computer screen, using a mouse or trackball.
Software applications that use drag-and-drop objects are generally easier to use than programs that use more conventional commands.
A good example is Visio, a new drawing program for computers that use the Microsoft Windows operating system.


Must U.S. Strip a Land of Guns?
The question of disarmament has become a touchy subject in the American-led military intervention in Somalia, where an abundance of weaponry creates a risky environment for the soldiers and casts doubt on a peaceful future for Somalia.
It is the guns that largely caused the famine, stalled the United Nations relief efforts and thus brought the Americans ashore in what many Somalis hope will be a rescue not only from their hunger but from the weapons many of them traditionally carry.


New Light on How Stress Erodes Health
PEOPLE with many friends or family ties tend to live longer than loners.
Heart attack victims who have emotional support survive longer than those who do not.
The mind has many subtle influences on the body, and a spate of new studies are seeking to explore the nature of this mysterious axis further.
"Your closest relationships seem to matter most for your health," said Dr.
Janice Kiecolt-Glaser, a psychologist at Ohio State University Medical School who has just completed a study showing that marital fights can weaken the immune systems of couples.


Coleman to Return
Nets forward Derrick Coleman, who has missed the last four games because of strained ligaments in his right knee, practiced with the team yesterday for the first time since his injury and is expected to play against the Knicks tonight.
Coleman hurt the knee Dec. 4 against the San Antonio Spurs during a collision while scrambling for a loose ball.


Toll Brothers Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Corrections
A telecast schedule yesterday with articles about President-elect Bill Clinton's economic conference included an erroneous entry.
PBS has continued its regular programming schedule.


Max Greenberg, 85; Was Chief of Union For Store Employees
Max Greenberg, who led the Retail, Wholesale and Department Store Union for 20 years, died on Saturday in Boca Raton, Fla.
He was 85.
He died of complications from pneumonia, his family said.


Fretter Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Getting Insurance Help on Storm Damage
Many of the people whose homes or livelihoods floated away during the weekend storm probably have no insurance against ground flooding.
But that does not necessarily mean they are on their own.
The first thing people should do is call their insurance companies to have an agent survey their properties.
Even for those without flood insurance, if the flooding was a result of some sort of event that is covered by their policy -- for example, if a wind-blown tree broke through the roof, or if snow built up and water leaked through -- then the water damage is covered, said Hugh O. Strawn, director of Catastrophe Services of the Property Loss Research Bureau, based in Schaumburg, Ill.


Chiropractic Coverage Wouldn't Be Limitless
To the Editor:
Your claim that a bill passed in the New York State Legislature would allow for unlimited chiropractic services is false ("Veto the Chiropractors' Power Play," editorial, Nov. 21).
The bill would simply reimburse group insurance policyholders for chiropractic services.
The chiropractor must be practicing within the "lawful scope of his practice." There is no wording in the bill specifying that insurance carriers must reimburse for unlimited care.
As with most medical care, insurance companies will only reimburse for that which is reasonable and customary.


THE TRANSITION: Political Memo; Professor-Elect on TV: More Than a Talk Show
Watching Bill Clinton moderate the first nationally televised economics talk show, Larry King sounded both envious and a little proprietary.
"Bill Clinton is a natural," Mr.
King said.
"He's just got to learn to move through the call-ins faster. I feel personally responsible for his growth and success. He's promised to appear on my show twice a year. Maybe I won't even have to be there now. Don't forget, he's a young man. He'll be looking for work in eight years, and I can see us going head to head: 'Larry King Live' and 'Bill Clinton Live.' "


Pop and Jazz in Review
Throwing Muses
The Knitting Factory SoHo
Throwing Muses, one of the most innovative collegiate-rock bands, has fissioned and shrunk.
Tanya Donelly, one songwriter, has formed a worthy band of her own, Belly, leaving Kristin Hersh as singer, guitarist and songwriter in a three-member Throwing Muses.
The new lineup, with Bernard Georges on bass and David Narcizo on drums, performed on Tuesday and Wednesday nights, reining in some of the old group's eccentricities without losing its disciplined peculiarity.


Bloomingdale's Looks for Ideas
Just two weeks after Bloomingdale's moved its television advertising account in-house after 10 years at Grey Advertising in New York, the department store has got in touch with three New York agencies to pitch ideas for an undisclosed creative assignment.
Industry executives who insisted on anonymity confirmed reports of the review in Adweek and The Wall Street Journal.
The executives identified the contenders as FCB/Leber Katz, Kirshenbaum &amp; Bond and TBWA Advertising.
Though billings were not disclosed, The Wall Street Journal estimated them to be less than $5 million.
A decision is expected in early February.


Corrections
A caption on Saturday with the About New York column, about a former addict who has abandoned crack and assumed custody of his baby daughter, described the picture incompletely.
It was taken in May 1991, when the child was just over 1 year old.
She is now a healthy 3-year-old.


Stage Set At Boeing For Strike
Calling the bluff of its unionized engineers, the Boeing Company said today that it would carry out provisions of its final contract proposal, even though it was rejected by the union last week.
The move set the stage for a possible strike by the engineers and technical employees represented by the Seattle Professional Engineering Employees Association, the second- largest union at Boeing.
In rejecting the contract by a 70 percent margin, the union authorized a strike, but its leaders agreed at a meeting tonight that members would not leave their jobs soon.


Elway Set to Return
JOHN ELWAY is coming to the Denver Broncos' rescue.
The problem, though, is that even his heroics might not be enough to get them into the playoffs.
On Sunday, Elway said that his bruised right shoulder had healed enough for him to play in next Sunday's game against Seattle.
Elway has missed the last four games -- all losses -- because of the injury.
The Broncos, who lost to Buffalo on Saturday, are 7-7, and their chances are slim of reaching the playoffs.


Kathryn Beck Kris; Psychiatrist, 59
Kathryn Beck Kris, a psychoanalyst and psychiatrist, died Sunday at her home in Brookline, Mass.
She was 59.
Dr. Kris died of cancer, said Harvard University, where she worked.


Astrotech International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-18  YELTSIN REPLACES PREMIER  Outmaneuvered by Russian lawmakers, President Yeltsin surrendered Yegor Gaidar, the architect of his economic program.
In his stead he named Viktor S. Chernomyrdin, a veteran manager of the state oil industry, to head the Cabinet.
A1  The new Prime Minister is a seasoned administrator.
A16


Business Scene; Consumer Surge Is Facing Tests
CONSUMER confidence is a fickle thing.
The economy has surged since October, in large part because Americans seem to be feeling more confident about their jobs and their incomes.
So they have gone shopping.
But sometimes a major event, like a military victory or a Presidential election, can cause people to feel better off than they actually are.
And after a while, the optimism disappears, along with the surge in shopping and economic growth.
That possibility makes the consumer confidence surveys that will be conducted over the next six weeks very important in gauging whether a strong recovery has finally arrived after nearly four years of weak growth or outright recession.
Consumer confidence has shot up since Election Day, but that is also the problem.
Is Bill Clinton's election the only reason for the surge in optimism about jobs and higher wages?
If so, can the optimism endure?


Cangene Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Clinton Leads Experts in Discussion on Economy
President-elect Bill Clinton led an elaborate daylong seminar today in which some of the nation's most prominent economists and business executives presented the case that the American economy is badly crippled and in danger of becoming much worse.
Before more than 300 invited guests and a national television audience, Mr.
Clinton showed himself once again to have mastered some of the most arcane aspects of Government policy and to be conversant with the kinds of complicated economic issues often confined to graduate-school classrooms.


ABC Names President Of a Division
Edward W. Harbert, a longtime company entertainment executive, was appointed president of ABC Entertainment yesterday.
He replaces Robert A. Iger, who was promoted last month to president of the ABC Television Network Group.
Mr.
Iger made the appointment, effective Jan. 1.
He said maintaining stability within ABC's entertainment division, which makes all of the network's program decisions, was "the top priority behind naming Ted."


Classical Music in Review
New York Philharmonic  Isaac Stern, soloist Avery Fisher Hall
Holidays and anniversaries work hard to guarantee a good time for all.
But at the same time they promote a certain wooziness as far as artistic matters are concerned.
As a spectator at Monday night's 150th-anniversary concert at the New York Philharmonic, this writer enjoyed himself immensely at an event of questionable musical achievement.
He returned to Avery Fisher Hall on Thursday, happy to help honor Isaac Stern's long affiliation with the orchestra and wondering once again at the strangely uneven quality of the evening.


Classical Music in Review
Fei-Ping Hsu  Pianist Kosciuszko Foundation 15 East 65th Street
At a meeting of "The Bohemians," a New York musicians' society, Fei-Ping Hsu played a short but absorbing program on the evening of Dec. 7.
But he had to contend with an obtrusive continuo of buses and taxis outside.
As a result, perhaps, the opening works on the program (Schumann's "Arabesque" and Chopin's "Polonaise Fantaisie") seemed a little shaky, with some remarkably poised and controlled playing not quite in focus. (The foundation should look into some sort of acoustical barrier for its tall windows.)


Pop and Jazz in Review
E.M.F.
Bank Lower East Side
Even for a concert that started just before midnight, E.M.F. could count on an audience laced with squealing teen-age girls.
During its set on Wednesday night, band members did jump around and bare their chests like the kind of pop pinups regularly promoted on MTV.
Yet E.M.F.'s music (the English band sometimes translates the initials as Ecstasy Mad Funkers) has little in common with the kind of pop most pop idols make.
Band members don't flirt, either.
Onstage, they did most of their dancing with their faces and bodies obscured; a bank of spotlights was behind the musicians, aimed into the crowd.


High Court to Rule On Tough Penalties In Hate-Crime Laws
Barely six months after ruling that states may not designate particular expressions of bias as crimes, the Supreme Court today plunged back into the roiling debate over hate crimes.
The Justices agreed to decide whether the Constitution permits an approach that more than half the states have taken to the bias-crime issue, that of increasing the sentences for ordinary crimes like assault or vandalism if the victim was selected because or race, religion, ancestry or the like.


Wilbur Rice, 76, Head Of a Valve Company
Wilbur C. Rice, former president of a valve-manufacturing concern, died Saturday at his home in Sanibel, Fla.
He was 76 and also had a home in Bennington, Vt.
He had been suffering from leukemia, said his daughter Cynthia Rice.


Review/Television; For a Change, Dramas Not Based on Fact
For television movies these days, not being based on fact, especially the kind found in sensational headlines, affords a pronounced sense of relief.
Tonight, for instance, CBS's "Through the Eyes of a Killer" is an old-fashioned thriller and "The Good Fight" on Lifetime takes pains at the very beginning to announce that "the following is a fictional work." Script writers, it seems, can still do more than stitch together tired news reports.
"Through the Eyes of a Killer," adapted by John Pielmeier from a Christopher Fowler short story, requires some laborious setting up.
Fed up with her cheating boyfriend, Jerry (Joe Pantoliano), who also happens to be her boss in an industrial-design firm, Laurie (Marg Helgenberger) asserts a new independence by buying a new apartment requiring extensive renovation.
Enter Ray (Richard Dean Anderson), a blue-collar contractor eager to devote his time to both the apartment and Laurie.


Manor Care reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


They Ship Horses, Don't They?
Leroy Jolley huddled against the cold as the wind swept through the empty boxes at Aqueduct racetrack, and considered the fading joys of winter racing in New York.
"Since year-round racing came in," said Jolley, a Hall of Fame trainer who is the son of a renowned trainer, "the day of the itinerant stable is gone. You tend to stay put now. But there's not much reason to stay put in New York in the wintertime."


Raiders' Allen Irked at Davis
Marcus Allen, the Los Angeles Raiders' disgruntled running back, last night accused the Raiders' general partner, Al Davis, of orchestrating a campaign to "ruin my career" by limiting the 11-year veteran's playing time.
In an taped interview with Al Michaels of ABC's "Monday Night Football," played at halftime of the Raiders-Dolphins game in Miami, Allen said that Davis "told me he was going to get me."


Litton Gets Big Order From Navy
Litton Industries, a military contractor based in Beverly Hills, said today that it had received a $760.9 million contract from the United States Navy to build a sixth Wasp ship, the next generation of amphibious assault vessels.
Litton has already received contracts to build the first five ships in the Wasp class, known as LHD's.
On Friday, the Navy, which is replacing its outdated amphibious ships, exercised an option for the sixth LHD ship, Litton said.


Gore Bringing Environmental Policy to Fore
With a month to go before the Clinton Administration takes office, Vice President-elect Al Gore has already had unusual influence on a broad range of appointments and is supervising the development of new policies on the environment, natural resources, technology and the economy, transition aides say.
The most immediate example of Mr.
Gore's influence with Mr.
Clinton occurred last Friday when a former senior Senate aide was chosen by Mr.
Clinton to be Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency.


It's Not Just Composting, It's Building a Rich Future
ABOUT 30 years ago Stanley Nalepa would take his daughter Timothea along on Saturday morning drives to deliver the family's refuse to the town dump here in still-rural Suffolk County.
The two of them, the big, strong father who knew so much about the world and his little Timmi, who was so eager to learn, would leisurely walk around together.
They'd see what others discarded, maybe even find a battered bicycle with the right part to fix Timmi's trike.
The excursion offered the tantalizing possibility of discovering unburied treasure.
All for free.


Warning! This is Not a Recipe.
What you see below appears to be a recipe.
But it is not a recipe.
It is a tool for making a political statement.
The arena? The holiday party.
You have cooked up something special, let's say your famous, lighter-than-air Solstice cookies.
It's the pride of your kitchen, a secret recipe you've honed to perfection.
You bring a batch to a party and your fellow-revelers are in hog heaven.
Everything is merry until you find yourself cornered by someone preaching Recipe Socialism: share your secret or be branded Capitalist Running Dog.
Now, you mustn't admit that you don't want to give away your recipe because it's
yours
and you're entitled to it.
That smacks of respect for private property and the subversive conceit that you deserve what you earn by the sweat of your brow.
But if you try to be honest, your fellow traveler friend (eager to lay hands on undeserved gain) is apt to accuse you of lacking the holiday spirit.
Don't argue.
Just clip out the following recipe (note how convincingly we've matched the layout of recipes in The Living Section), and present it to the pastry panhandler.
Holiday Puffs
Total time: 25 minutes  1 egg  1/2 cup buttermilk (or 1/4 cup milk mixed with 1/4 cup vinegar)  5 teaspoons baking soda  1/2 teaspoon vanilla  1 cup lemon juice (fresh is best)  1/2 cup sugar  3/8 cup all-purpose flour
1. Preheat oven to 375 degrees. Butter a cookie sheet.
2. In a small bowl or 2-cup measuring cup, beat the egg until foamy.
3. Add the buttermilk and the vanilla and blend well.
4.
Add the baking soda, one teaspoon at a time, sprinkling it in and beating until the mixture is smooth and the consistency of light cream.
5.
Add the lemon juice all at once.
Stir gently until blended, but do not beat (it is important not to allow air to get trapped in the mixture).
6.
Sift the sugar and the flour together in a small bowl and add it to the egg mixture a teaspoon at a time.
Stir until just moistened.
7. Drop the batter by tablespoonfuls, one inch apart, onto the buttered cookie sheet.
8. Bake for 12 minutes or until golden. Serve hot.
Yield: 12 servings
Approximate nutritional analysis per serving: 62 calories, 1 gram fat, 10 milligrams cholesterol, 2 milligrams sodium, 4 grams protein, 4 grams carbohydrate.
Then rest secure in the knowledge that when your pantry pinko reaches Step 5, about a gallon of lemon-egg foam will gush out of the measuring cup and inundate the kitchen counter.
It's harmless, just lemon juice liberating the carbonate radical of the sodium bicarbonate to produce a cascade of CO2 bubbles -- no fires and, regrettably, no explosions.
But plenty messy and more than enough to make Chef Share-the-Wealth crazy.
A ruling-class lackey like yourself may want to photocopy and distribute this recipe to all the bleeding hearts at the party.
Or add a touch of verisimilitude by writing it out on a file card, dipping it in weak tea to age the paper and leaving it out as freeloader flypaper.
And if nobody's trying to mooch a recipe from you, no need to feel left out.
Be an anarchist: slip the recipe into someone else's fax machine (it's a virus) and use the auto dialer to send little bundles of holiday chaos all 'round the world.


Corrections
A chart in Business Day yesterday with an article about proposals to change the tax treatment of health benefits misstated the provisions of the plan in the House of Representatives.
It would limit a tax deduction for employers to the cost of a minimum standard package of benefits.
For employees, all employer-provided benefits would remain tax-free.


Bowe Trashes His W.B.C. Title Belt
Riddick Bowe is no longer boxing's undisputed heavyweight champion, but he is clearly its new title-holder in theatrics.
Bowe stripped himself of one of his championship belts yesterday, tossed it into a trash can during a news conference in London and then indicated he would defend his remaining two titles Feb. 6 at Madison Square Garden.
The only obstacles: no opponent and no confirmation from the Garden.


Recalling Stokie, Lenny and Life in the Allegro Lane
The New York Philharmonic is one of New York's most venerable institutions, one that usually puts forth a dignified public face.
So what about the pistol-packing Toscanini protege?
The music critic who called the trumpeter "Rubber Lips"?
Or the Moscow tour when the conductor had to borrow the cellist's tuxedo?
When 20 former Philharmonic players got together for a reunion, it wasn't undignified.
But it wasn't all straight-faced, either.
It was sort of like a behind-the-scenes look at a family that has been through the turbulence of daily life, and lived to laugh about it.
After all, some of these players sat side by side on stage for 30 or 40 years.


With Formal End to War Today, Ex-Rebels in Salvador Demobilize
Former guerrillas of the Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front rushed to complete their demobilization around the country today in preparation for the formal end of El Salvador's 12-year civil war in ceremonies on Tuesday.
One faction of the guerrilla front had sought to delay demobilization at the last minute, but international peacekeepers and diplomats said it resumed its disarmament over the weekend.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Utah Saints
Limelight Chelsea
Dance music always has a utilitarian core: the beat that moves the feet.
In the techno-rave music that has conquered England and is making inroads in the United States, sometimes that's nearly all there is, just a relentless tick-a-tick-a beat without words or melodies.
For a band trying to create an identity, the trick is to personalize the music without cluttering or softening it.


Chess
There are times when you must risk a line of play where a misstep could be fatal because the alternative of holding back puts you into a passive position that cannot be maintained in the long run.
So you may escape the necessity for cold-blooded exact calculation only to find that you are slowly, but inexorably, lost.
In the game between Vladimir Dimitrov of Bulgaria and the Yugoslav grandmaster Bosko Abramovic in the Euroinvest Bank International Tournament in Prilep, in the new state of Macedonia, Abramovic ducked when he should have slugged.
It's not surprising that he then went down without a fight.


Federal Express reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Guild Faults Zuckerman on Making Cash Offers
Mortimer B. Zuckerman sidestepped a Daily News union he is battling by making direct "buy out" offers to its members yesterday.
The union, the New York Newspaper Guild, retaliated by charging that he had violated Federal labor law.
Barry F. Lipton, president of the New York guild, said his union had filed a complaint with the National Labor Relations Board asserting that Mr.
Zuckerman had improperly contacted Daily News employees instead of negotiating with them through their union.
It was not clear, even if the board were to act quickly on the complaint, whether it would stall Mr.
Zuckerman's effort to purchase the newspaper by the end of the month.


Bad Tidings for California Banks
Even without tougher national banking regulations that take effect on Saturday, California banks face serious problems in the coming year because of continued weak real-estate markets and a stubborn regional recession.
Federal regulators, banking analysts and officials of small and large banks agree that -- new rules or not -- there may be as many as 30 fewer banks in California next year as a result of the current problems.


General Automation reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


Police Arrest Girl in Staten Island Bias Case
A 15-year-old girl was arrested after the police said she had her dog attack a Jewish teen-ager on Staten Island on Sunday in what the police described as a bias-related incident.
It was the latest of a series of bias incidents reported by the police over the last few days.
Mayor David N. Dinkins released a statement on Sunday condemning the attacks.


Smart Caterpillars Ski the American West
To the Editor:
Your foolishly romantic editorial ("If Caterpillars Could Ski," Nov. 29), upbraiding Colorado's latest ad campaign to promote its skiing industry  and extolling the simple virtues of Northeastern skiing reflects either extreme naivete or the hidden agenda of an editorial writer with Vermont ski properties to sell or rent.


Andy Kirk, 94, Big-Band Leader Known for the Kansas City Sound
Andy Kirk, one of the last surviving orchestra leaders from the big-band era, died on Friday at his home in Harlem.
He was 94 years old.
He died of complications from Alzheimer's disease, said a friend, Phil Schaap, the disk jockey and jazz historian.


WSMP Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 6


Corrections
A telecast schedule yesterday with articles about President-elect Bill Clinton's economic conference included an erroneous entry.
PBS has continued its regular programming schedule.


Reporter's Notebook; Unpaid for 3 Years, a Somali Still Directs Traffic
Idriss Hassan received his last paycheck three years ago.
Still, every day from 7 A.M. until 3 P.M., he works as a traffic policeman, guiding cars, camels, trucks and people through one of Mogadishu's trickiest intersections.
It is not only a difficult task but, in a city without any form of government, tap water, electricity or phones, it is an unusual touch of normalcy.


William Michelfelder, Writer, Is Dead at 82
William F. Michelfelder, a journalist and novelist, died on Sunday at Hospice by the Sea in Boca Raton, Fla.
He was 82 years old and lived in Gulf Stream, Fla.
He died of congestive heart failure and diabetes, said his wife, Phyllis.


Optical Coating Lab reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


As Halon Ban Nears, Researchers Seek a New Miracle Firefighter
A RECENT agreement by 87 countries to halt the manufacture of halon fire extinguishers one year from now will eventually eliminate a potent threat to the earth's protective ozone layer.
But experts believe that the ban will make some fires harder to put out and could cost lives.
Halons are up to 10 times more effective in putting out fires than other chemicals, and chemists doubt that halons can ever be replaced by equally effective extinguishers.
Halons, unlike other fire extinguishers, not only extinguish fires swiftly but are chemically inert, nontoxic, and harmless to delicate equipment, including computer circuits.
No other extinguishers combine all these features.


Cigar-Loving Perelman Buys Quite a Big Supply
It's costing him $180 million, but Ronald O. Perelman has regained the luxury of having a personal cigar roller making H. Upmann-brand cigars at his own factory in the Dominican Republic.
Mr.
Perelman, a multibillionaire whose cigar smoke has perfumed many a leveraged buyout conference, agreed yesterday to pay that much to buy back the Consolidated Cigar Corporation from Vestar Capital Partners Inc.


Atlantic Waves Higher, Independent of Winds
THE North Atlantic has become much rougher over the last 30 years, scientists say, and, surprisingly, gustier winds are not to blame.
Sheldon Bacon, a marine physicist at the Institute of Oceanographic Sciences in Wormley, said average waves were about 30 percent higher in the mid-1980's than during the early 1960's.
His recent studies indicate that waves were nearly 50 percent higher at the end of the 1980's than 30 years ago.
Fewer Data on Storm Waves
It is more difficult to say whether storm waves, or extremes, have also increased, since far fewer measurements are available, Mr.
Bacon said, though some evidence suggests they have become larger by perhaps 10 percent.


Russian Carries On Like the Bad Old Days, Then Says It Was All a Ruse
The Russian Foreign Minister shocked an international conference today with a blustering anti-Western speech that sounded as if it had been given at the height of the cold war.
For nearly a half hour, senior diplomats rushed around, conferring with each other on what had seemed a drastic shift in Moscow's policy enunciated by the Foreign Minister, Andrei V. Kozyrev.
Even members of his own delegation said they had been caught unawares.


Coke Adds a Clear Cola To Its 'New Age' Stable
The Coca-Cola Company introduced a new clear diet cola yesterday to counter the recent foray by its archrival, Pepsi, into so-called New Age beverages with Crystal Pepsi.
But Coca-Cola declined to anoint a clear Coke and reached to one of its second-tier brands in naming its newest drink: Tab Clear.
Coca-Cola rented the Hayden Planetarium in Manhattan yesterday to announce its "truly out-of-the-world news," and the hyperbole never abated.
With bluster characteristic of the cola wars, Coca-Cola executives called Tab Clear the "ultimate diet soft drink" and declared that confronting Pepsi's challenge with a clear Coke would have been "aiming too low." 'Clear Coke' Shunned
Doug Ivester, president of Coca-Cola's North American soft drink business, also suggested that attaching the Coke name to a clear beverage was never a possibility, in light of the brand's cola heritage.
"Clear Coke is an oxymoron," he said.


COMPANY NEWS
METRO AIRLINES INC., Dallas, announced final bankruptcy court approval of its plan of reorganization based upon a sale of all the assets of its subsidiary, Metroflight Inc., and a settlement of all pending litigation between Metro and American Airlines.
SHELL CANADA LTD., Calgary, Alberta, signed an agreement with the provincial government agency Alberta Oil Sands Technology and Research Authority to share 50 percent of the estimated $6.5 million costs of a project to recover oil from the Peace River area.


Accounts
*
The D.C.
Committee to Promote Washington and the Washington D.C.
Convention and Visitors Association to Goldberg Marchesano Kohlman, Washington, to handle their joint $1.3 million account, previously at Harant Soghigian Marketing, Washington. *
Comcast Metrophone Cellular Service, Philadelphia, to Gyro Advertising, Philadelphia, to handle its account, previously at Grant Marketing Inc., Lafayette Hill, Pa.
Billings were not disclosed.


METRO DIGEST
CALCULATING A STORM'S COST
The violent storms that swept through the New York region last week damaged or destroyed more than 12,000 homes, according to Red Cross estimates, and industry officials estimated that many if not most of the properties were probably uninsured.
As the waters receded, the cost of two days of wind, rain and snow began to emerge in greater detail, and preliminary inspections found that 4,000 homes in New York City were damaged or destroyed, along with 3,460 in Connecticut, 3,500 in New Jersey, 1,000 in Long Island and 100 in Rockland County.
A1.
Long a provider for City Island, the sea has now turned on the community.
B8.


Q&amp;A
Thunder Snow
Q.
Why doesn't there ever seem to be lightning in a snowstorm?
A.
There is sometimes lightning in a snowstorm, although it is somewhat rare, said Fred Gadomski, a meteorologist at Pennsyvania State University.
In fact, he said, the biggest snowstorm are those marked by thunder and lightning, a phenomenon meteorologists call "thunder snow."


Corrections
A chart in Business Day yesterday with an article about proposals to change the tax treatment of health benefits misstated the provisions of the plan in the House of Representatives.
It would limit a tax deduction for employers to the cost of a minimum standard package of benefits.
For employees, all employer-provided benefits would remain tax-free.


Owners and Players to Meet Today On Labor Agreement for N.F.L.
Unable to find labor peace since their last collective bargaining agreement expired in 1987 and having argued their differences in court more than at the bargaining table, the National Football League players and owners will sit down in Dallas this morning to try to iron out the details of a contract.
Several sticking points remain, and if the two sides cannot conclude a new deal, they will be headed back to court.


Loyalties in Glen Ridge Are Divided by Sex-Attack Trial
This genteel suburb is still mourning its lost innocence, three and a half years after the unraveling of the scandal that made "Glen Ridge" synonymous with "sexual assault."
The small Essex County town (population: 7,000), with its grand boulevard, elegant colonials and century-old gaslight lanterns, was once known for its discreet charm and traditional family values.
The charges that a group of local high school athletes had abused a retarded schoolmate changed all that.


T.V.A. Sale Presses Underwriters
A sale of $1 billion of 30-year bonds by the Tennessee Valley Authority scheduled at short notice for today is putting pressure on leading bond underwriters.
The competitive bid sale, which had been expected in January, will force the dealers who win to fill their shelves with more bonds than they would normally want this close to the end of the year.
The T.V.A. announced yesterday that bids would be accepted this morning.


Observer; Dream and Memory
The year is ending, a barrel of mail is still unanswered.
Eugene Weinstock of Brookhaven, N.Y., for example, deserves an apology.
On July 26 he wrote suggesting a column on the incessant deaths of the American dream.
"Just about every other day for the past 30 years a news article, Op-Ed piece, feature article or book review in The New York Times announces the death of the American Dream," he wrote.
"Two questions: First, how does the American Dream manage to revive itself with such monotonous regularity? Second, how come such a commonplace event as its demise is regarded as newsworthy by The Times?"


Review/Television; High Road Is Crowded As Seminar Discusses Inflammatory Lyrics
If there exist any record producers, television executives or actors who are in the entertainment business for the money, you will not encounter them on "Popular Culture: Rage, Rights and Responsibility." Their contributions to tonight's round table are so soaked in virtue that the provocateur, Charles R. Ogletree of Harvard Law School, has trouble getting hold of them.
He and the program, a direct descendant of Fred Friendly's estimable series of television seminars, come alive about halfway into the hour when Mr.
Ogletree goes after David W. Harleston, the president of Def Jam Recordings, a rap-record company.
In an earlier interchange, Mr.
Harleston said he would release a hypothetical record by a hypothetical rap group called the Black Nightmare Messengers that seemed to prescribe killing teachers.
He reassures anyone made nervous by such a message that in the lingo of rap, the lyric "off the teacher" should not be taken literally.


The Postal Service Aims for a Light Touch
EDWARD EVERETT, a United States Senator in the 1850's, once said that he regarded the United States Postal Service, "Next to Christianity, as the right arm of our modern civilization."
Anyone who has fumed through a long wait at the post office may not be so effusive, even though the country's postal system is widely regarded as the most efficient in the world.


A 2d Election Day, and This One Counts
Some fairly anonymous people got together over the lunch hour today to pick the next President of the United States.
In all, 538 people -- about one-third the population of Guernsey, Wyo. -- did the choosing as they gathered at noon in every state capital to mark their ballots.


Clinton Picks Arkansas Official To Be New U.S. Surgeon General
The top Arkansas health official, Dr.
Joycelyn Elders, has been asked by President-elect Bill Clinton to be the new surgeon general, a transition official said today.
Dr.
Elders, a 59-year-old pediatrician here and the director of the State Health Department, was offered the position over the weekend and accepted it immediately, the official said.
She would become the second black and fifth woman to be named to a top post in the Clinton Administration.


Giants Making Networks Shudder
What a cruel and terrible joke the National Football League is playing on CBS and NBC: two straight Saturdays of Giants games.
Last week, it was CBS's turn to telecast the Giants' dispiriting 19-0 loss to the Phoenix Cardinals.
This week, on NBC, it will be the Giants against the Kansas City Chiefs.
"When we made the schedule in April, most people thought the Giants would be a reasonably good team," said Val Pinchbeck, the N.F.L.'s director of broadcasting.
"We have 224 games. They can't all match playoff teams."


William H. Avery; Lawyer, 87
William H. Avery, a lawyer and civic leader, died on Saturday at his home in Winnetka, Ill.
He was 87.
His family said he died after a long illness.


Davis Carries On the Family Business
There is a resemblance that is undeniable.
Hubert Davis's jump shot is reminiscent of Walter Davis's.
Picturesque.
Deadly.
"I think his is a lot nicer," Hubert said, deferring to his uncle and basketball elder.
"It's smoother."


Review/Music; Leading the Young Down a Percussive Path
The first sign that the New York Philharmonic was taking an entirely new approach to its Young People's Concerts was the yellow plastic paths mapped out on the promenade of Avery Fisher Hall on Saturday afternoon.
They were musical versions of royal carpets, inscribed with lines from the score from Beethoven's Fifth Symphony, the first work the orchestra played at its founding concert 150 years ago.
"Follow the yellow clef road . . ." read the leaflet handed out with warm welcomes: Philharmonic bags also included name tags, a coloring book, stickers with pictures of instruments and information about the program.
Volunteers offered greetings to the children (by name), informing them about the timpani demonstration or about the tables covered with percussion instruments waiting to be tried: cowbells and tambourines and drumsticks and all manner of clackers and bangers and gongs.
The hall's promenade and first tier were filled with sounds of children set loose among the greatest instrumental toys every invented.


Classical Music in Review
California EAR Unit  Kathryn Bache Miller Theater Columbia University
Renaissance lute composers occasionally called their pieces "Toys," a title indicating the music's light spirit.
Perhaps it's time to revive the designation and apply it to certain cartoonish new works that are turning up with increasing frequency.
The California EAR Unit brought a bag of these to its concert on Tuesday evening.
Some held the attention better than others; some were educational and a few were fairly complex.


Burmese Say Detained Peace Prize Winner May Yet Face a Trial
The Government said today that Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, the Burmese dissident who won the 1991 Nobel Peace Prize and who has been under house arrest here for more than three years, was not on a hunger strike and issued a new warning that she may yet face a criminal trial.
"We can put her on trial anytime we like because we have lots of evidence which can be used against her," said Col.
Ye Htut, a spokesman for the junta that controls Myanmar, formerly Burma.
He said the Government had resisted a criminal trial until now because Mrs.
Aung San Suu Kyi, who was placed under house arrest in 1989 as she campaigned to bring democracy to her homeland, is the daughter of the country's assassinated independence leader, Aung San.


Bowne &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


G.M. AND ITS UNION PLAN TO ENCOURAGE EARLY RETIREMENTS
The United Automobile Workers union agreed today to a set of sweeping early-retirement incentives for hourly workers at the General Motors Corporation, signaling that the union recognizes the gravity of the auto maker's problems.
The incentives come as the No. 1 auto maker is feverishly cutting costs, closing plants and shrinking itself over all to regain its financial health.
All told, the company has announced plans to close nearly two dozen car and parts-making plants over the next several years and eliminate more than 70,000 jobs, the bulk of which are held by union members.


Cincinnati Utility to Merge With Indiana Counterpart
Citing changes in the electric business brought on by the new Federal energy act, the Cincinnati Gas and Electric Company and the parent company of the Public Service Company of Indiana announced yesterday that they planned to merge next year.
The new entity, the Cinergy Corporation, will be the nation's 13th-largest investor-owned utility as measured by generating capacity.


Classical Music in Review
Tallis Scholars  Alice Tully Hall
Anyone hearing the Tallis Scholars in concert after following their progress on recordings would not have been surprised, and probably not too disappointed, if the astonishingly pure and burnished Tallis sound had shown a few flaws or uncertainties.
On Thursday night, in addition, these early-music singers forsook the reverberation of a sacred habitat and submitted themselves to the secular and exacting acoustics of Alice Tully Hall.
But the astonishing, almost miraculous reality is that the group loses nothing under close scrutiny.
There might have been one wavering moment in a large Lassus Mass, but the performance was essentially flawless.


Lindros Wants to Talk
ERIC LINDROS is eager "to tell his side of the story," and his trial on common assault charges should be held as soon as possible, his lawyer said in court yesterday.
Lindros, 19, wasn't in the provincial division of Ontario Court, but EARL LEVY, who appeared on his behalf, said the Philadelphia Flyers' forward "wants to get it over with as soon as possible."
"The complainant has had a chance to tell her side, and now he wants to tell his side of the story," Levy said.


Ellis G. Arnall, Progressive Georgia Governor in the 40's, Dies at 85
Ellis G. Arnall, who sliced through red tape and Southern tradition as Governor of Georgia from 1943 to 1947, died Sunday in Atlanta.
He was 85.
He died of pneumonia at Emory University's Wesley Woods Health Care Center, where he had lived for two years since suffering a stroke, his family said.


Biomet Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Companies Capitalizing on Worker Diversity
From the palm-fringed Burger King headquarters in Miami to the Towers Perrin offices on Park Avenue in Manhattan, corporate managers and employees are playing the diversity game, literally and figuratively.
They are trying everything from board games to real-life case studies to learn how to turn diverse groups of workers to their advantage.
The games and case studies are the brainchildren of consultants -- anthropologists and psychologists, as well as M.B.A.'s.
Such consultants are increasingly being hired by employers who need help managing a diverse work force, in which members of minority groups, immigrants and women now hold more than half the jobs.


Supreme Court to Hear Case On Banks' Sale of Insurance
The Supreme Court agreed today to decide whether national banks with branches in small towns may continue selling insurance under a Federal law that an appeals court earlier this year found had been repealed -- perhaps inadvertently -- 74 years ago.
With billions of dollars ultimately at stake in a long-running battle between the banking and insurance industries, the outcome of the unusual case may well turn on the placement -- or, perhaps more accurately, the misplacement -- of half a pair of quotation marks by an unknown Congressional draftsman in 1916.


COMPANY NEWS
ATHEY PRODUCTS CORP., Raleigh, N.C., has received a multimillion-dollar order for delivery of street sweepers to Los Angeles.


Yields Mixed At Banks This Week
Yields offered on bank money-market accounts and certificates of deposit for the new week that begins today are mixed, with gains occurring mostly outside the New York area, according to The Bank Rate Monitor.
Robert K. Heady, publisher of the rate magazine, says deposit rates are on hold for the moment as banks wait to see President-elect Bill Clinton's strategy on handling the economy.


U.S. TO ACT FASTER ON SAVING SPECIES
The Bush Administration, which made opposition to the Endangered Species Act a centerpiece of the 1992 campaign, today settled a lawsuit with environmentalists that requires the Government to protect 400 more species of plants and animals over the next four years.
That increases by 53 percent the number of species under Federal safeguards.
Interior Secretary Manuel Lujan Jr. approved the settlement after more than six months of negotiation between the Government and a coalition of national and regional wildlife groups.
Both the Government and the environmental groups agreed that the settlement was the one of the single most important steps the Government has taken to save plants and animals threatened with extinction since the Endangered Species Act was enacted in 1973.
Denial of Contradiction
Almost 90 percent of the species due to be protected are plants, and most are native to Hawaii, California, the Pacific Northwest and the desert Southwest, according to the United States Fish and Wildlife Service, a unit of the Department of the Interior.
Only a handful of the threatened species, like the Lake Erie water snake and the Florida black bear, are in the East.


Guillevin International reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Dinkins Promises Business A More Hospitable City
Mayor David N. Dinkins assured an audience of business people yesterday that he was committed to making New York a more hospitable place for small and big companies.
In a breakfast speech he billed as a major address to outline his long-term economic vision, he said the city should concentrate on strengthening its position as an international center for business, culture and the United Nations, which is considering moving some agencies out of New York.


Dancing in the Dark
So the shortest day came, and the year died./ And everywhere down the centuries of the snow-white world/ Came people singing, dancing to drive the dark away./ They lighted candles in the winter trees;/ They hung their homes with evergreen;/ They burned beseeching fires all night long/ To keep the year alive.
-- A Christmas revels poem by Susan Cooper  The colder and stormier the December, the better the Revels.
The annual festival of song, dance and drama, opening this week at Symphony Space in Manhattan, reflects feelings as old as humanity itself: fear of chill and darkness at the winter solstice, celebration as the sun begins to return.


Neediest Cases Finds Counseling for a Jobless Mother and Her Daughter
After 15 years of working for the same company, Carol C. was laid off from her job as a clerk for Alexander's, an event that sent her into a dizzying fall from the reality and stability she had known for so long.
For years, she would take the train from her Harlem apartment to Alexander's warehouse in the Bronx, until she lost her job shortly before the company went under.
Now, Carol spends her days applying for one position after another, or attending job-training classes.
"Only one place called me, and then they said they'd get back to me," she said recently.
"But they never did."


Wine Talk
THE best gift for a wine lover is wine.
But many people are nervous about buying wine for someone else, especially when they are nervous enough about buying it for themselves.
Which is why so many opt for the relatively painless alternative: a wine book.
Wine books follow much the same cycle as wine itself.
They are usually announced in the spring or early summer and, like ripe grapes, they appear in the fall.
More wine is bought in the fourth quarter of the year than in the other three combined.
With wine books, it's virtually the same.


Trying to Take the Cable Out of Cable Television
Workers at Hovnanian Enterprises, a large real estate operation in Freehold, N.J., had a nice fringe benefit in the late 1980's: a television in their lunchroom showing 12 channels retrieved from a satellite.
It looked like cable television, but there was no cable.
Instead, the signal was received from the top of a water tower about an eighth of a mile away.
What appeared to be a pleasant perquisite was one of the first tests of a broadcasting technology that could eventually rival the domain of cable and telephone companies.


Labatt (John) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


THE TRANSITION: Priming the Pump - Economic Solutions: a Sampling of Advice, and Clinton's Response; The Case for Government Stimulus
Selections by The New York Times from a transcript recorded by Reuters.
James Tobin  Nobel laureate and emeritus professor of economics, Yale University
Is there a case for  [ fiscal ]  stimulus to create the jobs we need by 1996?
I think there is.
The labor market is weaker than the unemployment rate suggests, for several reasons.
Many workers are involuntarily working short time when they would like to be working full time.
As everybody knows, we're experiencing an unusual series of layoffs by businesses, permanent layoffs, not temporary cyclical layoffs.
Why can't the Federal Reserve do this job by itself?
Well, we heard about the bank credit crunch yesterday and we see that the Fed has more or less given up on doing anything more to stimulate demand, even though it has 300 basis points left between interest rates, short-term interest rates now and zero.
I think maybe the Fed did things so late and so little during the recent downturns that they let the economy and business expectations slip away from their grasp.
That's why I think the country needs some fiscal stimulus in the short run.
I would be willing to see something like 1 percent of G.D.P. stimulus, which would be about $60 billion a year, and for a couple of years.
Other people may prefer a smaller amount.
Now fiscal policy for recovery is bound to raise the deficit temporarily.
And we're fooling ourselves if we think there's a way of having a fiscal stimulus that doesn't have that result.
The thing to do, I believe, is to combine the short-run fiscal stimulus with credible deficit reduction policies that will be phased in at a later time, so far as possible enacted, so that they will come into effect at a later time, whether they're tax increases or expenditure reductions.
In today's weak economy, fiscal austerity would be counterproductive and would actually reduce investment in plant and equipment, in technology and human capital for the future.
So it actually would damage the prospects of our children and grandchildren, rather than improving them.
Allen Sinai  Chief economist, Boston Company
Short run, a modest dose of net fiscal stimulus probably is necessary to lift growth and jobs as part of the task of raising potential growth in the long run, as well as to sustain a fledgling business expansion.
A $20 billion to $30 billion program of short-run fiscal stimulus I believe should be ready to go, legislated as needed in early 1993.
The measures used in this fiscal stimulus I think should . . . do double duty in the sense of being measures that lift short-run growth in jobs but also raise long-run potential output.
Candidates . . . include infrastructure spending on roads, highways, buildings, airports, rail and telecommunications and equipment investment tax credits.
Investment tax credits would produce the greatest bang for a buck if they were targeted towards productive equipment, incremental and refundable.
Other possibilities: measures such as inflation indexing of capital gains, R.&amp; D. tax credits, education and manpower training programs and incentives for small business.
A major effort should be made to find measures that can raise growth without raising the Federal budget deficit.
Some possibilities include an easier bank regulatory environment for bank lending to improve growth at little cost to the budget, a shift in the composition of Treasury financing further away from long-term issues to reduce interest costs of Federal Government financing and greater efficiencies and reduced costs for the provision and delivery of health care services.
On timing, you should do it right away and  [ make it ]  retroactive . . . to early December.
I think the impact would be in the second through the fourth quarter of next year when the current impulse of the economy may indeed be fading and so it would come at the right time.
If you wait longer, it's dangerous.


Standard Brands Paint reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 25


60-Minute Gourmet
THE pervasive influence of Oriental cuisines on Western gastronomy continues to grow.
This growth has opened exciting and challenging horizons for chefs and home cooks.
So many traditional dishes in the American and European repertories can be energized with the addition of Eastern spices and herbs like ginger, coriander, lemongrass, turmeric and cumin.
Many of these ingredients pack a wallop, so cooks must learn precisely how to use them, and in which combinations.
Once you get a handle on this factor through experimentation, you'll find that devising new dishes is greatly rewarding.


Standard Pacific reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Marcade Group reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


THE TRANSITION: Long-Term Investing - Economic Solutions: a Sampling of Advice, and Clinton's Response; Ideas on Where the Government Should Spend More
Selections by The New York Times from a transcript recorded by Reuters. Vincent Lane
Chairman, Chicago Housing Authority
We have a double standard in this country, one for normal people and another for poor and minority people.
And that double standard has led to bad public policy, public policy which assumes that poor people can do nothing to help themselves.
We have got to now not only invoke sanctions with people, but we have to put incentives in place to change behavior.
How we do it, how do we restore our urban communities?


Republicans Form Group to Regain Centrist Votes
A group of prominent Republican moderates, trying to undo the damage they think was done to their party by its 1992 convention and platform, formed an organization today to try to reduce the Republican preoccupation with abortion, homosexuality and other divisive issues.
The new group came under immediate attack from right-wing Republicans, notably leaders of the religious right.
It was the first of what will doubtless be many public clashes among the factions of the Republican Party that Ronald Reagan welded into a winning phalanx in the 1980's.
How those clashes are resolved will help to determine whether the Democratic victory this year proves to be a turning point, like 1932, or a flash in the pan, like 1976.


Knicks Play a Little Hardball in Victory Over Nets
Warning: You are entering an arena where the Knicks are playing.
Hard hats required.
Boxing gloves optional but recommended.
And anyone entering the building who knows how to stop Patrick Ewing, please see the front office, where a National Basketball Association representative will be waiting.
Knicks 108, Nets 94. Someone call an ambulance.
The Nets (11-10) stepped in front of a runaway train called the Knicks tonight and there are still pieces scattered around the Byrne Meadowlands Arena floor.
In a truly brutal game in which the Knicks were whistled for four technical fouls but were sent to the free throw line 41 times, defense won out.
And the Knicks may have the best defense in the league.


Book Notes
Title Search
Coming to bookstores this winter from William Morrow &amp; Company is a book called "Ordinary Miracles." Coming to bookstores this winter from Simon &amp; Schuster is a book called "Ordinary Miracles."
"Really? Are you kidding?" said Scott Manning, a spokesman for Morrow, when he was asked about the coincidence.
"I never heard of this happening before."


Saudis' Census Counts 16.9 Million People
Seeking to end years of debate over the size of its population, Saudi Arabia says it has completed a comprehensive census that shows 16.9 million people live in the country.
The results, announced by the Saudi Government over the weekend, put the number of Saudis in the country at 12.3 million and the number of foreigners at 4.6 million.
Children born to foreigners are not entitled to Saudi citizenship.


Kaufel Group reports earnings for Year to Aug 31


Highland Superstores reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Comtech Telecommunications Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Review/Theater: Orpheus in Love; Orpheus as Mediator Between 2 Worlds, But Just Which 2?
When words and music can't resolve their differences -- and in opera they rarely do -- what better mediator than Orpheus?
He is the musical charmer who seduces Death into taking a holiday, if only a short one.
In a way, music has been created in his image: inventing its own clock, persuading time to rearrange itself a little.
Dismembered finally by the Bachantes, Orpheus and his lyre continue to sound even past death.
Music will last, the song tells us, even in a fractured world of events.
Myths like this live partly because they are malleable.
So when Craig Lucas (words) and Gerald Busby (music) deposit the Orpheus myth in the midst of music students at an American community college, minor adjustments make it fit.
Tinkering with the ending of this story is an old operatic tradition anyway.
The one for "Orpheus in Love," which opened last night at the Circle Repertory Company, falls between happy and unhappy.
Lost to an automobile accident, Eurydice prevails over death by becoming a kind of music of her own.


The Storm Is Gone, and in Some Places, So Is the Power


Public &amp; Private; Without Windows
Every school smells the same, an amalgam of disinfectant, chalk, steam table lunches and a faint whiff of wet coats.
The odor rises around you inside the door at Public School 291.
So does the sound, the high-pitched Babel of elementary education.
Linoleum, blackboards, the marbled covers of copybooks.
Universal school.
But every school is its own self too, unique, specific.
Sandwiched into a commercial strip on Jerome Avenue in the Bronx, P.S. 291 from the outside is a strange flat slab of a building, blank and unwelcoming.


Outlook Graphics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


At Landlords' Expense
To the Editor:
I think New York City has found convenient and cheap housing for the homeless, namely, private landlords.
In my case, I have been ordered by Kings County Housing Court, Part 18F, after three appearances, to continue housing a tenant who stopped paying rent in May because, in the words of his lawyer, "he will become a homeless person if evicted." My lawyer says this is not unusual.


Homedco Group Inc. reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


Catalina Lighting reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


BENEFIT PROPOSED FOR TERMINALLY ILL
The Internal Revenue Service proposed today that people with terminal illnesses like AIDS or cancer should be allowed to collect life insurance benefits tax-free.
Under current practice, the proceeds of life insurance paid after a person's death are tax-free.
But if the benefits are paid before death and exceed the amount paid in premiums, the difference is usually treated as ordinary income and is subject to a Federal tax rate up to 31 percent.


Foreign Units By the Dozen, And All 'Elite'
At least 28,000 American troops will dominate the military operation in Somalia.
But at least 34 other countries are expected to contribute 15,000 to 20,000 troops to the effort in the next several weeks, American officials say.
Some have already arrived.
On the road leading to the airport here, Belgian commandos wearing green berets and camouflage fatigues crouch behind machine guns in sandbag bunkers.
Saudi riflemen in crimson berets patrol parts of the airport.
French marines and Foreign Legionnaires monitor checkpoints through the city.


Advance Circuits Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 28


The Pop Life
Holiday Old and New
In the something-for-everybody category, Christmas albums have few rivals.
They have been recorded by just about everyone from Elvis to Pavarotti and cut across virtually all styles of music, from the reggae, soca and calypso of "Mas! A Caribbean Christmas Party" (Rykodisc USA) to the mellow sounds of "Mel Torme's Christmas Songs" (Telarc).
Because holiday albums have a successful record, record companies each year deck the stores with a hodgepodge of sparkling new ones and a cornucopia of old ones.


The Other, Warmer, Christmas Tradition


AGRA Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Roper Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Topps Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 28


Integrated Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Max &amp; Erma's Restaurants Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 25


METRO DIGEST
PLEAS FOR STORM RELIEF
The Governors of Connecticut and New Jersey formally asked the Bush Administration for Federal disaster relief for last weekend's storm, citing preliminary estimates of well over $150 million in damage to their two states.
Governor Cuomo is expected to make a formal request for Federal aid for New York next week.
New York officials said they had already accounted for more than $100 million in damage.
B6.
NEW YORK CITY  DINKINS EXTENDS HAND TO BUSINESS
Mayor Dinkins assured an audience of business people that he was committed to making New York a more hospitable place for business, from international business and cultural institutions to neighborhood stores and specialized manufacturers.
B3.


New Promises About Traffic For Concourse
Three weeks after a 5-year-old was killed and a 2-year-old seriously injured by hit-and-run drivers on the Grand Concourse in the Bronx, transportation officials said they would make an assortment of traffic improvements to increase pedestrian safety.
The suggestions, including ones for new pavement markers, clearer signs and a pedestrian barrier, were outlined by Lucius J. Riccio, Commissioner of the Department of Transportation, at a meeting yesterday with the Bronx Borough President, Fernando Ferrer, and other community leaders who have demanded greater traffic control on the Concourse.


Telco Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 29


Vitriol Is Order of Day in Allen-Farrow Case
In a hearing that saw more venomous exchanges than substantive movement and provided a preview of the long, brutal struggle ahead, Woody Allen appeared in State Supreme Court in Manhattan yesterday to watch his lawyers gain a little ground in his custody battle with his former lover, Mia Farrow.
Mr.
Allen, the film maker, is suing for custody of 4-year-old Satchel Farrow, his and Miss Farrow's biological child, and of their adopted children Moses A. Farrow and Dylan O. Farrow, 7.


SoftKey Software reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Des Moines Acts to Halt White Flight After State Allows Choice of Schools
When school choice came to Iowa three years ago, allowing students to enroll in any public school in the state no matter where they lived, educators in Des Moines figured if any students left the district they would be poor and minority students eager for a chance to go to school in the suburbs.
Instead, the city's white and affluent students began leaving, and in such alarming numbers that last month the Des Moines school board took a drastic step to stop what it saw as the start of white flight.


Wilkins Is Lost To Hawks Again
Pistons 107, Hawks 94
ATLANTA, Dec. 15 (AP) -- Joe Dumars scored 32 points tonight in the Detroit Pistons' 107-94 victory over Atlanta.
But loss was a costly one for the Hawks, who lost Dominique Wilkins, the league's second-leading scorer, with a broken finger in the second period.
Wilkins, averaging 28.5 points, injured the fourth finger on his right hand with about three minutes left in the second period as he and Dennis Rodman went for a rebound.
He will miss four to six weeks.
Wilkins had come back strong after missing the last 40 games of last season with a ruptured Achilles' tendon.
He had 12 points on 5-for-14 shooting before the injury.


The American Christmas Table: Fit for a Crown
MOST cultures have precise recipes for parlaying visions of sugar plums into Christmas dinner.
The French have buche de Noel, and the British have plum pudding with hard sauce.
Northern Italians feast on cotechino, the salami-size sausage that is boiled, sliced and served with lentils or polenta, as well as panettone, the dome-shaped pound cake that is studded with raisins and candied fruit.


Review/Television; Dance Productions for the Holidays
Maybe it's just that the holiday season creates a demand for bonbons, but major dance productions are getting an uncommon whirl this week.
Tonight at 8:30 on PBS's "Great Performances" there is "The Hard Nut," by Mark Morris, a bell-bottomed, cross-dressing, sex-reversing adaptation of "The Nutcracker." And Saturday at 7 P.M., Bravo is presenting the National Ballet of Canada's production of Glen Tetley's "Alice," inspired by Lewis Carroll's "Alice's Adventures in Wonderland."
In highly unusual scheduling, "The Hard Nut" is being televised in the middle of its American premiere this week at the Brooklyn Academy of Music.
This version, slightly trimmed, was taped in performance last year at the Theatre Royal de la Monnaie in Brussels.
Mr.
Morris, never one to dabble in orthodoxy, appears at the beginning to explain his conception: "In many 'Nutcrackers' the story is presented in a charming, adorable way, because that's what adults think children will like. But most kids would rather see something scary."


Review/Film: Forever Young; Mel Gibson In a Vehicle For an Age Of Miracles
"Forever Young" has the manner of something that was made in the kind of perfect vacuum that can be achieved only in a Hollywood bell jar.
Here's a romantic comedy in which Mel Gibson plays a pre-World War II test pilot who, accidently defrosted after spending more than half a century in a cryogenic capsule, learns about life and love in 1992.
When first seen in 1939, Daniel McCormick (Mr. Gibson) seems to have the world in the palm of his hand.
He's not only at the top of his class as a flier, but he's also in love with and loved by an ideal woman, Helen (Isabel Glasser), a successful magazine photographer.
Daniel has one small failing: marriage scares him, though for no reason more special than that the story requires it.


Milosevic, Unfazed by Criticism, Rouses the Faithful Serbian Voter
Appealing to the Serbs' traditional defiance toward foreign pressure and warning that major powers are attempting to set up a "puppet regime" in Belgrade, the President of the Serbian republic stumped through its heartland today, campaigning for his political survival in elections Sunday.
"The United Nations sanctions against Serbia and Montenegro are unjust and must soon be canceled," President Slobodan Milosevic said at a campaign stop in Krusevac.
"All those who imposed these sanctions will very soon be ashamed of their decision against this country and its people, who wish to be the masters of their own home and refuse to bow down."


G-III Apparel Group reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Cuomo Presses Legislators To Act on Transit Bailout
Seeking to salvage a small victory from what increasingly seems a lost cause, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo proposed today that the Legislature return to Albany this month to earmark $125 million for a mass-transit bailout aimed at preventing fare increases next year in New York City and several upstate cities.
But he said for the first time that the issue of the bailout could be considered separately from the other significant transportation issues on the state's agenda.
In doing so, Mr.
Cuomo essentially surrendered his hope that a comprehensive transportation package could be negotiated and approved this month before the debate over the 1993-94 budget begins.


League Fines Barkley
CHARLES BARKLEY of the Phoenix Suns, named the National Basketball Association Player of the Week on Monday, was fined $5,000 yesterday by the league for making "derogatory comments" about the officiating.
The National Basketball Association said Barkley's comments came after the Suns' 105-100 victory over the New Jersey Nets on Dec. 8 at East Rutherford, N.J.
"I said what I wanted to say, and they fined me for it," Barlkey said.
"Life will go on." (AP)


Immunex, Cyanamid Unit to Merge
The Immunex Corporation and the American Cyanamid Company said today that they had agreed to create a new biotechnology company by merging Cyanamid's cancer business, Lederle Laboratories, with Immunex.
Cyanamid, which is based in Wayne, N.J., will also contribute $350 million to the new company, which will retain the Immunex name and will continue to be based in Seattle.


SL Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Contract Extended
Ohio State's basketball coach, RANDY AYERS, has agreed to a five-year contract extension that will pay him a base salary of $110,000 through the end of the decade, the university announced yesterday.
Ayers, with a 73-23 career record, was three games into the fourth year of the original five-year contract he signed when he was hired in July 1989. (AP)


Esterline Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Clinton Chooses Arkansan for Surgeon General
The top Arkansas health official, Dr.
Joycelyn Elders, has been asked by President-elect Bill Clinton to be the new surgeon general, according to transition official.
Dr.
Elders, a 59-year-old pediatrician here and the director of the State Health Department, was offered the position over the weekend and accepted it immediately, the official said on Monday.
She would become the second black and fifth woman to be named to a top post in the Clinton Administration.


Early Days of Guardian Angels Made the Subways Feel Safer
To the Editor:
While I agree with your view in "Curtis Sliwa's Confession" (editorial, Nov. 27), that the fabrications of the founder of the Guardian Angels require re-examination of his organization and his motives, you ignore the impact the Angels had when they first appeared in New York City.
The Angels were trusted, not because people thought they learned their crime control on the streets, but because they were visible where people felt most threatened.


Ideal Metal reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


Charter Power Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Refugees Are Evacuated from Tajikistan Capital


Chock Full O'Nuts reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Review/Film; Surrealism, Dark Humor and Satire
The title character of John David Allen's short film "Mona's Pets" is a punkish young woman who paints her fingernails black, twists her hair into spiky antlers and speaks in surly pronouncements.
In the opening scene, she walks out on her boyfriend and goes home to the suburbs to live with her mother.
Mom (Taylor St. Clair) already has a hard enough time bringing up Mona's younger brothers, Bobby and Jimmy (Joel McGinnis and Michael Ogletree), two squabbling hellions on the verge of adolescence.
No sooner has Mona begun unpacking than the tidy little house becomes infested with cockroaches that she has brought from the city.


Paychex Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Constitution Protects Even Mail Solicitation
To the Editor:
"The Fright Mail Gambit" editorial (Nov. 30) takes Richard A. Viguerie to task for using publicly subsidized mail to wheedle money out of people on the pretext that Social Security and Medicare are nearly insolvent.
Your call for the Internal Revenue Service and the Postal Service to crack down by insisting on, and enforcing, stricter solicitation reporting standards is welcome.


Slow Stretches Now, a Great Leap Someday
Tasha Taylor was dancing across the floor in ballet class when the teacher called out to her to look outside at the blue sky.
"Why are you dancing as if the sky is red?" the teacher asked.
Remembering that moment in a recent conversation, Miss Taylor smiled.
"I
wanted
to paint the sky red," she said. "But I've found I had to understand how to paint it blue."
Most dancers come to New York City to hone their skills in the classroom or be seen performing onstage.
For Miss Taylor, a 24-year-old from Perth, Australia, the city offered a chance to learn not only how to dance better, but also to learn to dance her own way, to "paint red skies," as she somehow knew she must.
In the Perth academy where she received most of her dance education, she had been considered something of an anomaly.
"I was trying my best," Miss Taylor said.
"But I think they couldn't quite work me out."


India, Acting on Militants, Ousts Local Rulers
Moving decisively to smash Hindu militants' political power, the Indian Government dismissed the governments in three northern states tonight.
A fourth government was removed from power 10 days ago after a rampaging mob of Hindu militants razed a 16th-century mosque in the town of Ayodhya.
The dismissal of the three state governments and the imposition of rule from New Delhi is certain to catapult the country into even further political turmoil after a week of rioting that has left more than 1,200 people dead.


Dodging the Big One
Bill Clinton has still not addressed the most difficult economic issue and perhaps the hardest political question he will face as President: Which Government programs should be cut and which taxes should be raised to lower the budget deficit?
Anyone looking for the answer at the two-day economic conference this week was disappointed.
Not only did Mr.
Clinton skirt the question, but so too did most of the prominent economists and business executives he invited here to chew the fat at his seminar on the economy.


Connecticut and New Jersey Seek Disaster Aid for Storm
The Governors of Connecticut and New Jersey yesterday formally asked the Bush Administration for Federal disaster relief for last weekend's winter gale, citing preliminary estimates of well over $130 million in storm damage to their two states.
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo of New York is expected to make a formal request for Federal aid sometime next week, officials said.
Yesterday, as teams of inspectors began visiting some of the state's worst-hit neighborhoods, officials said they had already accounted for over $100 million in damages -- a figure they predicted would more than double before final damage assessments were completed.


An Empty Plant, Missing Jobs and Residents' Doubts
Along Route 17 here on the way to Elmira lies a riddle as big as the Sphinx -- bigger, actually.
The sprawling 1.5 million-square-foot building covers almost as much ground as the Pentagon, which it resembles.
Many residents believe the unused property, which belongs to the Great Atlantic and Pacific Tea Company, a.k.a.
A. &amp; P., is run more secretively than the Department of Defense.


LOS ANGELES FORCE CONTAINS DISORDER
Determined not to repeat the mistakes that allowed a riot to rage out of control in the spring, the Los Angeles Police Department staged a show of swift and massive force on Monday night after a small demonstration turned unruly.
The city's new chief, Willie L. Williams, intending to show that he will not allow mobs to rule the streets, poured hundreds of riot-equipped officers into the area that was the flash point of the April riot, made 55 arrests and quickly restored order.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
NEW YORK YANKEES -- Agreed to terms with Wade Boggs, third baseman, on a three-year contract.
TEXAS RANGERS -- Agreed to terms with Tom Henke, pitcher, on a two-year contract.
National League
ATLANTA BRAVES -- Named Bruce Kimm manager of Greenville of the Southern League.


Korean Investment Fund reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Resignation At Magazine
Gilbert E. Kaplan, the founder of Institutional Investor magazine, said yesterday that he would resign as chairman and editor in chief, eight years after he sold the magazine, which he founded, to Capital Cities/ ABC.
Mr.
Kaplan, who is 51, said he would form a new media company that would focus on investments in existing publications, joint ventures with United States and international publishers and possible start-ups.


Sticking Points Found During Talks
Meetings here today between National Football League players and owners on settlement of their legal disputes and completion of a collective bargaining agreement concluded with both sides maintaining opposite views on the success of the talks.
Players representatives said an agreement was attainable.
Owners said more negotiation was required to give the league and its players their first agreement since 1987, when the last contract expired.


BRIEFS
Debt  *
Airborne Freight Corp., a Seattle air express company, is offering $100 million of 8 7/8 percent notes due 2002 at a price of 99.469 to yield 8.956 percent through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.
The noncallable notes are rated Baa-3 by Moody's Investors Service and BBB+ by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corp. *
New York State Housing Finance Agency is offering $28.9 million of tax-exempt multifamily housing revenue bonds with a maximum yield of 6.70 percent for an issue due in 2025 through underwriters led by Bear, Stearns &amp; Co.
The shorter-maturity serial bonds are priced to yield from 3.75 percent in 1994 to 6 percent in 2003, with another long bond due in 2012 priced to yield 6.625 percent.
The financing is rated Aa by Moody's.
For some investors these bonds are subject to the Federal alternative minimum tax.
Common Stock  *
Bell Sports Corp., Chicago, is making a public offering of 2.5 million common shares at $24.50 a share through William Blair &amp; Co.


Food Notes
Lower Caviar Prices
A few merchants are posting some of the lowest caviar prices since 1985, and they say the quality is excellent.
An abundant catch of sturgeon from the Caspian Sea and competition among dealers in the former Soviet Union have contributed to the drop in prices.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Dec. 11
Dec. 4
Dec. 13
1992
1992
1991
Gasoline production, daily
7.3
7.4
7.2
Distillate production, daily
3.1
3.3
3.1
Gasoline stocks
212.6
212.8
214.4
Distillate stocks
140.4
142.4
142.3
Crude imports, daily
7.0
6.2
5.8
Product imports, daily
1.4
1.8
1.8
Crude stocks
329.4
324.8
340.4
Crude production, daily
7.0
7.0
7.3
Refinery utilization (%)
86.5
89.7
87.0
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Seoul Looks North, Balancing Hope and Anxiety
President Roh Tae Woo said here not long ago that he wants to be remembered as the man who fulfilled South Korea's "aspirations for democratization."
But for Asia and the United States, perhaps most important has been his paramount role in isolating North Korea, a three-year diplomatic campaign that has left one of the world's most menacing powers bereft of its cold-war allies and on the defensive about a nuclear-weapons project that ranks among the biggest threats in Asia.


Clinton Economic Session Yields Clear Goals, but Solutions Clash
President-elect Bill Clinton's economic conference ended today with a consensus on the need to spur growth in the short term and reduce the deficit over the long haul, but with a welter of contradictory advice on how to achieve these goals.
The President-elect took in all the comments from the economists, business executives and labor leaders gathered here.
But he refrained from tipping his hand over what approaches he intended to take at first.
Toughest Issue Ahead
Participants at the conference proposed solutions ranging from spending a few million dollars to spending $60 billion on roads, bridges and education training to help create jobs and jolt the economy.
And they suggested various timetables for reducing the deficit; some would start at once, others would phase in cuts starting several years from now.


Miscellany
*
Tatham Euro RSCG Chicago said that its sibling agency, Della Femina McNamee Chicago, had moved into its offices and renamed itself DFM/ Tatham.
A Tatham spokeswoman said DFM/Tatham would continue to operate as a separate Euro RSCG unit. *
The Publishers Information Bureau, New York, said magazine advertising pages in November declined 3.3 percent from November 1991, to 17,198.7.
So far this year, pages have risen 2.11 percent, to 149,482.4.


Accounts
*
Rooms To Go, Lakeland, Fla., to RKL Productions Inc., Great Neck, L.I., as the first agency to handle the the furniture chain's broadcasting advertising account.
Billings were estimated at more than $3 million.


Sales of U.S.-Made Vehicles Maintain Their Strong Pace
In keeping with generally stronger retail activity, momentum in the automotive market carried over from last month as sales of domestically produced light vehicles surged 17.9 percent higher in early December compared with the corresponding period a year ago.
Sales of cars built in the United States and Canada rose 12.3 percent, to 148,079, while sales of light trucks, which include mini-vans, sport utility vehicles and pickups, rose 26 percent, to 113,890.
Total light-vehicle sales during the period of Dec. 1 to Dec. 10 totaled 261,969.


People
*
Ueli E. Morant was named executive vice president and senior account director on the Polaroid and Best Foods accounts at BBDO New York, taking some of the responsibilities of John Marchese, who left to become managing director at Wieden &amp; Kennedy, Philadelphia.
Mr.
Morant was previously executive vice president and director of business at Della Femina McNamee Inc.
New York.  *
Ben Benya, senior vice president and media director at Bozell Los Angeles, was named senior vice president and director at BJK&amp; E Media/ West.
In addition, Sara Geuss, vice president and director at Bozell's Los Angeles regional buying office, was named vice president and director of broadcast operations at BJK&amp; E Media/West.
Both will report to Michael Drexler, president at BJK&amp; E Media in New York.


I.M.F. Splits Yugoslav Debts Among Successor Republics
The International Monetary Fund has declared that five succcessor republics have inherited the debts and assets of the former Yugoslavia, and assigned percentages to each.
The finding, reached Monday and announced today, is likely to serve as a guideline for foreign governments and foreign banks in assigning liabilities for the roughly $15 billion owed to overseas creditors, New York banking officials said.


TROOPS IN SOMALIA CLOSE IN ON GOAL OF AIDING HUNGRY
More than 700 American marines and French forces rolled into this inland town this morning, in the first major push by the military aid operation into the interior of Somalia's man-made famine belt.
As Huey and Cobra helicopter gunships whirred overhead, an armored convoy of 70 trucks, jeeps and armored vehicles rumbled down the narrow main street at dawn to cheering crowds.


Peter S. West, 66, Advertising Executive
Peter S. West, an advertising executive and conference manager, died Saturday at the White Plains Medical Center at the age of 66.
He was a lifelong resident of Scarsdale, N.Y.
He died of a stroke, his family said.
Mr.
West followed in the field of his father, Paul, who was the president of the Association of National Advertisers.
The son began as the advertising manager of Quantacolor, then became an account executive at the Batten, Barton, Durstine &amp; Osborn agency.


Eric Ramsey Returns
A former Auburn football player, ERIC RAMSEY, whose play-for-pay allegations led to the resignation of Coach PAT DYE, graduates today under tighter than normal security.
The university police chief, JACK WALTON, said extra officers would be on hand for the commencement since Ramsey and his wife, TWILITTA, plan to walk down the aisle at Eaves Memorial Coliseum.


Exco Technologies reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


Federal Express reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


'I Care About Them,' Says Woman in Sex Abuse Case
Guided by questions from defense lawyers using gentle words and jokes, flattery and self-deprecation, a mildly retarded woman testified today that she still cared for the young men charged with sexually assaulting her.
Minutes before the judge, R. Benjamin Cohen, recessed the Glen Ridge trial for the day, Michael Querques summoned his client, Kevin Scherzer, from his seat behind the defense table and positioned him about 10 feet in front of the young woman on the witness stand.


In the Spirit of Giving: The Neediest Cases
Unemployment and a 13-year-old's growing pains led a single mother to trun to a Neediest Cases agency for help.
They now have a counselor and some extra money.
Page B2


PBS Plans a Magazine By Students, on a Disk
Imagine a student magazine that tackles the current affairs of the day in a serious manner.
Put the magazine into a computer and inject it with technology that allows photographs and illustrations to move and make sounds.
Then distribute it in high schools from Boston to Honolulu.
The Public Broadcasting Service intends to do just that in March, with a computerized magazine called HiWavz.


Personal Health
MISCARRIAGE is not only the most common mishap of pregnancy, it is also the one most commonly misunderstood and incorrectly handled by doctors as well as by lay people.
New studies indicate that fully half of pregnancies are spontaneously aborted, often before the woman even knows or suspects she is pregnant.
When miscarriage occurs after pregnancy has been confirmed and announced to friends and relatives, the couple's pain is often compounded by well-intentioned but inappropriate or inaccurate expressions of comfort even from doctors, like "Be glad, nature was just getting rid of a defective fetus."


Boutique Bourbons Win Prestige at Home and Sales Abroad
BOURBON has shed its corn-likker image.
The bluegrass twang of grown-up country boys like Booker Noe of Jim Beam and Jimmy Russell of Wild Turkey has not changed, but the bourbon that these master distillers swirl, sniff and sip certainly has.
Once the raw drink of the frontier, bourbon is now beginning to follow single-malt Scotch onto after-dinner drink lists.
On a recent fall morning, Mr.
Noe, a giant bear of a man, ambled over to a barrel of bourbon stored dead center in one of the pastel-colored Jim Beam warehouses perched on hillsides above the hamlet of Clermont.
He rapped it smartly with a mallet to pop the bung and then, with a copper tube called a thief, siphoned some of the bourbon into a snifter.


Many Faucets Are Leaching Lead At Dangerous Levels, a Suit Says
Two environmental groups charged in a lawsuit today that many American-made kitchen faucets leach dangerous levels of lead into drinking water and pose a significant public health risk.
The lawsuit, which lawyers describe as the most broad-based action brought under California's stringent antitoxic law, was filed by the Natural Resources Defense Council and the Environmental Law Foundation.
It names more than 25 manufacturers whose products were found to have leached from 6 to 250 times as much lead as allowed under the law.


Children's Aid Society Has Health Services to Go
Yeremy Jaquez had never visited a dentist before.
But the 4-year-old behaved well, turning his round face up to Carmen Melendez so she could clean his teeth.
When it was over, Yeremy proudly displayed his new green toothbrush and the "Tooth Fitness" sticker on his striped shirt.
Yeremy was lucky; only one tooth seemed prime for a cavity.
Ms.
Melendez, a dental hygienist, said that most of the children in his class at the Fort George Head Start program in Washington Heights already had one or two cavities, too many for 3- and 4-year-olds.


Lowrance Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Tektronix Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 28


Sports of The Times; The Problem Was George, Not N.Y.
THE Yankees have had trouble persuading warm bodies to accept boxcars of George Steinbrenner's money, but yesterday they found a taker.
Creaky and limited Wade Boggs agreed to come to New York, ending a series of disappointments and embarrassments for the Yankees and for all those touchy New Yorkers who were taking it personally.


Intelligent Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Microdyne Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Paul M. Sachner; Editor, 42
Paul M. Sachner, the executive editor of Architectural Record, died yesterday at John Dempsey Hospital in Farmington, Conn.
He was 42 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of AIDS, his family said.
Mr.
Sachner joined the Record, a national monthly professional journal, in 1984 and became executive editor in 1989.
He was the steward of its annual awards for housing design and championed lesser-known American architects.
He also started an awards program, In the Public Interest, to honor innovative civic architecture.


NATO to Help U.N. on Yugoslav Plans
NATO has agreed to help the United Nations plan for three possible new military operations that the Security Council might authorize the organization to undertake in the war-torn Balkans, diplomats and officials said today.
At a meeting in Brussels on Monday, NATO's governing council agreed to send "a positive reply" to a request from Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali for the alliance to share with him any contingency plans it might make for these operations.


2 Streaks End for Rangers
Defenseman Kevin Lowe, the Rangers' latest potential antidote to 52 years of Stanley Cup futility, played his first game of the season last night.
Unfortunately for Lowe, the game was not a defensive or offensive triumph for him or the Rangers.
Not only did they fail to prevent goals, but they also failed to score any themselves.
Instead, the Calgary Flames, fresh from shutting out Detroit on Monday, breezed into town and again played the role of rude guests.
Treated to another flawless performance from veteran goaltender Mike Vernon, who posted his second road shutout in two nights, the Flames snuffed the Rangers, 3-0.


THE TRANSITION: Banking - Economic Solutions: a Sampling of Advice, and Clinton's Response; How Easing Rules Would Help
Selections by The New York Times from a transcript recorded by Reuters.
Vice President-elect Al Gore
We heard earlier about other options for stimulating short-term economic growth, in addition to a new fiscal package, and one of them, for example, was the easing of bank regulations to free up a lot of money that entrepreneurs could get ahold of to expand and so forth. . . .
What order of magnitude stimulus would you expect to come from easing those bank regulations?
Bill Brandon
National Bank of Phillips County, Arkansas
If you were to increase lending in the banking system just 4 percent, which we can do, Mr.
Sinai, with no effect on safety and soundness, and we can demonstrate that, you would increase the amount of capital coming out $86 billion, which would be a tremendous input back into small business.


Polish Politicians Find No 'Erotic Immunity'
After three years of democracy in which politicians' private lives were largely their own business, Poles are suddenly reading and talking about the sexual proclivities of their lawmakers.
The gossip, which has caused considerable embarrassment among members of Parliament, has been prompted by publication of a book purporting to detail the more salacious activities of Poland's Parliament.
It is titled "Erotic Immunity: The Memoirs of Anastazja P."


University Patents reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


IEH Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25


Amrep Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Environmental Officials Reject L.I. Plan for Drinking Water
A plan to protect Long Island's shrinking supply of drinking water was rejected today by state environmental officials, who called it a good effort but said it was incomplete.
The rejection by Thomas C. Jorling, the State Commissioner of Environmental Conservation, was praised by environmentalists, who had been calling for more details on ways to preserve and protect the Island's underground water supply.
"The decision is a bittersweet victory for us," said Jeffrey D. Fullmer, program director of the Citizens Campaign for the Environment.


Radix Ventures Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Intelogic Trace reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Advantage Life Products Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


SEES RECORD LOSS
The International Business Machines Corporation, conceding that its orderly retrenchment has failed to reshape the company, said yesterday that it planned to cut another 25,000 jobs next year and further trim manufacturing capacity to cope with a worldwide economic slowdown.
The costs associated with the cutbacks are likely to leave I.B.M. this year with the biggest one-year loss in American corporate history.


Product Placement
The Federal Trade Commission said yesterday that it had denied a petition to require motion picture producers to disclose at the beginning of films the names of companies that paid fees for their products to appear in the films.
Consumer advocacy organizations, including the Center for the Study of Commercialism, had requested that the F.T.C. require producers to run the credits.
But Lee Peeler, associate director for advertising practices at the F.T.C. in Washington, said the commission had found a lack of a pervasive pattern of deception and would consider these matters on a case-by-case basis.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a front-page article yesterday about President Boris N. Yeltsin's surrender of his principal aide, Acting Prime Minister Yegor T. Gaidar, misstated the inflation rate.
The rate of 25 to 30 percent is monthly, not annual.


2 Officers Are Indicted in Shooting and Cover-Up
Two Newark police officers were indicted today in yet another case growing out of this city's crisis in car theft.
One officer, Dino D'Elia, was accused of aggravated assault in the June 2 shooting of an Irvington, N.J., teen-ager whom the officer suspected of stealing his car.
Officer D'Elia, who was off duty, was accused of firing one shot from a .25-caliber handgun at 19-year-old Shakir Davis, who suffered a minor foot wound.


Is Baker Next in Line?
The San Francisco Giants have called a news conference for today at which the batting coach, DUSTY BAKER, is expected to be named manager, replacing ROGER CRAIG.
Baker, who has spent five seasons on the Giants' coaching staff, was the first of six candidates interviewed by the general manager, BOB QUINN after Craig was dismissed Dec. 1.


Islanders Beat the Blues in Overtime Show for Texans
Islanders 4, Blues 3
DALLAS, Dec. 15 (AP) -- Derek King scored with 2 minutes 27 seconds left in overtime tonight to send the Islanders past the St.
Louis Blues, 4-3, in the first regular-season National Hockey League game ever played in Texas.
The neutral-site game drew a crowd of 11,251 at Reunion Arena.
Dallas has been mentioned as a future N.H.L. expansion site.


Eating Well
CRIES of 'nutritional Nazis," "nutrition terrorists" and "food police" fly through the air whenever the old guard -- the hollandaise, eggplant parmigiana and 16-ounce T-bone steak crowd -- is challenged by the new guard, which thinks yogurt, tofu and bean sprouts taste better.
Between these two warring camps lies a demilitarized zone, ground now being claimed by moderates who instead of resorting to name-calling are devising food that tastes good without tubs of butter, pounds of cheese and quarts of cream.
They are doing this not only by reducing the amount of fat they put in food, but also by emphasizing beans and rice, vegetables and fruits instead of meat.


Electronics Technology Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


2 Russians Star in Theater of Democracy
From the political turmoil in Russia in recent days, two men have emerged with enhanced influence: Viktor S. Chernomyrdin, the new and relatively unknown Prime Minister, who has spent most of his life in the oil and gas industry, and Ruslan I. Khasbulatov, who has burst from obscurity to make his job of Speaker of the legislature into a new power center.
In separate news conferences today, both appealed for calm and consensus, but in radically different tones.


Allison Assante Dies; A Writer for Ellington
Allison Assante, a composer and songwriter and supporter of the homeless, died on Friday at her daughter Paula Blasband's home in Manhattan.
She was in her early 70's and lived in Manhattan.
She died of a heart attack and stroke, her family said.


A Simple Dinner for Those Condemned to Holiday Indulgence
AT this time of year, as I begin to get ready for the holidays, I purposely keep my everyday menus simple and economical, serving seasonal products in easy-to-prepare dishes.
This method gives me more time to work on menus for the holidays, and eating simple fare early in the month makes me feel less guilty about the richer, more elaborate meals I know I will be consuming later in the month with family and friends.
This menu begins with a salad featuring sweet potatoes, which are plentiful and inexpensive now.
Tossed with a vinaigrette dressing and served on salad greens, the potatoes have an unusual and pleasantly distinctive flavor that makes them appealing both as a first course and as an accompaniment to a roast or other main dish.


COLLEGE HOCKEY REPORT
Goals, Goals, Goals
Suppose the object was to select a league game to attend in which a lot of goals would be scored.
Where would one turn?
The suggestion is to a Hockey East match, especially one involving the Maine team.
Hockey East's 9.31 goals-per-game average is the highest among the four Division I leagues this season.
There is a reason.
The Black Bears, the nation's only remaining undefeated Division I team, have scored 75 goals in 10 league games, twice as many as second-place Northeastern.


Critic's Notebook; Clinton and the Economy: A Round Table of Experts
The Bill Clinton two-day television spectacular gave good value.
Although the number of viewers of CNN and C-Span who stayed with the whole show (longer than "The Civil War" and "Civilization and the Jews" put together) would not have made a Nielsen blip, even the intermittent watcher could find rewards.
There was information, human interest, glimpses of the new Administration's movers and shakers and, presumably as programmed, star power in the form of the President-elect.
For the most part personages from prestige-ridden institutions like Harvard, the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Apple Computer, the Brookings Institution and the World Bank laid out the nation's problems in a reasonably clear way, even if repetition set in early and their small jokes did not always earn the big laughs they received from Mr.
Clinton.
The man who resorted to "paradigm," 11 times in his 11 minutes and mouthed muddy formulations like "overall macroeconomic environment" and "economies of scale are obsoleted" was the exception.
Taken together, these Clinton supporters got across in an audience-friendly way the general economic perspective of the incoming Administration and the dilemma of trying to cure one ailment without worsening another.


SEES RECORD LOSS; Shifting Role In Technology
The big cutback that I.B.M. announced yesterday has underscored what some of the nation's experts on technology have been saying for several years: While the world's largest computer maker remains a huge enterprise, it no longer can be expected to set the pace for technological innovation in the United States.
I.B.M. will slash its development spending by $1 billion, or 17 percent, next year, an amount unprecedented in its history.
The company spent about $6.6 billion in 1991, the last year for which figures are available.
Analysts believe it will spend a similar amount this year.
Role of Follower
"I.B.M. as the I.B.M. that defined computing is over; it's gone," said Nathan Myrthvold, the Microsoft Corporation's vice president for advanced technology and business development.
"As a result of new technology developments during the past 10 years, I.B.M.'s role in the computer industry has fundamentally changed."


Corrections
An article yesterday about help available for people whose homes were damaged in last week's storm included incorrect telephone numbers for Nassau and Suffolk Counties.
The numbers for Nassau's civil preparedness office are (516) 573-7057, 7058 and 7059.
Suffolk's emergency management office is at (516) 852-4900.


Luby's Cafeterias reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Duquesne Stuns Florida State
Duquesne 91, Florida State 84
PITTSBURGH, Dec. 15 (AP) -- Effrem Whitehead's four 3-pointers during a 17-2 run tonight led Duquesne's second-half comeback as the Dukes rallied from a 20-point deficit to stun No. 10 Florida State, 91-84.
The Dukes, coming off a loss to Kent, overcame Bob Sura's 34 points and a 59-41 deficit behind Whitehead's outside shooting and Derrick Alston's 20 points.
Duquesne trailed, 70-54, before scoring 37 of the final 51 points, including runs of 8-0 and 13-0.


Audio/Video Affiliates reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Critic's View Of Movies Is High-Rise
WHEN Barbara Cramer finally came to the city after her divorce, the situation she found herself in was a little like one of those Woody Allen movies in which nobody ever thinks or talks about money.
It was also a little like Paul Mazursky's film, "An Unmarried Woman." Maybe a touch of Bunuel.
The point is that at the age of 50-something, having raised four children, her challenge was not so much to make a living as to make a life.
She has succeeded.
Now her days are full and, among other things, she is the resident film critic of the Mayfair Towers, a building on West 72d Street.
Since October she has been writing capsule reviews of movies and has them circulated to her neighbors in 499 apartments along with the building's monthly newsletter.
"I have written about movies for many years, and I thought I could provide a useful service," said Ms.
Cramer.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
I.B.M. will shed another 25,000 jobs next year and trim its manufacturing capacity at a cost of $6 billion.
It will also probably impose its first dividend cut and its first formal layoffs next year.
The company's stock fell $6.75, to a 10-year low.  [ Page A1. ]  I.B.M.'s plan to cut its development budget by $1 billion brings into focus the fact that it already frequently responds slowly to the significant technological forces reshaping the industry.  [ A1. ]
Donald Trump is reportedly seeking refinancing of the debt of the Trump Plaza Hotel and Casino.
The prospective deal is said to call for the sale of as much as $335 million in new bonds.  [ D1. ]


Queens Board Rejects Fernandez Offer to Talk
A Queens school board resumed its defiance of Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez, rejecting his latest offer of direct talks and demanding immediate mediation of their dispute on a multicultural curriculum that teaches respect for gay people.
In assuming that attitude, the local board of District 24 walked a thin line between keeping the sympathy of the central Board of Education on its stand against portions of the "Children of the Rainbow" curriculum and alienating the board, which might then come down squarely behind the Chancellor.


Intrawest Development reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


D'Amato Fund-Raiser Cleared
A Federal judge has cleared Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato's chief fund-raiser in Puerto Rico of charges that he illegally funneled $75,000 in political contributions through relatives and business associates to Mr.
D'Amato's campaign.
Judge Gilberto Gierbolini of Federal District Court in Puerto Rico ordered the acquittal of Eduardo Lopez Ballori, 49 years old, on Nov. 18, after the prosecution rested its case during Mr.
Lopez Ballori's second trial.


Nets Don't Have Firepower In the Knicks' War of Words
On a program that has previously been sold as a battle of two heavyweight champion coaches, the Knicks-Nets undercard suddenly developed considerable clout last night.
There is a problem here, though, as far as the guys who defend the west bank of the Hudson are concerned.
For the time being, at least, they are apparently far more familiar with the manly art of battling each other, as opposed to the opposition.


Campus Journal; At Bowdoin, an All-Male Era's Vestige Won't Budge
From its founding in 1794 until only 21 years ago, Bowdoin College, an academically demanding institution nestled along Maine's southwestern coast, was for men only.
Today, about 44 percent of its 1,400 students are women.
One tradition from the all-male days that did not end with the advent of coeducation in 1971 was Bowdoin's strong fraternity system.
It continued to thrive.
But now, nearly 200 years after its founding, Bowdoin has banned all single-sex organizations.


U.S. College Band Accused of Shoplifting in Japan
Members of an American university's marching band recently went on a shoplifting spree in Tokyo's electronics district, taking 119 items valued at about $22,000, the Tokyo police said today.
While most of the items were returned and no charges were pressed, the incident could contribute to the unfavorable image many Japanese hold of Americans.


National Trustco reports earnings for Year Oct 31


ACM Government reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Lebanon Rebuilding Criticized
Barely a month after his Cabinet took over, Prime Minister Rafik al-Hariri and his plan for rebuilding Lebanon are being attacked by politicians who say he is drawing too close to Saudi Arabia in his effort to raise money.
The criticism, from Muslim and Christian political leaders and newspapers, arises partly from concern that Saudi businessmen may come to dominate Beirut.
Mr.
Hariri has also been faulted for investing his money in public reconstruction projects while serving as head of the Government.


Arden Holdings reports earnings for Year to July 31


New Man, Old Burden: Moscow Owes $86 Billion
Russia's new economics czar, Viktor S. Chernomyrdin, takes office just as President Boris N. Yeltsin's Government is preparing to ask the industrial nations to postpone collection of $18 billion that should have been repaid this year but was not.
Talks on rescheduling the debt reopen tomorrow in Paris.
Bush Administration officials and bankers said that Mr.
Chernomyrdin's appointment as Prime Minister, replacing Yegor T. Gaidar, is not likely to change the outcome of the negotiations.
"We will continue to support debt rescheduling," one Administration official said.


Score Board Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Digicon Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Long Day in Little Rock


Perry Drug Stores reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Look at 'Malcolm X' as a Mirror of America
To the Editor:
I do not think "Malcolm X" is the best movie I've ever seen, but I do think it is one of the more important.
I take serious offense at Russell Baker's trivialization of it for its length in "Three Men and a Cutie" (column, Dec. 1).
It was faulty to suggest that films should only entertain.
Films can and should have the same liberty as books, theater and music.
I am not alone in the belief that our culture is overentertained and underinformed.


Marietta Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Officer Wounded While Making an Arrest
An undercover police officer was shot and wounded with his own gun last night as he struggled with a suspected narcotics dealer who was being arrested on Staten Island, the police said.
The 28-year-old officer, whose name was not made public because of the nature of his work, was wounded in the left ankle.
He was admitted to St.
Vincent's Hospital on Staten Island, where he was listed in stable condition, said Officer Andrew McInnis, a police spokesman.


'Baby Bell' Entering Cable TV
In another sign of the accelerating clash between the telephone and cable television industries, the Bell Atlantic Corporation announced yesterday that it would team with a small New Jersey company to provide 60 channels of television over new high-capacity lines to 38,000 homes in Dover Township, N.J.
The venture will be the first in which a telephone company has competed head to head against a cable television service.
The deal comes as the biggest cable companies begin to install technology that allows them to provide a much broader array of information and entertainment.


Time to Undo Damage of Indian Partition
To the Editor:
Re "Kashmiris Must Have Say in Their Future," by Ghulam Nabi Fai (letter, Nov. 28), which makes a plea for an independent Kashmir in view of human rights abuses by the Government of India:


Burnup &amp; Sims reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


CHRONICLE
Who says British food is bland and boring?
Not MAXIME DE LA FALAISE, author of "Seven Centuries of English Cooking," a cookbook that has been reissued by Grove Press.
It was first published in England in 1973 and in this country by McGraw-Hill in 1982.
Throughout history, there was more than a soupcon of spice and daring in the English kitchen, said Ms. de la Falaise, who is British.
"England was so influenced by other countries," she continued, "by the spice and silk routes, the Crusades, the Moorish people, by the British occupation of France."


Circle for '93 Race Is Drawn And Is Starting to Attract Hats
The 1993 governor's race is officially on.
A former Attorney General, W. Cary Edwards, today became the first official challenger to a politically vulnerable Gov.
Jim Florio.
He sent a letter to potential supporters announcing that he would be a candidate for the Republican nomination and he registered the "Cary Edwards '93 Committee" with the New Jersey Election Law Enforcement Commission.


Killearn Properties Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Holiday Cards: Santa's Elves Vs. Humbugs
BREATHES there a soul who hasn't at one time or another thought -- for just a second or two -- how nice it would be not to have to deal with Christmas cards?
But fleeting thoughts and occasional action hardly count.
Despite the increasing costs of cards and postage, holiday greetings still flood post offices every year.
Untold hours are spent choosing, signing and addressing them, and a lot of midnight oil is burned by men and women creating original and highly personalized greetings.
A completely unscientific survey seems to indicate that an increasing number of people each year make the momentous decision to stop sending cards, but the number is still minimal.
Nevertheless, the men and women who have decided to flout tradition take some pride in their decision and almost never back down -- there's the odd twinge of guilt, but that seems to be about it.


Echlin Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


AT LUNCH WITH: The McLaughlin Group; Just Another Talk Show? Wronnnggg!
ON Sunday mornings, the circus comes to television: it's "The McLaughlin Group," five barking, squawking, ideologically split pundits who argue national and foreign affairs in a go-to-hell fashion that would have made Walter Lippmann, the patrician columnist of an earlier, gentler age, weep at the loss of any last shred of political gentility.
John McLaughlin, an ex-Roman Catholic priest who is the provocateur in chief, cows, points, cajoles, glares, implores and insults his way through the program with such rotating regulars as Patrick Buchanan, Fred Barnes, Morton Kondracke, Jack Germond and Eleanor Clift.
With the tilt of a shoulder, the rise of a demonic triangular eyebrow, the avid dispatch of a rival viewpoint ("Wronnnnggg!") or an attack on his favored target, Mr.
Kondracke ("Mort, who are you and why are you here?"), Mr.
McLaughlin has crafted the most widely watched political talk show in Washington and has become a victim of Dana Carvey of "Saturday Night Live."


Records Offered in Case Against Union Chief
A special Federal investigator presented a small mountain of documents yesterday in an attempt to prove that one of New York City's most influential municipal union leaders, Barry Feinstein, embezzled or misused about $500,000 as the head of a Teamsters local.
At a quasi-judicial hearing, the investigator, Charles M. Carberry, unveiled more than 100 yellow file folders, crammed with union records and expense vouchers.
Relying on the paper trail, Mr.
Carberry charged that Mr.
Feinstein improperly used union funds from 1984 to 1991 to pay his personal expenses, including those for an East Side penthouse apartment, maids, funishings and antiques and trips to China and Ireland with his wife.


Trump's Back and May Be Bankable
Is Donald Trump back, as big and as bankable as ever?
The irrepressible New York developer says yes, absolutely, without a doubt.


I.B.M. Bonds Hit by Revamping
I.B.M. bonds were hit hard by the restructuring the company announced yesterday, which includes a $6 billion special charge in the fourth quarter.
But traders also said that a cut in the company's stock dividend, which the company and analysts said was likely, could take some of the selling pressure off the bonds by improving the financial outlook for the company.
Prices of the actively traded I.B.M. bonds fell in the morning as yields rose 10 to 15 basis points or more in comparison with their comparable Treasury securities.
But one trader said that the "hemorrhaging" had stopped by the afternoon.


Bush, in Texas Valedictory, Defends His Foreign Policies
President Bush flew to the Texas heartland today to begin staking a claim to history, arguing in an occasionally vivid speech that he correctly spent his four-year term asserting America's global leadership in an era of change.
Mr.
Bush said the crises of his Presidency -- in the former Soviet Union, in the Persian Gulf and now in Somalia and Bosnia -- proved that American military and moral force were "indispensable" to the spread of democracy and political stability.


A Risotto With Less Fat
ON a recent trip to Italy I learned that risotto is often made with a little cream, as well as butter and olive oil.
It depends on the recipe and the region.
But risotto also lends itself very well to low-fat cooking: butter is never necessary, and the oil can always be cut back.
As for the cream, some of the richness may be gone, but other seasonings make up for it.
Risotto does not have to be stirred continuously.
When not stirring, you can prepare a sweet and tart orange-mustard salad that complements the risotto nicely.


Executive Changes
AMERICAN BUSINESS PRODUCTS INC., Atlanta, a paper products company, named Robert W. Gundeck executive vice president and chief operating officer.
AMERICAN GENERAL FINANCE INC., Evansville, Ind., a financial services company, appointed James R. Jerwers senior vice president for consumer lending for the Western United States.


Salvadorans, Ending a War, Are Cautioned on the Peace
Salvadorans officially ended their 12-year civil war today, but with many reminders that they are still going to be leaning on others, particularly the United Nations and the United States, to learn to live together in peace.
Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali of the United Nations and Vice President Dan Quayle said that such support would be forthcoming, but Mr.
Boutros-Ghali reminded Salvadorans that "the primary responsibility" for continued peace fell on them.


Why Hurry the Trade Talks?
Thank goodness for French farmers.
They may be irascible, and are subsidized, but they could save U.S. trade policy from U.S. policy makers.
The farmers oppose the U.S.-European Community agreement on agricultural subsidies, in which the E.C. promised to limit the acreage for oilseed crops.
The agreement, worked out under threat of retaliatory U.S. duties against French white wine and other products, broke a stalemate in the Uruguay Round of negotiations under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.


Dinkins Plans To Meet Jews On Tensions
In an effort to smooth his strained relations with New York City's Jews, Mayor David N. Dinkins will travel to Crown Heights today to meet with Hasidic leaders and representatives of Jewish groups from around the city.
Advisers to the Mayor said the immediate goal of the meeting was to ease the tensions that have been building between the Mayor and the Lubavitcher Hasidim in the 18 months since a rabbinical student was stabbed to death during racial violence.
But the meeting is also a symbolic act that could benefit Mr.
Dinkins in a broader political sense, by quieting newer criticism among more mainstream Jewish groups, who played a major role in his 1989 campaign.


Optimistic Hostetler Returns to Practice
For three weeks, while Jeff Hostetler has suffered from post-concussion syndrome, the Giants' quarterback has been Kent Graham, a rookie.
Today, Hostetler returned to the Giants' practice field, where he impressed his coach and teammates, and if his headaches do not come back, he will start Saturday against the Kansas City Chiefs at Giants Stadium.
Under Hostetler and then Graham, the Giants have lost their last five games.
Their record has dropped to 5-9, their playoff hopes are long gone and they have been playing without inspiration.
Graham has worked diligently -- "I'm trying as hard as I can," he said -- but he is still a rookie learning on the job.


Woman Files Kidder Claim
Elizabeth Sobol, a managing director at Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company until she resigned 16 months ago, filed claims last week to collect $5 million from her former employer because, she says, it discriminated against her on the basis of age and sex, and paid her less than similarly ranked male workers.
The claims may be heard by a three-member arbitration panel under the auspices of the National Association of Securities Dealers.
Ms.
Sobol, 49, had previously filed lawsuits against Kidder.
But recent court cases have held that such claims involving employees of securities firms who signed pre-employment agreements are to be handled under the industry's arbitration procedures.


Corrections
A sports article on Dec. 5 about the men's basketball team at the University of Michigan referred incorrectly to last season's Big Ten Conference champion.
It was Ohio State, not Michigan.


American Agencies Are Lining Up for Vietnam's Business
GOOD morning, Vietnam.
That may best sum up the optimism this week at many worldwide advertising agencies after the Bush Administration signaled it might ease the trade embargo with Vietnam and allow American companies to take the first steps to compete there.
Anticipating the move, many agencies, including Backer Spielvogel Bates; Dentsu, Young &amp; Rubicam Partnerships and J. Walter Thompson have commissioned studies on the market, visited Vietnam and begun work to establish ties with agencies there.


INSIDE
U.S. Indicts Bobby Fischer
A grand jury indicted Bobby Fischer on charges that he violated economic sanctions against Yugoslavia by playing chess there.
Page A3.
School Choice Furor
Iowa allows students to attend any school they choose, but now to curtail white flight, the Des Moines schools are refusing transfers.
Page B9.
A Taker for Yankees' Money
After snubs from other free agents, the Yankees signed Wade Boggs, Boston's five-time batting champion, to a three-year contract.
Page B11.


Expectation and Intricacy Conspire Against Nagle
He has been at it for 11 months -- morning, afternoon and often nights -- and Browning Nagle still can't complete even half his passes and has thrown 14 interceptions to only 6 touchdowns.
Rarely do quarterbacks in their first year running the team make a difference.
Yet, there were apparently false expectations for this strong-armed 24-year-old.
For in the complex, razzle-dazzle 90's, it simply takes longer.


Books of The Times; Charlayne Hunter-Gault: A Long Road Traveled
In My Place  By Charlayne Hunter-Gault  Illustrated. 257 pages.
Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $19.
A telling photograph that must seem incredible to college students today appears in Charlayne Hunter-Gault's inspiring memoir, "In My Place." It shows her walking onto the campus of the University of Georgia in 1961 -- the first black woman student in the university's history -- her head downcast but with a faint smile on her face.
A white woman screams at her, while a white man, with a wide grin, looks on approvingly.
Her caption reads:


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-19  KILLING STIRS FURY IN ISRAEL
The stabbed and bound body of an Israeli border policeman was found two days after he was kidnapped inside Israel.
Prime Minister Rabin vowed to "strike unmercifully" against the militant Islamic abductors but refused to give up Middle East peace talks.
A1  TROOPS HEAD TO SOMALI BUSH
American forces set off for the Somali town of Baidoa, the heart of the country's famine zone.
Marines were surprised to see healthy people in fertile areas along the way.
A1


Mr. Gaidar Departs, Democratically
It's tempting to interpret the resignation of Prime Minister Yegor Gaidar of Russia as a startling rebuke to Boris Yeltsin and his program of radical economic reform.
Yet even with the more- cautious apparatchik Viktor Chernomyrdin in the job, reform could still go forward, though at a slower pace and on a different trajectory.
And though the infighting was brutal, the result was reached democratically.
That reaffirms the wisdom of not imposing a made-in-America brand of economic policy as the test for all United States aid to Russia.
America's basic interest lies in consolidating democracy's tenuous hold on this vast and troubled country and preventing a fateful turn to ultra-nationalist demagoguery.


Sound Advice Inc. reports earnings for Year to June 30


Associated Natural Gas Corp. reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


Input/Output Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Cloud of Mace Injures 79 Students at a School in Queens
At least 79 students were injured yesterday when a cloud of Chemical Mace spread through an intermediate school in Queens, forcing a harried evacuation.
The police later arrested a 14-year-old student and charged him with juvenile delinquency for spraying a canister of Mace in a hallway on the first floor of the school, Intermediate School 125 in Woodside, as students changed classes at 10:50 A.M.


Phoenix Technologies Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Executives' Early Reaction to Clinton: Not Bad, for a Democrat
The way many executives here see it, President-elect Bill Clinton was inviting them on a blind date.
The business leaders at Mr.
Clinton's economic conference did not fall head over heels, but many came away feeling warmer toward him than they had expected.
Still, many of the executives had voted for President Bush, and they remained unsure today whether Mr.
Clinton was a man they could live with.


New Plan Realty Trust reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Acklands Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


FISCHER IS INDICTED OVER CHESS MATCH
Bobby Fischer, the mercurial chess master who returned to the game professionally in September after 20 years, was indicted today on charges that he had violated economic sanctions against Yugoslavia by playing a match there.
A Federal grand jury here handed up the single-count indictment that accused Mr.
Fischer of violating an executive order issued by President Bush in June that restricted commercial relations with what remains of Yugoslavia.


Inquiry on Clinton File Seeks Baker Interview
Congressional investigators have asked for an interview with James A. Baker 3d, the White House chief of staff, and his top aides to try to determine if he authorized or approved the search of Bill Clinton's passport files during the Presidential election campaign.
The investigators have also asked the White House for copies of any telephone logs, phone message slips, appointment calendars, computer records, memorandums or other documents that mention the search for damaging information on Mr.
Clinton.
The request was made in a letter to the White House from the General Accounting Office, a copy of which was obtained today.


Zuckerman Discussing Terms on Coliseum Sale
Rather than forcing the developer Mortimer B. Zuckerman to come up with the $338.6 million purchase price for the New York Coliseum site, city and state officials are trying to strike a new deal with him.
Through the development concern Boston Properties, Mr.
Zuckerman is under contract to buy the 3.4-acre site on Columbus Circle, where he is to build a 2.1 million-square-foot, multi-towered office, apartment and retail complex called Columbus Center.


New Data Revive the Debate Over Mammography Before 50
FOR a decade, women in their 40's have been told that regular mammograms can save their lives by finding tiny cancers in the breast.
But cancer experts are increasingly questioning whether the advice is a mistake for women that young.
Both the National Cancer Institute and the American Cancer Society have called meetings in February to re-examine this advice.
And The Annals of Internal Medicine, the journal of the American College of Physicians, said in an editorial this month that the recommendation should be abandoned for these women.


Olympic Golf Takes a Step
Golf survived its first pre-Olympic test yesterday, as 16 members of the Program Committee of the International Olympic Committee in Lausanne, Switzerland, agreed to forward the application of the World Amateur Golf Council to include the sport at the Atlanta Games in 1996.
The proposal will next be considered by the executive board of the I.O.C. in March, and possibly again in September.


Best Buy Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 28


Scotts Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


THE TRANSITION: The Budget - Economic Solutions: a Sampling of Advice, and Clinton's Response; The Struggle to Reduce the Deficit
Selections by The New York Times from a transcript recorded by Reuters. Elaine Kamarck
Senior fellow, Progressive Policy Institute
There's two topics on the table, short-term stimulus and long-term deficit reduction.
The first one requires very little political capital.
The second one requires enormous amounts of political capital.
What we know historically is that presidents come in and they have a honeymoon.
That honeymoon lasts six months if they're lucky.
You have a window of opportunity to achieve real progress on the long-term problems that we've heard about in the last two days.
If you look at the four sectors of this budget, every single one of them is a political nightmare that you will have to get through to make honest-to-goodness, long-term deficit reduction.


1,800 Objects From the Titanic: Any Claims?
Seven years after the sunken hulk of the Titanic was found by a French-American expedition off Newfoundland, France today gave the owners of 1,800 objects recovered from the wreck three months in which to claim their property.
With only a dozen or so of the 687 survivors of the disaster thought to be alive, the legal owners are most likely to be heirs either of the 1,513 people who died when the ocean liner went down on its maiden voyage on April 14, 1912, or of those who survived but have since died.


Allen Wallace; Dance Producer, 39
Allen Wallace, a dance producer, public relations agent and building preservationist, died on Saturday at Cedars-Sinai Hospital in Los Angeles, where he lived.
He was 39 years old.
He died of AIDS, said his companion, Michael Lombardo.


Geac Computer reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Look Freshly at a Changed Korea
South Korea's next President won't be a general, unlike virtually all his predecessors since 1961.
Friday's election will mark a new advance for Korean democracy, a gain for U.S. interests and a tribute to the outgoing Roh Tae Woo, whose reforms energized political life.
For Americans, the election is an occasion to reconsider familiar policies.
There's now a strong case for shifting to a more regional approach to security, and for giving new emphasis to economic issues, especially trade barriers.


Manatron Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


London Journal; For the Royal Frolickers, Time for an Image Lift
With the collapse of the marriage of the Prince and Princess of Wales, the beleaguered British monarchy last week abandoned its last and greatest fiction: the myth of the royal family as Britain's happiest family, a living role model embodying the nation's most cherished values.
Now, after a succession of sometimes scandalous marital travail and growing public resentment over royal wealth and life style, Queen Elizabeth II and her courtiers are embarked on what royal historians and scholars describe as a belated -- some say desperate -- campaign to restore public esteem and affection to an institution that has little real power beyond its own symbols and image.


THE TRANSITION: Clinton's View - Economic Solutions: a Sampling of Advice, and Clinton's Response; The Dilemma: Balancing the Needs of the Economy
Selections by The New York Times from a transcript recorded by Reuters.
President-elect Bill Clinton
Let me try to frame what I consider to be the dilemmas here.
I think we all understand the price we're going to pay if we continue with this deficit.
We now have this huge structural deficit, and I take it we all agree that that's a bad thing; certainly the rate of growth is a bad thing.
Not only that; obviously it doesn't necessarily promote any kind of economic activity.


Review/Film; A Family That's Not So Nice to Come Home to
Why would anyone not under duress want to spend time with a loud, obnoxious family eager to discuss body odor, toilets and Tupperware?
"Used People" makes the dubious assumption that these are funny grotesques, and that within their earthy platitudes lies some kind of reassuring candor. ("Even cheap borscht is a blessing for the toothless." "When you got a humpback, why spend money on a nose job?")
In fact the grotesque far outweighs the funny, emphasized as it is by shellacked hairdos, deliberately awful costumes (the year is 1969) and crude conversation.
"Not too spicy, we're Jewish," warns Shirley MacLaine as Pearl Berman, a recent widow who seems to be getting free advice from every last person in Queens, and who herself is criticizing someone else's cooking.
"We take gas very seriously."


Harry A. Gotimer 3d, Admiralty Lawyer, 45
Harry A. Gotimer 3d, a New York admiralty lawyer and teacher, died in Massachusetts on Saturday.
He was 45 and lived in New Hyde Park, L.I.
He died of a heart attack at a motel along the Cape Cod Canal where he was investigating a marine accident, said Frank Nolan, a friend and former partner in New York.


Domi and Probert Face Questioning
All those punches to the head from Bob Probert might not be the only downside for Tie Domi, who sought and got a fight with the Detroit forward two weeks ago when Domi's Rangers played Probert's Red Wings at Madison Square Garden.
Domi will appear in the National Hockey League office today to meet with Gil Stein, the league president.
Probert will appear later in the week.
There is a possibility both players will be harshly disciplined.


Yanks Place $11 Million Bet on Boggs's Revival
The Yankees finally found another free agent willing to accept some of their money.
They signed Wade Boggs to a three-year, $11 million contract yesterday and hoped that the five-time American League batting champion would make their third-base troubles disappear.
The signing is curious because the 34-year old Boggs is coming off the worst season of his 11-year career, all with the Boston Red Sox, and there has been rampant speculation that an ailing back will prevent him from regaining his form.


Snapple Is an Over-the-Counter Success
Wall Street, which sifts through dozens of new high-tech ideas daily, went back to basics yesterday and put its hands around a bottle of iced tea.
In one of the year's hottest new stock offerings, investors helped themselves yesterday to an initial public offering of 4.4 million shares of the Snapple Holding Corporation, a leader in selling New Age beverages.
In the process, Snapple's stock soared, at one point selling at more than 68 percent above its initial selling price.


That Playoff-Bound Team Used to Be the Chargers
When his Chargers were 0-4, Bobby Ross would call mulligans during practice.
In a simulated-game drill in September, quarterback Stan Humphries dented a fence with an errant pass, and Ross interceded.
"First down again," the coach said.
San Diego's machismo defense wondered why.


Hauser Chemical Research reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Metropolitan Diary
A FRIEND writes:
Glued to my television set during much of last weekend's storm, I found myself once again absolutely awed by the spirit, stamina and determination of people in this city.
But my candidate for the title of Quintessential New Yorker -- no, make that All-Time Quintessential New Yorker -- is easily the woman from Brooklyn who was asked on the news how it all was affecting her.


Aspin Is Called Likely Choice as Pentagon's Chief
Representatice Les Aspin, the chairman of the House Armed Services Committee, has emerged as the leading candidate for Secretary of Defense in the Clinton Administration, transition and Congressional officials said today.
The Wisconsin Democrat is the likely choice on what had been an extremely short list of candidates to head the Department of Defense, and several people familiar with the process said a formal announcement was expected soon.


Dycom Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Vicorp Restaurants Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 25


Cantel Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a report in the Company News column of Business Day on Saturday about a new television remote control device omitted the name of the company developing it.
It is Discovery Communications Inc.


Aircraft Lessor Places Orders for 82-Jet Fleet
In the midst of a protracted slump in the airline industry, the International Lease Finance Corporation today ordered a total of 82 new jets from the Boeing Company, Airbus Industrie and the McDonnell Douglas Corporation.
The orders included 53 jetliners from Boeing Company with a value of $3.6 billion and 28 aircraft from Airbus with a value of $1.5 billion.


System Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 24


Israeli Tensions Rise as an Officer Is Found Slain
The stabbed and bound body of an Israeli border policeman was found today alongside a highway near this Jewish settlement outside Jerusalem, two days after Islamic militants had kidnapped him in an announced attempt to free their jailed leader.
The killing of Sgt.
Maj.
Nissim Toledano, 29 years old, sent waves of anti-Arab anger rolling across Israel, where many people were already badly shaken by an abduction viewed as an unusually daring challenge to Israeli authority, especially in the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip.
It was believed to be the first kidnapping inside Israel for the ostensible purpose of arranging a prisoner exchange.
Cries for Vengeance
In Parliament, politicians of all ideological stripes demanded a swift and harsh crackdown against Hamas, a Gaza-based group of Islamic militants that rejects Israeli statehood and Palestinian involvement in the Middle East peace talks.


Standard Microsystems reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Bias Incidents Up in Wake Of Crown Heights Beating
A Hasidic man was robbed at knifepoint at a Crown Heights subway station by two black men.
"Kill the Jew," one of the robbers said as they mugged the man.
"This is for Nimmons."
The encounter, which the police said happened Monday night and which they described yesterday, was one of the latest in a spate of bias-related incidents reported to the police since the beating of Ralph Nimmons, a black man, by a group of Hasidic Jews on Dec. 1.


Report Sent to Court Gives Honecker Short Time to Live
Erich Honecker, the former East German leader on trial for manslaughter, is expected to die of liver cancer in three to six months, according to a new medical report submitted today to the court.


College Student Sprays Campus With an Assault Rifle, Killing 2
An honors student armed with an assault rifle he bought Monday morning sprayed a college campus near here with bullets that night, the police said, killing two people and injuring four others before surrendering.
Police spokesmen said the student, 18-year-old Wayne Lo of Billings, Mont., lugged a modified AK-47 assault rifle through the snowy Berkshire mountains campus of Simon's Rock College and opened fire around 9:30 P.M.
A professor of Spanish and an 18-year-old student were killed.
A security guard was shot twice in the stomach and is in critical condition.
Three other students were injured.


Great American Management &amp; Investment reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Felix Jackson Is Dead; Film Producer Was 90
Felix Jackson, a movie and television writer and producer, died on Dec. 4 at the Motion Picture and Television Hospital in Woodland Hills, Calif.
He was 90 years old and lived in Camarillo, Calif.
He died of congestive heart failure, said his wife, Ilka.


Earle Bruce Receives A Contract Settlement
EARLE BRUCE, the former coach of Colorado State, reached a contract settlement with the school that will pay him an estimated $110,000 in salary and benefits.
The agreement on Monday ended a controversy that began three weeks ago when Bruce was dismissed after allegations that he physically and mentally abused players and violated National Collegiate Athletic Association regulations.


Eshed Robotec Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


David M. Maeir, 66, Ex-Pathology Professor
Dr.
David M. Maeir, a former professor of pathology at Yeshiva University in New York and director general of Shaare Zedek Hospital in Jerusalem, died on Monday at Hadassah Hospital in Jerusalem.
He was 66 and had been a resident of Jerusalem since 1968.
He died from injuries sustained when a car struck him on a Jerusalem street, said a spokesman for Shaare Zedek Medical Center in New York.


T.W.A.'S PREFERRED SHARES TO BE SUSPENDED
The New York Stock Exchange said yesterday that it would suspend trading in the $2.25 preferred shares of Trans World Airlines Inc.
The Big Board also said it planned to file an application with the Securities and Exchange Commission to delist the preferred shares.


A Valuable Economics Seminar
The two-day economics seminar in Little Rock led by Professor Bill Clinton broke no new ground and settled no important policy debates.
Yet it was doubly impressive.
Several speakers delivered concise treatises on what ails the economy.
And Mr.
Clinton displayed a remarkable grasp of big themes and small details.
Teacher, student, preacher: the President-elect played all the parts well.
The two-day spectacle taught Americans a lot about the economy -- and about their new leader.


Review/Music; Hermann Prey's Night of a Universe of Schubert
The audience had no desire to leave at the end of Hermann Prey's recital at Carnegie Hall on Monday night.
And with good reason.
This was not just a recital, it was an act of reverence.
In 20 of Schubert's songs that ranged widely over the composer's career, Mr.
Prey, accompanied by James Levine at the piano, created astonishing miniature universes.
They were sculptured with the assurance of a master.
Nothing was ornate or excessive.
Mr.
Prey didn't need to "emote" or impose feeling on a phrase.
He seemed to take on the persona of each song, becoming the young lover, the worshipful son, the wizened wanderer.
In "Alinde" he presented an eerie Romantic drama of dialogue and yearning.
In "Der Schiffer" -- "The Boatman" -- his voice seemed to embody animal energy, the recurring accents suggesting the repeated swell of waves.
"Die Allmacht" -- a paean to the power of Jehovah -- had the authority and wonder of authentic faith.
These performances were acts of creative imagination.
And Mr.
Levine was an exemplary accompanist, always supporting and often expanding on Mr.
Prey's expression.


Reporter's Notebook; Russians Use 'Real Market': A Bazaar
At 4 P.M., as the winter sky darkens, thousands of traders from the giant flea-market at the Luzhniki Sports Stadium here trudge homeward through the dirt and slush, lugging bags and suitcases stuffed with unsold goods.
For many Russians today, this is the "market" that the politicians have been talking about in the Kremlin for all these weeks.
It is not a free exchange of goods and services, it is not checking accounts or credit cards, or even unemployment benefits and unpaid bills.
It is standing in the cold for hours on end, holding up cheap cosmetics, or sweaters imported from Turkey, or the odd pair of boots or shoes, waiting for someone to come and buy.


Look at 'Malcolm X' as a Mirror of America; With Dr. King
To the Editor:
Spike Lee's new film has heightened interest in the life and times of Malcolm X, as your Nov. 18 front page reports.
Readers may want to know that while the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. and Malcolm X were never close, they did work together in 1962; that was one year before Malcolm X left the Nation of Islam.


Market Place; Big Blue Bites Another Bullet
HOW low will it go?
That's the question that was being asked yesterday on Wall Street about the stock of the International Business Machines Corporation, which plunged to a 10-year low of $56.125, down $6.75 in trading on the New York Stock Exchange after it announced plans to take a $6 billion charge in the fourth quarter to cover the costs of 25,000 new job cuts.
Once the bluest of the blue-chip 30 stocks in the Dow Jones industrial average, I.B.M. has been something of a religion among investors.
And that faith has been hard to shake: some investors have been unwilling to accept the ferocity of I.B.M.'s tumble since July, when it was trading above $100.


No Headline
"What we know historically is that Presidents come in and they have a honeymoon. That honeymoon lasts six months, if they are lucky. You have a window of opportunity to achieve real progress." -- ELAINE KAMARCK, a political scientist at the economic meeting yesterday in Little Rock.  [ A27:6. ]


2 Expected for Cabinet
Les Aspin is the No. 1 candidate for Defense Secretary, and Mike Espy is the top choice for Agriculture Secretary, Clinton aides said.
Page A28.


The Remains of a Historic Manhattan Church


OEA Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


CPI Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 7


Holly Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


From Japan to Marlins
ORESTES DESTRADE, the three-time Japanese League home-run champion, signed a contract to return home and play for the Florida Marlins, the team announced yesterday. (AP)


Skyline Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Corrections
An article on Nov. 26 about the British monarchy referred incorrectly to a survey measuring Britons' feelings on the subject.
The survey was conducted by the Harris polling organization for the ITN news service, not by a London television station.
It was conducted in person, not by telephone.


Bridge
For those who like to acquire bridge expertise in small bites rather than large gulps, a series of 10 well-written monographs by Norma Sands and Jan Janitschke is now available.
Each has about 22 pages, costs $3.95, and can be ordered from Baron-Barclay Bridge Supplies at (800) 274-2221.
Most of the subjects relate to bidding, but there is one on defensive signals that includes the diagramed deal.
The bidding to three no-trump is simple, and making nine tricks is equally simple if your aim is to make nine tricks.
But at duplicate South wants an overtrick, which complicates matter.


CHRONICLE
They marched and demonstrated and organized together 25 years ago, so JACQUI CEBALLOS should not have been surprised when dozens of people started wangling invitations to a party being held tonight at the Seventh Regiment Armory on Park Avenue by women who led the feminist movement of the 1960's.
"We were just expecting 15 people for cocktails and dinner, but as word of mouth spread, more people asked to come and now it's up to 40," said Ms.
Ceballos, who was the president of the New York chapter of the National Organization for Women in 1971 and on NOW's national board from 1967 to 1975.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
7.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
4.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.18
2.99
4.62
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.20
3.23
4.11
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.49
3.40
4.16
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.45
6.49
6.71
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.44
7.46
7.74
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.43
8.43
8.80
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.39
6.37
6.79
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Kennedy Closeness Remembered Fondly
To the Editor:
My recollections of the Kennedys corroborate the intense family solidarity expressed by four surviving siblings in "A Grotesque Portrait of Our Parents" (Op-Ed, Dec. 3), in response to the book "J.F.K., Reckless Youth" and reviews of it.


Knicks March to the Beat of Champions
In the race for the Atlantic Division title, the Knicks lead the Boston Celtics by 4 games with 61 left to play.
Wait a second. That's last season's script.


Marines Protect Food Delivery in Somali Town


Unocal to Sell Magma Its Geothermal Plants
The Magma Power Company said today that it had agreed to buy the Unocal Corporation's geothermal power plants and undeveloped domestic properties for $225 million.
Industry analysts say Magma is positioning itself to fulfill the "renewable" electric needs of two of the state's largest utilities.


Essay; Kozyrev's Wake-up Slap
In his 1938 radio broadcast of "War of the Worlds," Orson Welles never sought to spread global panic.
But the prewar world was skittish; millions treated the real-sounding broadcast as frightening news.
In the first part of his 1992 speech to the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe, Russian Foreign Minister Andrei Kozyrev's clear intent was to wake up his countrymen and the world to the threat now before us.
But his dramatic warning in Stockholm is being shrugged off as a bad joke, a sophomoric hoax.


Market Place; Buffett's Bond Call Intrigues Wall St.
WARREN E. BUFFETT has an unusual offer for holders of convertible bonds in Berkshire Hathaway, the conglomerate he runs that has made him a billionaire.
They can receive the current value of the bonds in cash, or take Berkshire stock worth just a little bit less.
If they opt for cash, Berkshire will have to pay $477.6 million.
Its last balance sheet showed $831 million in cash, so that should not be a problem.


Foreign Affairs; Denuke Russia
In the bad old days of the Soviet Union, a frequent answer to the question "What's going on?" was "Nobody knows." Still, somebody usually knew.
But now, in Russia, nobody really does know.
Least of all experts in the West.
Some obscure older-style bureaucrat named Viktor Chernomyrdin replaces Yegor Gaidar, the West's reformist darling, as Prime Minister.
One day President Boris Yeltsin looks like a master democratic strategist; the next day he doesn't seem to have a clue.
The Russian Foreign Minister gives a frightening hard-line speech at an important international conference -- then an hour later says it was all a joke.
The Russian economy shows promise in places, but mostly it's fallen into a deep depression, ripe for repression.


No Headline
We know that crimes against humanity have occurred, and we know when and where they occurred.
We know, moreover, which forces committed those crimes, and under whose command they operated.
And we know, finally, who the political leaders are and to whom those military commanders were -- and still are -- responsible. -- LAWRENCE S. EAGLEBURGER, Secretary of State, on the former Yugoslavia.  [ A1:6. ]


Executive Changes
AMERICAN STOCK EXCHANGE, New York, named Jules L. Winters, who is executive vice president in charge of member-firm and trading-floor services, as chief operating officer.
LTV Corp., Cleveland, appointed J. Peter Kelly president and chief operating officer of LTV Steel, effective Jan. 1.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Big companies are still cutting jobs, even though the economy is expanding.
One survey found that one in four companies is planning work force reductions by the middle of 1993, and few experts expect a robust job market anytime soon.  [ Page A1. ]
Two important economic indicators posted gains in November.
Industrial production climbed 0.4 percent, and the rate that builders started new homes rose 1.5 percent from October's pace.  [ D1. ]


Why Is Hostetler Taking A Chance?
For the last three weeks, Jeff Hostetler has been sidelined with post-concussion syndrome.
Now he is returning as the Giants' starting quarterback and today he told why he was risking another concussion in Saturday's game against the Kansas City Chiefs' tough defensive line.
"It wasn't a tough decision," Hostetler said.
"I'm going out and risking that it won't happen again. But I like to play, and I hope I can help get things back on the right track.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the settlement of a lawsuit that will increase the number of species protected under the Endangered Species Act misidentified a plaintiff.
It was the Fund for Animals, not Friends of Animals.


Yankees In Crisis At Top? Of Course
The Yankees want to showcase Jimmy Key at a Yankee Stadium news conference today, but some of the spotlight will probably shift from their new pitcher to the managing partner, Joseph Molloy, and General Manager Gene Michael.
Although the club executives will be ready to trumpet Key's arrival, they will undoubtedly have to address questions about the redistribution of power in the Yankee front office.
Molloy has obviously assumed a much larger role in pursuing free agent players, a development that surely pleases the owner, George Steinbrenner.


Merge City and Suburban Schools, Lawsuit Urges
One of the most ambitious efforts to integrate the schools of a Northern metropolitan area went to trial today in a small suburban courtroom, in a lawsuit charging that the segregation that divides Hartford from its suburbs denies children in Connecticut's capital an equal opportunity for their education.
A victory could eventually lead to a wave of similar suits across the North, where the pattern of poor, heavily minority cities surrounded by overwhelmingly white suburbs has stood unchallenged since the height of suburban white flight and resistance to busing in the early 1970's.


Midtown Subway Shooting Leaves 1 Dead
One man was killed and another man injured on a northbound No. 4 IRT train in Manhattan were wounded last night after an argument between them and a group of four men ended in gunfire, according to the transit police.
The shootings took place about 11 P.M. after the train had left the Union Square station heading for Grand Central, said Lieut.
Robert Valentino, a transit police spokesman.


Lindros Practices, Too
Philadelphia Flyers rookie ERIC LINDROS was back at work yesterday, practicing for the first time since spraining his left knee during a game against Buffalo nearly a month ago.
But Coach BILL DINEEN said Lindros would need to practice for at least three more days before he would be ready to play again.


A Career Sprouts Anew
FOR years, Carl Levine has been known as the master marriage broker of the home furnishings trade.
As a senior vice president at Bloomingdale's, where he has been since 1957, Mr.
Levine paired the late designer Jay Spectre with Century Furniture and the late Charles Pfister with Baker Furniture.


At an I.B.M. Complex, Fear and Disbelief
Like a futuristic fortress, the sleek I.B.M. office complex here sits high atop a steep hill, a long drive up a winding road from the pastoral countryside below.
For the estimated 2,000 employees of the International Business Machines Corporation who work here, today was a day to digest the dour news that the company planned to trim another 25,000 jobs worldwide and to curtail further its manufacturing capacity.


Yes, Maybe You Are What You Collect
ALEX SHEAR lives in the kind of place where a turn-of-the-century welder's mask looks right at home on a pedestal in the living room and a gas-station display of vintage automotive products is the decorative focal point of the home office.
Mr.
Shear, a New York marketing consultant and collector, keeps memorabilia like salesmen's models of swimming pools, military panoramic photographs, Coca-Cola artifacts, life-size tin men and hand-painted roadside signs.


IRAN PANEL BACKS DIVORCE PAYMENTS
A council headed by President Hashemi Rafsanjani has approved a bill that would allow women to claim "wages in cash" from husbands who file for divorce, a newspaper has reported.
The move by the Council of Expediency, which was seen as a social and legal victory for women, a potential labor force of 12 million, ended a dispute between Parliament and the Council of Guardians, a body of 12 conservative jurors, and was hailed by religious and secular feminists.


Totes Hangs Its Hat At Sive/Y.&amp; R.
Totes Inc., the umbrella, knitwear and rain-gear manufacturer, said yesterday that it had named Sive/ Young &amp; Rubicam Cincinnati to handle its account, previously handled by Fahlgren Martin in Cincinnati for seven years.
Sive, which handled the Totes account from 1982 to 1985, was re-awarded the account after a review involving the incumbent and Backley Seifert Advertising in Cincinnati.


Mirrors Reflect Folk-Art Traditions
LIKE most of the other objects that Judith and James Milne sell, their latest cache of folk art -- in this case it's mirrors -- offers an enticing selection.
"They go from tramp to trompe l'oeil," said Mrs.
Milne, who with her husband has gathered more than 100 of them.
They are on view and for sale in an exhibition entitled "Reflections of the Past," at Judith and James Milne Antiques and Quilts, 506 East 74th Street, through Dec. 24.
The mirrors, which date from 1800 to 1940, include painted Victorian mirrors.
A square one, eight and a half inches on a side, is $275; a 57-by-35-inch one, $2,200; a standing mirror, $425; birch- bark mirrors, $375 for the pair; an 1820's mirror that's topped with a charming reverse-glass painting of a house, $475; an Art Deco double mirror, $325, and a small oval mirror encrusted with shells, $185.
A square mirror with outlines of ducks, the handiwork of a decoy maker, is $375.


Gorman to Lead Davis Cup Team Again
It was always obvious, especially to John McEnroe, who hankered for the job, and yesterday the United States Tennis Association finally made it official: the captaincy of the United States Davis Cup team was again awarded to Tom Gorman, the seven-year veteran who guided the team to championship seasons in 1990 and 1992.
"Our mission is to repeat in 1993, and I hope it's the same team," said Gorman, whose expanded U.S.T.A. duties will include the guidance of junior players in the player development program.
Gorman said he intended to ask Andre Agassi, Pete Sampras, Jim Courier and McEnroe, whom he called "the glue that solidified" this year's team, to return in 1993.


Brace the Coffee Table (or Make a New One Out of a Big Book)
PRIVATE PALM BEACH: TROPICAL STYLE ,
by Jennifer Ash (Abbeville; $40).
Palm Beach, Fla., is a place that is in many ways frozen in time -- or at least that's what we like to believe.
White wicker, waving palm fronds, plenty of chintz and the presence of Addison Mizner, the architect who was instrumental in providing the town's Mediterranean look (stucco walls and a touch of the monastery), are still there.
That's nice, and all well illustrated in Alex McLean's photographs that capture the luxe of the resort where a woman may tend to feel she should be wearing white gloves and high heels to shop the boutiques along Worth Avenue.


Richard Weigle, 80; Served as President Of St. John's College
Richard D. Weigle, an innovator in higher education who was president of St.
John's College in Annapolis, Md. for 31 years, died Monday at the Annapolis Convalescent Center.
He was 80 and lived in Annapolis.
He died of complications of Parkinson's disease, his family said.


Foundations Give $8 Million To House New York Homeless
An $8 million gift to provide permanent housing for thousands of homeless adults in New York City has been announced in a joint effort by 12 foundations.
The money will go to 17 neighborhood organizations to help build or renovate apartments and to provide residents with health and counseling services and job training.
The objective is to aid homeless adults with special needs, particularly people with AIDS, mental illness or a history of alcohol and drug abuse.


Pop and Jazz in Review
New York Strings with Paquito d'Rivera
Westside Theater  Clinton
New York Strings were wise to book the Cuban alto saxophonist Paquito d'Rivera as guest soloist for their concert on Tuesday night.
The group, led by Juliet Haffner on viola, is a string quartet plus bass and guitar, with a repertory of jazz tunes and pop standards; the concert featured Gershwin and Ellington.
Playing saxophone or clarinet, Mr. d'Rivera gave the arrangements a focal point, and pushed the group to swing harder than it did on its own.


Where Plants Are Indolent as Odalisques
I KEPT expecting to see some luxurious Matisse cats, what with all the flowers and tapestries and women, especially the bare-breasted odalisques lolling about on the couches, usually accompanied by equally indolent plants.
But all my sister and I found was a gray dog, scratching its fleas, in "Tea in the Garden." The two women pictured are fully clothed, a little frumpy-looking but entirely comfortable -- as if they have sat in this garden sharing their lives for years.


U.S. Official to Recommend Storm Relief
After touring areas of New York and New Jersey pummeled by last weekend's storm, the regional director of the Federal Emergency Management Agency said last night that he would recommend that President Bush approve the states' requests for disaster relief.
He said the approval could come as early as Saturday.
"Does this really look like the scope that would require a Federal disaster to be declared?" asked the official, Stephen Kempf Jr.
"In my heart, I believe it is. Not only is the extent of the damage there, but so is the swath of the damage. In New Jersey, it's about 150 miles, from Cape May up to Hackensack. In Long Island, you've got from Sea Gate in Brooklyn all the way out to Montauk."


Review/Concert; A Christmasy Second Half
In a mild bit of ecumenism at the 92d Street Y on Saturday evening, a program of Baroque music by Richard Hickox and the New York Chamber Symphony doubled in part as a Christmas program.
After a first half consisting of nonprogrammatic concertos by Handel and Bach, the second opened with Corelli's "Christmas" Concerto (Op. 6, No. 8), unusual only for its finale, a pastoral lullaby.
Then Mr.
Hickox, an English choral specialist, led the orchestra and the Mannes Chamber Singers in Bach's Magnificat.
Bach wrote the work for Christmas, in 1723, and included four German carols.
But he later revised it to make it suitable for use year-round.
Mr.
Hickox's performance, without carols, was a fine one.
The 32 choristers had been well prepared by Amy Kaiser.
Andrea Matthews, Nancy Maultsby, Paul Austin Kelly and Jan Opalach were fine soloists.


Three Virtues in Thrift-Shop Windows
CLAIR WATSON, who for 18 months has been designing the windows at the Irvington House Thrift Shop, at 1534 Second Avenue (80th Street), may have outdone herself.
In keeping with the holiday season, she has come up with a series of surprisingly sophisticated windows based on the theme of faith, hope and charity.
"It's actually a trilogy, dear," explained Ms.
Watson, the shop's merchandising and creative manager.
"I want people to be involved with our shop." Some people, she said, had described her past windows as the "Barneys windows of thrift."


Brace the Coffee Table (or Make a New One Out of a Big Book)
MARTHA STEWART'S NEW OLD HOUSE ,
photographs by Mathieu Roberts (Clarkson N. Potter;
$45).
In the live-it-up 80's, Martha Stewart emerged as the doyenne of home design and entertainment.
Through her books on cooking, gardening and party planning, her television appearances and her magazine, Martha Stewart Living, she served as chief guide to the good life, do-it-yourself style.


Review/Theater; London Makes a Revelation of 'Carousel'
Even in the age of Andrew Lloyd Webber, the British remain in awe of the Broadway musical.
Only the most obviously disreputable of American imports and revivals fail to earn critical raves here, and on occasion local versions of New York shows are proclaimed superior to the originals.
During the 1980's, this was most famously the case with Richard Eyre's staging of "Guys and Dolls" and Cameron Mackintosh's upbeat revision of Stephen Sondheim's "Follies," though American visitors could see that both productions were far from fluent in Broadwayese.
In "Guys and Dolls," Damon Runyon's mugs sometimes spoke with Southern accents and tapped like Bojangles.
So it was with skepticism that I approached the new production of the 1945 Rodgers and Hammerstein "Carousel," which opened last weekend to ecstatic reviews and turn-away crowds at the Royal National Theater, the site of the Eyre "Guys and Dolls." But for once the wild enthusiasm may be an understatement.
This is without question the most revelatory, not to mention the most moving, revival I've seen of any Rodgers and Hammerstein musical.
The National has recently found startling new ways of looking at the dramas of Tennessee Williams and Arthur Miller under both Peter Hall's and Mr.
Eyre's leadership, and now it proves just as imaginative in sweeping away decades of cliches from an American musical classic of the same period.


Brace the Coffee Table (or Make a New One Out of a Big Book)
L.A. INSIDE OUT: THE ARCHITECTURE AND INTERIORS OF AMERICA'S MOST COLORFUL CITY ,
by Paddy Calistro and Betty Goodwin; photographs by Grey Crawford (Viking Studio Press
; $40).
No other American city, except perhaps New York, captures the imagination and interest of the world as does Los Angeles -- referred to affectionately by its residents as the City of Angels, by outsiders as La-La Land or Tinseltown.
With its Mediterranean-style mansions, its bungalows, beach-front properties and canyon ranches, Los Angeles is an architectural delight.
Some of that frivolity, sense of style and color, and rich cultural history have been captured in "L.A. Inside Out."


'Rainbow' Curriculum Antagonists Clash at Board of Education Meeting


Corrections
An article yesterday about the indictment of two Newark police officers for the shooting of a car-theft suspect misstated the date of the incident.
It was June 2, 1991, more than a year before another shooting -- involving a suspected car thief -- in which three other officers were indicted.


Europe's Auto Industry Is at the Edge of a Crisis
The Ford Motor Company's decision today to slash production and eliminate nearly 10,000 jobs in Britain and Germany next year, came as several European car makers warned that they would suffer from rapidly falling sales as the European auto industry confronts the effects of a sharp economic downturn.
Ford said it estimated that the overall European car market would shrink next year by 7 percent, to 11.9 million vehicles.
Most European nations are suffering because of recession or lackluster economic growth, and consumer purchases of big-ticket items like cars have particularly suffered.


Leader of Union Explains $500,000 in Expenses
Facing accusations that he was a high-living, autocratic municipal union leader, Barry Feinstein yesterday disputed a Federal investigator's charges that he misused $500,000 in union money.
Lawyers for Mr.
Feinstein, one of New York City's most influential labor leaders, ended their defense by offering statements of support for him from Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, Mayor David N. Dinkins and five other prominent figures.
The statements were not made public, but Mr.
Feinstein's lawyers said they would attest to the union leader's integrity and character.


Ford to Cut $7.7 Billion From Net
The Ford Motor Company said today that it would account for its future costs for retiree benefits by taking a noncash after-tax charge of $7.5 billion in one huge swoop.
The fourth-quarter charge means the auto maker is likely to have a 1992 net loss of between $6 billion and $7 billion, an American corporate record.
Ford's accounting decision was included in a package of bookkeeping adjustments, including the one-time cost of eliminating 10,000 jobs next year from its European operations, which are struggling in the face of a worsening sales slump.
Had Warned of a Loss
In all, the nation's No. 2 auto maker said the special charges would reduce its 1992 income by $7.7 billion, which will be spread over the four quarters of 1992.
Ford said results for the first three quarters would be restated to reflect the charges.


ELECTION TURNOUT HIGHEST SINCE '68
Turnout in the Presidential election reached 55.23 percent of the voting age population, the highest share since 1968, Curtis Gans, head of the Committee to Study the American Electorate, said today.
In 1968, nearly 61 percent of the voting age population went to the polls.


Top Israel Court Halts Expulsion Of Palestinians
In reprisal for a recent burst of killings, Israel ordered the immediate expulsion today of hundreds of Palestinians linked to militant Islamic groups, but the attempt was temporarily blocked while the Israeli Supreme Court heard an appeal.
About 400 Palestinians from the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip who had been rounded up by the Army in the last few days were reported to be on buses near the Lebanese border, ready to taken into a buffer zone that Israel has carved out of southern Lebanon, where they were to be left.


Sports of The Times; The Knicks Are Ewing's Team Now
NO matter what the sport, the popular cliche word is "intensity." But that's simply a synonym for being in the game beyond the game, for being in the game emotionally, almost spiritually.
And as the Knicks roar along in first place in the Atlantic Division, nobody is in the game more emotionally than Patrick Ewing.
It's as if the Knicks were his team now. His responsibility.


Brace the Coffee Table (or Make a New One Out of a Big Book)
COWBOY HIGH STYLE: THOMAS MOLESWORTH TO THE NEW WEST , by Elizabeth Clair Flood (Gibbs Smith; $39.95).
As anyone who has recently been to a New York flea market knows, cowboy style is threatening to become as cliched as the howling Santa Fe coyote.


Grant V. A. Roberts, Consultant, 48
Grant V. A. Roberts, founder and chairman of Sasco Management in Fairfield, Conn., died yesterday at his home in Southport, Conn.
He was 48 years old.
He died of cancer, his family said.


Keep Looking, Hiss Says
Responding to General Volkogonov's latest remarks, Alger Hiss said yesterday, "If he and his associates haven't examined all the files, I hope they will examine the others, and they will show the same thing."
Mr.
Lowenthal, who met with General Volkogonov several times on Mr.
Hiss's behalf, indicated surprise at the general's remarks.
He produced a fax from General Volkogonov, dated Sept. 25, saying that he had information from the intelligence services, and that "on the basis of a most careful analysis of the data, I can report to you that Alger Hiss was never an agent of the intelligence services of the Soviet Union."


Brace the Coffee Table (or Make a New One Out of a Big Book)
AMERICA'S PAINTED LADIES: THE ULTIMATE CELEBRATION OF OUR VICTORIANS , by Elizabeth Pomada and Michael Larsen;, photographs by Douglas Keister (Dutton; $40).
Tanna Abell, the owner of an 1874 Victorian house in the Queen Anne style in Oneida, N.Y., asked that it be painted in colors that would make people smile when they walked pass.


New Campaigns
*
The Seagram Company is introducing a global advertising campaign for its Champagne Perrier-Jouet line, created by Ogilvy &amp; Mather London.
The American version features the Fleur de Champagne label and carries the tagline "You can always tell a great Champagne by its bouquet.


CHRONICLE
TERRY ANDERSON was visibly moved when he went backstage at the Booth Theater after Tuesday's performance of "Someone Who'll Watch Over Me."
Shaking hands with the three actors who play hostages in Beirut, the former hostage said, "These were not portrayals of what happened, but it felt right in the way that a novel can tell you things that a factual account cannot."


4 Hurt as 2 I.R.A. Bombs Go Off On Busy London Shopping Street
The Irish Republican Army detonated two small bombs within minutes of each other this morning in the busy Oxford Street shopping district, sending Christmas shoppers screaming through the streets and causing minor injuries to four people.
The bombs, the latest strike in an I.R.A. campaign on the British mainland, caused more panic than harm.
Of those who were hurt, the police said, three were cut by flying glass and another collapsed from an asthma attack caused by shock.


Review/Dance; Movement Tailored To Those Who Move
With "A Folk Dance," an unusual premiere that bounces with nonstop exuberance, the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater continues its open-door policy toward experimental choreographers.
Donald Byrd is well within that category, and before Ailey's death in 1989, he created works for both the organization's junior and senior troupes.
But "A Folk Tale," which was performed at a gala benefit on Tuesday night at the City Center (131 West 55th Street, Manhattan) by four fabulous Ailey dancers dressed in brilliant red, is very different from Mr.
Byrd's "Shards" and "Dance at the Gym."


Brace the Coffee Table (Or Make a New One)
THE seasonal avalanche of design books is heading your way, so clear some space on the coffee table.
You have no coffee table?
Maybe you can make one out of some of these books.
They're hefty this year.
Attaching the legs can be tricky.
But if you manage to pull off this architectural caper, you should be ready to build yourself a gazebo with cedar columns.
Let Martha Stewart show you the way in her new book about renovating old houses.
No more gilding vegetables and weaving tuzzy-muzzies for the how-to queen.
Mrs.
Stewart's latest work tackles concerns of the 90's like updating your plumbing.


LAST OFFICIAL ACT: A TRIP TO MOSCOW
After returning home from a visit to China and Hong Kong aboard a military jet, several Bush Administration officials plan to tour Moscow and St.
Petersburg at Government expense -- several days before the inauguration of Bill Clinton forces them from office.
The American Embassy in Moscow has tried informally and unsuccessfully to discourage the trip, saying it is unnecessary, according to an official who was critical of the trip.


Mears Opened His Eyes
RICK MEARS, the four-time Indy 500 winner who retired from driving last Thursday, figuratively and literally awoke to the realization that he should quit.
"I woke up in the mornings and I wasn't excited about getting into the car," Mears said in a telephone conference yesterday, his first public statement since retiring.
"And that was the first thing that told me."


Want to Stay a Jet? Prove It in Two Games
With only two games left in his team's disappointing season, Coach Bruce Coslet tried to get a message out to the Jets today: What's done in the last two games will affect where you are next season.
Coslet used two players, quarterback Browning Nagle and rookie tight end Johnny Mitchell, to make a point about using the last two games to leave a lasting impression with the coaching staff that will carry over to next season.


Douglas Granted Leave
Point guard SHERMAN DOUGLAS, who lost his starting job earlier in the season, temporarily left the Boston Celtics yesterday for personal reasons, the team said.
It was not known when he would return.
He played 20 minutes Tuesday night in Boston's 124-119, double-overtime victory at Minnesota but did not accompany the team to Indiana for last night's game.


N.F.L. Owners Decide To Keep Talks Going
National Football League owners concluded their meeting here today without a settlement but with a consensus that continuing talks with player representatives are preferable to attempting to implement their own free-agency system.
But the owners said they would continue to work on a plan of their own -- being referred to as Plan C -- so that if settlement talks abruptly end, the league will have a potential option of action.


ROMANIAN LEADERS BATTLE AN IMAGE
Nearly three years after the overthrow and execution of Nicolae Ceausescu, Romania's leadership continues to suffer from widespread mistrust, at home and abroad, of the sincerity of its efforts to convert the country to democracy and a free-market economy.
Typifying Western reticence, the United States in October renewed its denial of most-favored-nation trading status to Romania.
The refusal is particularly resented by the Government of President Ion Iliescu because "the clause," as it is called here, was granted to the Ceausescu dictatorship and is enjoyed today by most other former Communist countries, as well as China.


Lewis Looks Beyond the Trash Can
Lennox Lewis, boxing's other heavyweight champion, apparently hasn't abandoned his hope of fighting Riddick Bowe soon, even if it's for $3 million.
But Lewis is also making other plans, including the first two defenses of his World Boxing Council title.
Frank Maloney, Lewis's manager, said yesterday from London that Lewis would probably meet Alex Stewart or Tony Tucker in the last week in March in Las Vegas, Nev., and then face Frank Bruno in July in London.


Top Officer Set to Retire At American Electric Power
Richard E. Disbrow, chairman and chief executive of the American Electric Power Company, one of the nation's largest utilities, intends to retire in April, after the company's 1993 annual meeting, it was announced yesterday.
E.
Linn Draper Jr., American Electric's president, will succeed Mr.
Disbrow.
Mr.
Draper, who is 50, joined the company last March after a 13-year career at Gulf States Utilities, the last five as chairman, chief executive and president.


2 Radiation Overdoses Prompt Federal Inquiry
An inch-long sliver of radioactive material used in a cancer treatment broke off inside an 82-year-old Pennsylvania woman last month and may have been responsible for her death, the Nuclear Regulatory Commission says.
Experts are testing 39 people, including workers at the woman's nursing home and waste haulers, to see whether they have received substantial doses of radiation.
As a result of the woman's death and a second incident of overexposure involving an identical machine, the Nuclear Regulatory Commission has ordered users of all 24 such machines to take precautions.
The agency regulates all use of radioactive materials.


Renovated, Well Equipped And Struggling to Teach
Visitors to Ramon E. Betances School, an elementary school on the edge of downtown Hartford, do not find broken windows, crowded classrooms, indifferent teachers or any of the other obvious signs of distress seen in many inner-city schools.
The 69-year-old building was renovated in 1986, and its classrooms are bright, clean and carpeted.
The library has thousands of books, several sets of encyclopedias and a reading corner stocked with mats for children to sit on and stuffed animals to play with.


Council Set To Approve Trump Plan For Housing
The New York City Council is expected to approve Donald J. Trump's ambitious plan to build a huge apartment complex along the Hudson River today, but the vote does not mean construction will begin any time soon or that the financially troubled Mr.
Trump will be able to build it, real-estate experts said.
Although a handful of Manhattan lawmakers have said that they will oppose the project because they believe it is too big, Council leaders expect the vast majority of 51 members, most from other boroughs, to vote for it.
The Council Speaker, Peter F. Vallone, supports the project.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
AN electrical outlet that sparks, will not hold a plug tightly, is cracked or functions only sporadically can cause a fire or a shock and should be replaced.
The job is not difficult, but great care must be taken to insure that power to the outlet is off during the repair and that the new outlet is installed correctly so it is safe.
If you live in an apartment or condominium, find out before starting the project whether amateurs are allowed to perform electrical repairs.
Call the building superintendent, or check your lease or ownership agreement.


I.B.M. Stock Off Again
Wall Street continued its flight from I.B.M. stock yesterday.
One day after the computer maker announced it would have a record loss, its stock fell another $4.25, to $51.875.
With a $6.75 drop Tuesday, I.B.M.'s stock now lies at its lowest level since 1981.
Business Day, page D1.


Brace the Coffee Table (or Make a New One Out of a Big Book)
WHEN ART BECAME FASHION: KOSODE IN EDO-PERIOD JAPAN , by Dale Carolyn Gluckman and Sharon Sa dako Takeda (Los Angeles County Museum of Art, $35.95, paperback; Weatherhill, $60, hard cover).
Beginning in the 16th century, Japanese women wore the narrow-sleeved forerunner of the kimono, a T-shaped silk robe called the kosode (pronounced ko-SO-deh).
These extraordinary gowns were dyed, stitched and painted, sometimes by prominent artists, with landscapes, intimate scenes, stylized flowers, swirling graphics and abstract motifs.
Many patterns anticipate the flat, optical imagery that emerged in 20th-century Western art.


Don't Even Think of Trying to Beat Three-Card Monte Sharks
To the Editor:
As a card manipulator and a student of three-card monte for more than 20 years, I'd like to clear up a few misconceptions in "How They Drove Three-Card Monte Out of the Carnival Circuit" (letter, Nov. 30).
David I. Goldenberg refers to "the honest dealer" of three-card monte.
There is no such thing.
The game was conceived as a swindle from the start and was never meant to be played fairly.
In fact, three-card monte cannot be played fairly.
Why?
Because every monte dealer knows that if the cards are thrown fairly, even the dullest player can follow the right card -- no matter how fast the cards are thrown.
The monte dealer must cheat to make it any kind of game at all.


INSIDE
More Good Economic Data
Both industrial production and the construction of new homes increased in November, as the nation's economy continued a slow but steady expansion.
Page D1.
A New Chief for H.U.D.
Clinton aides say former Mayor Henry G. Cisneros of San Antonio will be named Secretary of Housing and Urban Development.
Page B20.
Bound for Moscow
Having already toured China a month before their jobs end, several Bush appointees plan to visit Russia at Government expense.
Page A21.
Settlement in Sex Case
A former Harvard psychiatrist accused of seducing a patient and driving him to commit suicide will pay his family $1 million.
Page A24.


Where Skiers Are Clocked And Lauded for Speeding
Races and other winter competitions have long been a staple for weekend skiers seeking more than the perfect turn.
Speed skiing is the latest of these events to trickle down to the recreational skier.
On Saturday, skiers who have wondered how fast they could ski straight downhill can find out at Hunter Mountain, N.Y., at the first Eastern Citizen's Speed Skiing competition.


Birth-Control Implant Gains Among Poor Under Medicaid
Since Norplant was introduced two years ago, thousands of poor women have flocked to health clinics, hospitals, private doctors and Planned Parenthood affiliates around the country to get the contraceptive implant, which is covered by Medicaid in all 50 states and in the District of Columbia.
In what some see as a troubling paradox, truly poor women can get Norplant more easily than those who have modest incomes -- women who are neither poor enough to be covered by Medicaid nor with enough money to pay the entire cost.


Official Tries to Reverse Burger King's Marketing Record
IN Burger King's current marketing campaign, an MTV host, Dan Cortese, declares, "I love this place," as he mugs his way through a series of rapid-cut ads pitching the fast-food chain's new table service.
Now that Burger King has been running its "BK TeeVee" campaign for a couple of months, it seems fair to ask whether others are embracing Burger King and its table service as eagerly as Mr.
Cortese, who in the ads elicits enthusiastic reviews from the customers and crew members he interviews in Burger King outlets.


Choosing Wars of Conscience
President Bush, in a valedictory mood, told a Texas audience on Tuesday that despite its victory in the cold war against Communism, America must be prepared to wage lesser wars to secure global stability.
Don't abandon countries like Somalia when disaster strikes, he pleaded, and be prepared to intervene when the stakes "warrant" and where limited force can be effective.
On the need to respond, Mr.
Bush speaks for his country.
Two of three Americans think Washington has a responsibility to provide military assistance in troubled regions.
Moreover, according to a new New York Times/CBS News Poll, most people accept that Americans will have to remain in Somalia from three to six months or longer.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about President-elect Bill Clinton's economic conference misidentified the woman talking to Robert B. Reich, the Labor Secretary-designate.
She was Alice M. Rivlin, Mr.
Clinton's choice for Deputy Budget Director.


Brace the Coffee Table (or Make a New One Out of a Big Book)
AMERICA'S PAINTED LADIES: THE ULTIMATE CELEBRATION OF OUR VICTORIANS , by Elizabeth Pomada and Michael Larsen;, photographs by Douglas Keister (Dutton; $40).
Tanna Abell, the owner of an 1874 Victorian house in the Queen Anne style in Oneida, N.Y., asked that it be painted in colors that would make people smile when they walked pass.


Harry A. Gotimer 3d, Admiralty Lawyer, 45
Harry A. Gotimer 3d, a New York admiralty lawyer and teacher, died in Massachusetts on Saturday.
He was 45 and lived in New Hyde Park, L.I.
He died of a heart attack at a motel along the Cape Cod Canal where he was investigating a marine accident, said Frank Nolan, a friend and former partner in New York.


Brace the Coffee Table (or Make a New One Out of a Big Book)
COWBOY HIGH STYLE: THOMAS MOLESWORTH TO THE NEW WEST , by Elizabeth Clair Flood (Gibbs Smith; $39.95).
As anyone who has recently been to a New York flea market knows, cowboy style is threatening to become as cliched as the howling Santa Fe coyote.


Louise L. Hoxie, 75, an Educator And a Scholar of the Presidency
Louise L. Hoxie, an educator, died Monday at Huntington Hospital.
She was 75 and lived in Oyster Bay, L.I.
She died of complications from diabetes, her family said.


Fracas Leads Board to End A Meeting
Tensions over the "Children of the Rainbow" curriculum caused an uproar at a New York City Board of Education meeting last night, as ideological antagonists shouted and at times pushed one another, forcing an abrupt adjournment of the heated session.
When H. Carl McCall, the board's president, directed security guards to clear the room, more than 60 people were still waiting to speak, mostly on the disputed curriculum, which includes passages teaching respect for gay people.


Hints of Planets Beyond Solar System
The Hubble Space Telescope has photographed broad disks of gas and dust grains surrounding 15 newly formed stars.
Astronomers say this is the strongest evidence yet that planets could exist beyond the solar system and may even be a common occurrence.
Examining the pictures, the astronomers said yesterday, was like looking back and seeing how the solar system probably appeared soon after the Sun was formed 4.5 billion years ago.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-23  SERB BRANDED AS WAR CRIMINAL  The U.S. named President Slobodan Milosevic of Serbia and other important Serbian and Croatian figures as possible war criminals who should be tried.
A1  BOSNIA FIGHTING INTENSIFIES  Fighting in Bosnia intensified near the Serbian border despite the opening in Geneva of talks among foreign ministers of 29 countries aimed at ending the war.
A22


COMPANY NEWS
CLOROX CO., Oakland, Calif., said it had purchased the household cleaning products business of Dow Brands Inc. in Argentina.
The purchase price was not disclosed.
EKCO GROUP INC., Nashua, N.H., has signed a letter of intent to acquire Kellogg Brush Manufacturing Co., Easthampton, Mass. and its wholly-owned subsidiaries, Wright-Bernet, Inc. and Cleaning Specialty Co., for $33.9 million.


Corrections
An article on Tuesday about the dispute between the New York City Schools Chancellor, Joseph A. Fernandez, and a Queens school board over a curriculum that includes lessons on gay life misstated the religion of Mr.
Fernandez's spokesman, James S. Vlasto.
He is Greek Orthodox, not Roman Catholic.


RUSSIAN GENERAL RETREATS ON HISS
The Russian official who was reported to have cleared Alger Hiss of spying for the Soviet Union says that he was "not properly understood," and that he only meant to say he found no evidence of the charges in the K.G.B. documents to which he had access.
The official, Gen.
Dmitry A. Volkogonov, a military historian who has been closely involved in studying various Soviet-era archives, said that at Mr.
Hiss's request he had searched through K.G.B. files for the 1930's and 1940's, and in them he found only one mention of Mr.
Hiss, in a list of diplomats at the United Nations.


Taiwan's Parties Test Limits of New Freedom
With the same fervor that helped build Taiwan's economic miracle, candidates are bustling about the island in preparation for landmark legislative elections on Saturday, vigorously plastering walls with posters, denouncing each other from sound trucks, bribing voters with gifts and cash, and in one case reportedly even trying to burn down a rival's headquarters.
The campaigning is as chaotic as Taipei traffic, and it marks a sharp break from the orderly autocracy with which Taiwan was governed until a few years ago.
The elections this week are widely regarded as a milestone in Taiwan's transition from a harshly repressive authoritarian system to a no-holds-barred democracy.


Menorahs of Every Shape and Size
MENORAHS, whether made in factories or by children or artists, all topped by nine candles, oil lamps or electric lights, will be lighted during the eight nights of Hanukkah, beginning Saturday.
Some particularly distinctive menorahs are on view in Manhattan at the Michael Ende Gallery, which specializes in Jewish ceremonial objects.
All are limited editions, priced from $900 to $35,000, and are mainly by Mr.
Ende, who works in Jerusalem, where he has a second gallery.


Brace the Coffee Table (or Make a New One Out of a Big Book)
THE SPORTING LIFE: A PASSION FOR HUNTING AND FISHING ,
text by Laur
ence Sheehan, with Carol Sama Shee
han and Kathryn George; photographs by William Stites (Clarkson N. Potter
; $40).
Arnold Gingrich, the editor and angler, once remarked of fly-fishing: "You will meet, if not a better class of people, a better class of fish." You will meet both in "The Sporting Life: A Passion for Hunting and Fishing."


21 Months of 'Shock Therapy' Resuscitates Polish Economy
An economic success story is taking shape in Poland, three years after the country became the first in Eastern Europe to risk the rigors of "shock therapy."
Industrial production, which declined a precipitous 39 percent in 1990 and 1991, is on the rise, and Poland is on track this year to become the first among former Communist nations to record annual economic growth.


U.N. Sends Peacekeeping Force To Supervise Mozambique Truce
The United Nations Security Council began its fourth peacekeeping operation of the year today, sending about 7,500 troops, police and civilian administrators to monitor a cease-fire agreement in Mozambique, disarm rival armies and organize elections.
The new force will be the 13th the United Nations is now deploying around the world and brings the number of blue-helmeted troops under its command to nearly 60,000.


Home Video
Videocassettes of many old movies sell for $15, which makes them a popular gift this year.
But for a few tapes of older films, the price can be steep.
In New York City, for example, a used copy of Disney's "Sleeping Beauty" may bring about $130. (For a new copy, make that $300.) Prices quoted in some stores for "The Little Mermaid," which sold by the millions for less than $25 in 1990 and 1991, run from $100 to $150, new or used.
The problem is that Disney withdrew the film from distribution in 1991 and the supply has since dried up, as it has for other Disney titles similarly withdrawn, like "Lady and the Tramp" and "Cinderella" (both about $150 used).


MIDWEEK REPORT
Week 16  Pittsburgh lost but claimed a division championship.
Washington and Miami won but failed to nail down playoff spots.
Atlanta won but was eliminated.
Go figure.
It was that kind of weekend.
Only Buffalo gained a playoff berth last weekend, bringing the list to five, including San Francisco, Dallas, New Orleans and the Steelers, the only division champion so far.
The Falcons and three other teams -- the Raiders, the Rams and the Giants -- were eliminated, bringing that list to 12.


Brace the Coffee Table (or Make a New One Out of a Big Book)
OF HOUSES AND TIME: PERSONAL HISTORIES OF AMERICA'S NATIONAL TRUST PROPERTIES ,
by William Seale (Harry N. Abrams,
in association with the National Trust for Historic Preservation; $45).
Houses don't need to talk.
The architecture and furnishings tell the social habits, style and culture of an era.
In "Of Houses and Time," William Seale, an architectural historian and restorer, chronologically depicts more than 250 years of American history by charting the inhabitants, architecture and interiors of 17 National Trust houses.


Review/Theater; The Night Before Christmas Full of Swing and Spirit
Dancing mice on a New York stage are nothing new at Christmastime.
But what about dancing chitlins?
Dancing Christmas stockings?
Eight fine reindeer with glittering antlers?
They are all to be found through Sunday at the Apollo Theater (253 West 125th Street, Harlem), where a lively show titled "The Night Before Christmas: A Musical Fantasy" is staking a claim to vie with Balanchine's "Nutcracker" and the Radio City Christmas Spectacular as a holiday perennial.


Fischer Said to Plan a 2d Match in Yugoslavia
A day after he was indicted in Washington for violating international economic sanctions against Yugoslavia, Bobby Fischer, the former world chess champion, was reported by a Belgrade newspaper today to be planning another match in Yugoslavia in March.
A Belgrade daily, Vecernje Novosti, reported that Mr.
Fischer's promoter, Jezdimir Vasiljevic, would sponsor a match in Belgrade and Spain between Mr.
Fischer and Yugoslavia's top player, Ljubomir Ljubojevic.
Facing Heavy Penalties
The United States Government announced Tuesday that Mr.
Fischer had been charged with violating the law for playing a $5 million match with Boris Spassky of Russia in Yugoslavia this fall.


Critic's Notebook; Beatlemania's Ghosts And Paul McCartney
"I look around and I get the feeling of deja vu, like I've been here before," Paul McCartney said from the stage of the Ed Sullivan Theater last Friday evening, during a concert that was taped for an MTV "Up Close" program, to be shown on Feb. 3.
Mr.
McCartney had been there before, of course: the Beatles made their first big impact on the United States with a performance televised from that theater on Feb. 9, 1964.
In some ways, he has been held prisoner there.
Mr.
McCartney was 21 years old then, and his mission was to transplant Beatlemania to the lucrative American market.
Now he is 50, and his agenda is more complex, partly because of what he and his three friends started on that first visit.


Bankers Split on Deregulation as Stimulus
Amid the hours of presentations at the economic conference in Little Rock, Ark., Monday and Tuesday and among the various programs offered for rejuvenating the economy, one of the ideas that seemed to whet President-elect Bill Clinton's appetite was bank deregulation.
This involved the notion that banks could be expected to unleash an outpouring of new capital into the economy if the Government simply relaxed regulations on lending -- an $86 billion free lunch, so to speak.
"You heard the $86 billion figure; I've just been sitting here all day thinking about this," Mr.
Clinton said, noting that such an amount dwarfs the $30 billion economic stimulus package that had been under discussion by many other speakers at the conference.
Many Doubts
Many bankers, of course, are delighted that Mr.
Clinton -- a Democrat, no less -- is interested in deregulation.
But to many, the idea that it can replace Government spending is unrealistic.
Most say they are trying as hard as they can to make new loans, and that however welcome the relief, it will not spur much new lending right away.


Brace the Coffee Table (or Make a New One Out of a Big Book)
IN ARTISTS' HOMES: THE LIVING SPACES OF CONTEMPORARY ARTISTS , by Roberta Kimmel with Edith New hall; photographs by Kari Haavisto, (Clarkson N. Potter; $40).
It's hard to shake the notion of a contemporary artist living anywhere other than in a wide-open loft in a gritty part of town.


A Chip Powerhouse Is Challenged
When Samsung Electronics decided to enter the computer memory-chip business in the early 1980's, it tried to license the technology it needed from many American and Japanese companies.
"Texas Instruments refused; Motorola refused; every company refused us," recalled Kim Kwang Ho, president of Samsung's semiconductor division.
The only company that would agree, he said, was a tiny start-up in Boise, Idaho, called Micron Technology.
"Micron is our teacher, and we will always respect them," Mr.
Kim said.


Prison Problem Still Starts on Poverty Street; Real Job Training
To the Editor:
"The Inmate Riddle, and Its Moral" (editorial, Nov. 29) overlooks a key factor in why increased incarceration rates alone have failed to reduce violent crime: the need for both meaningful job training for prisoners while incarcerated and support services to encourage employment after their release.
In more than 25 years as a volunteer at New York City's Rikers Island Correctional Institute for Men, I have observed that most prisoners' minds are idle during incarceration, and almost none are offered support aimed at keeping them out of prison when they return home.
Frequently, the only people waiting for a prisoner when he's discharged are his drug dealer and his criminal friends.
More often than not, the released prisoner will return to jail in a short time.


Average Yields Are Level On Money Market Funds
The average yields offered by tax-exempt and taxable money market funds showed little change in the latest week.
But seasonal factors could temporarily push them higher in the weeks ahead.
According to the most recent survey by IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report, yields moved higher by either 1 or 2 basis points.
"It was like watching grass grow," said Walter S. Frank, chief economist at IBC/Donoghue's.
A basis point is one-hundredth of a percentage point.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a brief obituary on Friday about Julian Roth, an architectural designer, referred incorrectly to his father.
His father was Emery Roth.


New Breed of Ecologist to Lead E.P.A.
When she was growing up, Carol M. Browner spent hours hiking in the Everglades and once stayed home from school to finish a watercolor of an anhinga, a graceful and increasingly rare water bird that alighted in the pond outside her family's home in South Miami.
Now, as President-elect Bill Clinton's choice to be the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, Ms.
Browner, who turned 37 today, is about to step into one of the Government's most important posts for setting environmental policy.
It will give her not only an opportunity to admire the natural world her family says she loves but also a powerful position to help repair it.


Cuomo Offers Bailout Plan for Empire Blue Cross
Seeking to help bail out the state's largest insurer, Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo today proposed giving the company $85 million to carry it through the next few months and reduce the need for a steep rate increase.
Leaders of the Republican-controlled Senate and the Democratic-led Assembly said they agreed in principle with the Governor's plan, but the three sides have yet to decide how much money the company should receive.
Senate officials warned that they might insist on tighter state control over Empire as a condition for their support of the Governor's proposal.


New Gains for Industry and Home Building
The economy ground out gains in industrial and new-home output in November for the second straight month, complementing a buoyant performance by shoppers, Government figures showed today.
Production at the nation's factories, mines and utilities climbed four-tenths of 1 percent last month and the October gain was stronger than initially reported, according to the Federal Reserve.
These advances more than offset late-summer declines and carried the Industrial Production Index to 109.7, less than one point below its pre-recession peak in September 1990.


Uneasy Czechoslovaks Ending Free Health Care
Rain was dripping on the Prague cobblestones, and within the old walls of ward B3, the men were safely tucked in bed, eating platefuls of sausage, potatoes and lentils.
But this is where normality stopped in Thomayr Hospital.
Zdenka Zakova, a nurse for more 20 years, was studying boxes of new foreign medicines with her colleagues.
Down the hall, doctors held yet another meeting to discuss the bewildering question before them: how can they reconcile the care of the sick with the heartless rules of the marketplace?





Donations to Neediest Fund Made in Lieu of Holiday Gifts
For half a century, Irene S. Knabel and her husband, Harry, dutifully fired off a burst of holiday cards when the weather turned chilly and the Santas took to the streets.
But 10 years ago they looked at their address list and said: "Enough!" After living for so long in New York City and traveling extensively in Europe, the list had swollen to more than 200 names and it was no small feat to inscribe the cards, label the envelopes and lick the stamps.
So the Knabels decided to give the money that they would have spent on cards and postage to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
And then they spread the word that they were contributing to charity in honor of their relatives and friends instead of mailing them season's greetings.


As Talks Open in Geneva, Strife Worsens in Bosnia
Fighting in Bosnia and Herzegovina intensified near the Serbian border today despite the opening in Geneva of talks between United Nations mediators and the foreign ministers of 29 countries aimed at ending the war.
Clashes raged between Serbian and Bosnian forces near the town of Bratunac and at Gradacac and other towns near a thin Serbian-controlled corridor linking Serbian strongholds in Croatia and northern and western Bosnia with Serbia itself, witnesses and news reports said.


Where to Find It
WITH short, dark days and occasional wintry storms, this is high season for games, from board games with cards and spinners to jigsaw puzzles with 1,000 pieces.
Most years produce a fashionable new game or two.
But for some people, the most pleasurable games are from the past, from kitschy board games based on defunct television programs to stylish card games from the 1920's.
"Every decade is the heyday for a distinctive type of game," said David Galt, a New Yorker whose seven-year-old company, Games and Names, sells and rents more than 5,000 games dating from 1882 to 1976.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Russell Malone
Blue Note  West Village
Predictability in music isn't half as bad as it's made out be.
An old idea can be a friend and when dressed up a bit can have all sorts of ramifications, intellectual and emotional.
Pleasure is gained in all sorts of ways.


The Pixie Judy Troupe Finds a Home
The Pixie Judy Troupe, one of New York's oldest companies offering theater for children and families, has found a haven for the rest of the season.
The group, which for the last few years has had a vagabond existence, moving from location to location in Manhattan, will have regularly scheduled performances in the 300-seat Playhouse 91, at 316 East 91st Street.
Tomorrow, in an 11:30 A.M. celebration with Joyce Dinkins, the Mayor's wife, as host, the group will kick off its season with a performance of "The Littlest Clown." The musical, with a cast of eight, tells the story of a child growing up in a small family circus and is intended for 3- through 12-year-olds.
Tickets are $9.50 and may be reserved by calling 688-1740.


Brace the Coffee Table (or Make a New One Out of a Big Book)
UNDER THE HULA MOON: LIVING IN HAWAI'I ,
by Jocelyn Fujii
, photographs by Linny
Morris Cunningham (Crown Publishers;
$35).
What most mainlanders know of Hawaiian style is limited to the pulsating prints, neon colors and floral motifs splashed across our favorite play clothes.
But "Under the Hula Moon," Ms.
Fujii's engaging look at the style of her islands, shows us that Hawaiian style is much more than that.


Ex-Trooper Lectured And Is Sent to Prison
Saying "Nothing can justify what you did," a judge today sentenced a former state police investigator to 4 to 12 years in prison for faking fingerprint evidence in four cases.
The judge, Betty D. Friedlander of Tompkins County Court, accused the investigator, David L. Harding, of "willfully destroying or attempting to destroy public confidence in the criminal-justice system."


These Mail-Order Gifts Have an Ethnic Focus
SHOPPING by mail for the holidays has long been a practice of people who are too busy to get out to stores.
Many catalogues are now designed for the minority consumer, offering a range of products from Afrocentric movies to computer software in both English and Spanish.
Ninos, a company in Michigan, offers educational music cassettes, games and books that are based on the heritage of Hispanic people.
One book, "Nueve Dias Para Navidad/ Nine Days Before Christmas," is for children 3 to 8, and is $14.95.
The four activities in "Stickybear's Reading Room," which is a program for Macintosh computers, teach bilingual reading using sound effects, graphics and text in English and Spanish.
It is recommended for children 4 to 8, and costs $59.95.


Books of The Times; A Continent's Lively Past and Uncertain Future
The Crystal Desert
Summers in Antarctica
By David G. Campbell
308 pages. Houghton Mifflin. $21.95.
"I spent three summers in Antarctica, in places beyond the horizon of most of the rest of my species," writes David G. Campbell at the opening of his remarkable book, "The Crystal Desert: Summers in Antarctica."


Calendar: Holiday Scenes, All Around
Vintage Christmas
New-York Historical Society, 170 Central Park West, at 77th Street; (212) 873-3400.
The museum's holiday shop is selling greeting cards depicting New York as far back as 1810, including scenes of the Central Park skating pond and the Washington Square arch and photographs of Times Square and the Flat Iron Building, through Wednesday.
There also are reproductions of Victorian sheet music, magazine covers and advertisements in addition to ornaments, puzzles and toys.
Open Tuesday through Friday and Sunday, 11 A.M. to 5 P.M. (Thursdays until 8 P.M.).
No charge for admission to the shop.
Armory Crafts
Seventh Regiment Armory, Park Avenue and 66th Street; (914) 679-7278.
More than 150 artists will sell such handmade items as woven scarfs, gold earrings, ceramic vases, wooden trays, tapestries and leather accessories.
Open tomorrow, 3 to 9 P.M.; Saturday, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.; Sunday, noon to 5 P.M.
Admission is $6 for one day or $8 for a three-day pass; children under 12, no charge.
Holiday Flowers
Brooklyn Botanic Garden, 1000 Washington Avenue, off Eastern Parkway, Prospect Heights; (718) 622-4433.
The garden's holiday show in the Steinhardt Conservatory runs through Jan. 3.
It features "trees" constructed from red and pink poinsettias in addition to amaryllis, calla lilies, freesias, wreaths and swags.
Open Tuesday through Sunday, 10 A.M. to 4 P.M. (closed Christmas Day).
No charge.
Christmas Finery
Singer's Brooklyn; (718) 875-9084.
Lou Singer, a tour guide, will lead a bus tour through the Mill Basin, Bensonhurst, Dyker Heights and Bay Ridge neighborhoods in Brooklyn to see the Christmas lights and decorations at private homes.
The tour, offered every night through Jan. 1, from 5 to 11 P.M., includes an optional dinner at a Russian restaurant.
Reservations are required.
Tickets are $25; dinner is $20.
Plant Sale
Staten Island Botanical Garden, 1000 Richmond Terrace, off Snug Harbor Road; (718) 273-8200.
The garden's annual sale, featuring poinsettias, evergreen wreaths, amaryllis, swags and live Christmas trees, will be held daily through Wednesday, 10 A.M. to 4 P.M.
No charge for admission.
Antiques Boutique
Irvington Thrift Shop, 1534 Second Avenue (80th Street); (212) 879-4555.
Jewelry, furniture, crystal, clothing and silver will be for sale at the thrift shop, which benefits the Irvington Institute for Medical Research, through Dec. 31.
Open daily, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M. (until 8 P.M. on Wednesdays and Thursdays).
No charge for admission.
Victorian Christmas
Newark Museum, 49 Washington Street, at Central Avenue, Newark; (201) 596-6550.
Ballantine House, a part of the museum, will be decorated with ornaments, toys and greenery through Jan. 24.
Tours will be offered Wednesday through Friday at 12:30, 1:30 and 2:30 P.M.
Open Wednesday through Sunday, noon to 5 P.M.
No charge.
Glass Wares
New York Experimental Glass Workshop, 647 Fulton Street (Rockwell Place), Brooklyn; (718) 625-3685.
The annual holiday exhibition and sale, featuring functional items and art work, runs through Jan. 4.
Open Monday through Friday, noon to 6 P.M.; Saturday and Sunday, noon to 5 P.M.
No charge.
Hand-Thrown Pots
Baldwin Potters, 534 La Guardia Place, off West Third Street; (212) 475-9742.
A sale of vases, bowls, mugs and platters will be held on Saturday and Sunday, from 1 to 6 P.M.
No charge for admission.
Candlelight Christmas
Boscobel Restoration, Scenic Route 9D, eight miles north of Bear Mountain Bridge, Garrison-on-Hudson, N.Y.; (914) 265-3638.
Candlelight tours of Boscobel, a 19th-century house with Federal furnishings decorated for the holidays in period style, will be offered tomorrow through Sunday, from 5 to 7 P.M.
Admission is $5; those 62 and older, $4; children 6 to 14, $2.50.
Irving Homestead
Sunnyside, West Sunnyside Lane off Route 9, Tarrytown, N.Y.; (914) 631-8702.
Sunnyside, the home of Washington Irving, will be decorated with 19th-century ornaments and greenery during candlelight tours tomorrow through Sunday, from 5 to 9 P.M.
There will also be caroling around an outdoor bonfire.
Admission is $7.50; children 6 to 17, $5.
Reservations are required.


United Way: Leaner and Needier
All charities are squeezed this year by the recession.
Past donors are now in food lines themselves.
For annual United Way campaigns now under way, there's also the lingering taint of last winter's scandal at the United Way of America -- a threat because United Ways are collectively the nation's largest fund-raisers.
The scandal did some good.
Financial abuses at the United Way of America have been halted.
New management is in place.
And some rusty old habits are being discarded.


Brace the Coffee Table (or Make a New One Out of a Big Book)
THE RANDOM HOUSE BOOK OF HOW THINGS WERE BUILT ,
by David J. Brown (Random House
; $15).
In the spirit of trying to satisfy inquisitive children is this informative work.
Young readers -- although recently a 40-year-old announced that he wanted the book, too -- will find out how things like the Pompidou Center were built. (And if they don't know what the Pompidou Center is, they can find that out, too.) More than 100 drawings, with diagrams and cross sections, depict edifices as diverse as the Hoover Dam and Machu Picchu.
A glossary of architectural terms -- do your children know what a cofferdam is? do you? -- will make buildings seem less imposing and more like the magnificent constructs they are.


Brace the Coffe Table (or Make a New One Out of a Big Book)
ELSIE DE WOLFE: A DECORATIVE LIFE,
by Nina Campbell and Caroline See
bohm (Clarkson N. Potter
; $35).
Elsie de Wolfe (1865-1950) was the first in a long line of decorating grandes dames who preached the gospel of simplicity and suitability while speaking in italics.
"I could
steal
for beauty," she once said. "I could
kill
for it."


France Opposes Air Strikes
The French Government said today that it favored enforcing a ban on flights over Bosnia and Herzegovina and using military force to close prison camps run by Serbians, but it opposed allied air strikes on Serbian artillery positions.
A Government spokesman said Georges Kiejman, a Deputy Foreign Minister, told a Cabinet meeting this morning that the United States had proposed pre-emptive bombing strikes against Serbian targets, but that France and Britain were opposed.


Brace the Coffee Table (or Make a New One Out of a Big Book)
AMERICA'S PAINTED LADIES: THE ULTIMATE CELEBRATION OF OUR VICTORIANS , by Elizabeth Pomada and Michael Larsen;, photographs by Douglas Keister (Dutton; $40).
Tanna Abell, the owner of an 1874 Victorian house in the Queen Anne style in Oneida, N.Y., asked that it be painted in colors that would make people smile when they walked pass.


Japanese Farmers Rally to Keep Rice Import Ban
Thousands of farmers rallied here today to protest recent hints by the Government that Japan would lift its ban on rice imports in order to prevent blocking negotiations for a new global trading treaty.
The protesters repeated their longstanding demands that Japan continue to prohibit imports of rice.
But it has become clear to many that Japan's Government will agree to liberalize rice imports, replacing the ban on foreign rice with a system of high tariffs, as requested by negotiators working on the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Named Fred Manfra radio announcer.
CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Agreed to terms with Jeff Schaefer, infielder, on a minor league contract.
National League  CINCINNATI REDS -- Promoted Darrell Rodgers, minor-league pitching coach, to assistant for baseball operations.
Agreed to terms with Bill Landrum, pitcher, on a minor league contract.
FLORIDA MARLINS -- Agreed to terms with Benito Santiago, catcher, on a two-year contract.
PITTSBURGH PIRATES -- Agreed to terms with Jay Bell, shortstop, and John Candelaria, pitcher, on one-year contracts.
SAN DIEGO PADRES -- Acquired Pat Gomez, pitcher, from the Texas Rangers for Terry Bross, pitcher.
SAN FRANCISCO GIANTS -- Named Dusty Baker manager, Bobby Bonds first-base and hitting coach, and Dick Pole pitching coach.
Announced that Bob Lillis, bench coach, and Wendell Kim, third base coach, will return to those positions and Bob Brenly, first base coach, will shift to bullpen coach.
Basketball National Basketball Association  BOSTON CELTICS -- Granted Sherman Douglas, guard, temporary leave from the team for personal reasons.
INDIANAPOLIS PACERS -- Placed Pooh Richardson, guard, on the injured list.
Activated Sean Green, guard, from the injured list.
PHOENIX SUNS -- Placed Oliver Miller, center, on the injured list.
Activated Richard Dumas, forward, from the suspended list.
Global Basketball League  GBA -- Announced that the league will assume control of the South Georgia Blues beginning Saturday.
Football  National Football League  CINCINNATI BENGALS -- Placed Anthony Munoz, offensive tackle, on the practice squad.
Released Antoine Bennett, cornerback.
Signed Tony Savage, defensive end.
Signed Elbert Turner, wide receiver, to the practice squad.
DETROIT LIONS -- Placed Leonard Burton and Blake Miller, centers, on injured reserve.
Signed Mike McDonald and Brad Leggett, centers.
SEATTLE SEAHAWKS -- Announced the retirement of Rusty Hilger, quarterback, effective immediately.
TAMPA BAY BUCCANEERS -- Waived Sidney Coleman, linebacker.
Arena Football  TAMPA BAY STORM -- Named Lary Kuharich head coach and signed him to a three-year contract.
Hockey  National Hockey League  PITTSBURGH PENGUINS -- Sent Martin Straka, right wing, to Cleveland of the International Hockey League on a four-day assignment.
Soccer  National Professional Soccer League  MILWAUKEE WAVE -- Signed Steve Morris, midfielder, to a two-year contract.
Placed Moe Suri, defender, on the 15-day disabled list.
College
CANISIUS -- Announced the resignation of Gary Friedman, women's soccer coach.
CORNELL -- Named William Hall men's assistant lacrosse coach.
SAN DIEGO STATE -- Accepted the resignation of Brian Barry, head football trainer, effective Jan. 15.


Judge Approves Seizure of Car
In what supporters called a test case of a new tactic to fight prostitution, a Superior Court judge in Hartford yesterday approved the seizure of a car used by a man accused of cruising Hartford's streets looking for prostitutes.
The judge, Carmen Espinoza, awarded the car, a 1986 Pontiac Firebird, to the Police Department after the accused, identified as Frank Cseh of Middletown, Conn., failed to appear at a hearing.
The car will probably be used in police undercover work, a state law-enforcement official said.


A Polish Capitalist's Journey From Margin to Mainstream
The explosive growth in Poland's private sector has its roots in millions of people like Rajmond Jop.
When Communism was in its death throes in the 1980's, this cherubic 26-year-old was sharpening his business skills on the edge of the system, selling used cars from West Germany, shirts from Thailand, and personal computers.
Now, he is part of the expansion of Poland's entrepreneurial ranks, owner of a used-car lot with three college friends.


People
*
Jeffrey I. Burch, advertising director at House Beautiful magazine, New York, was promoted to the additional new position of associate publisher. *
Wilkie F. Bushby, eastern advertising manager at Town &amp; Country magazine, New York, was promoted to advertising director, succeeding William David, who continues as associate publisher.


Broadway's Many Angels
TO get into the holiday spirit and do their bit to help Broadway Cares/ Equity Fights AIDS, a charity that gives money to AIDS causes, the cast and crew of "Jelly's Last Jam" have decorated a Christmas tree with costumed wicker angels.


How U.S. Can Ease Korean Tensions
To the Editor:
To the credit of the Bush Administration's handling of North Korea's alleged nuclear weapons development program, Pyongyang has accepted international inspection of its nuclear facilities.
The inspection is far from sufficient to clear all doubts surrounding North Korea's intentions or capability, but it is a good start.
We can take heart in Pyongyang's willingness to honor its obligations under the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty, which it signed in 1985.
The United States decided recently, in conjunction with the South Korean Government, to increase military pressure on North Korea by shelving plans to downsize the United States ground force stationed in South Korea and resume the Team Spirit military exercise that is scheduled for next spring.
North Korea has reacted by threatening to terminate dialogue with the South in all forms.
Pyongyang's sensitivity to the Team Spirit exercise is well known, especially to South Koreans.


Regardie's Magazine Closes Down
After struggling for three years to remain on the newsstands, Regardie's magazine, chronicler of the Washington business world, is closing, the publication's founder and president announced today.
"While it is a hard decision for myself and my publisher, there really isn't any other choice," William A. Regardie said.


CLINTON TO NAME 2 MORE TO CABINET
President-elect Bill Clinton has decided to name former Mayor Henry G. Cisneros of San Antonio to be Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, and Jesse Brown, a disabled Vietnam War veteran, as Secretary of Veterans Affairs, transition aides said today.
Mr.
Clinton spent the day at the Governor's mansion here mulling over his final Cabinet choices, and aides said he would announce the appointments of Mr.
Cisneros and Mr.
Brown at a news conference on Thursday, with others to follow later in the week.


Hail, Montana! 49ers Excited
The president of the San Francisco 49ers said today that he wanted quarterback Joe Montana to make an "uproarious" Hollywood return during San Francisco's Monday night finale against Detroit on Dec. 27.
"I think it'll be bedlam," said Carmen Policy in a telephone interview from the National Football League owners' meetings in Dallas.
"It'll be like everyone opening Christmas presents as a kid. I think it'll be a great day, or should I say, evening."


Baker a Trailblazer Of an Unexpected Sort
The Arizona Fall League was created to serve as an alternative to the Latin American winter leagues for developing young baseball players, but the neophyte league has already produced its first major league manager.
Dusty Baker, whose only managerial experience came in the Arizona league's first season this year, was named manager of the San Francisco Giants with a two-year contract yesterday.
He replaces Roger Craig, whom the club's new owners dismissed after seven years in the job.


BRIEFS
Debt  *
Massachusetts Health and Educational Facilities Authority is tentatively offering $22.9 million of tax-exempt revenue bonds for the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.
Shorter-maturity serial bonds are priced to yield from 2.75 percent in 1993 to 5.90 percent in 2006, with long-term bonds priced to yield 6.25 percent for an issue due in 2015 and 6.18 percent for another due in 2010.
Because the bonds are insured by Financial Guaranty Insurance Co., they are rated triple-A by both Moody's Investors Service Inc. and Standard &amp; Poor's Corp. *
Monroe County, Mich., is tentatively offering $85 million of tax-exempt pollution-control revenue bonds due in 2024 through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.
The bonds are for Detroit Edison Co. and for some investors are subject to the Federal alternative minimum tax.
The issue is priced to yield about 6.58 percent and, because it is insured by the Municipal Bond Investor's Assurance Corp., is rated triple-A by both Moody's and S.&amp; P.


Losing the 'Home' in 'Nursing Home'
Some of the 26 elderly residents waiting in the nursing home's recreation room suspected that the mysterious meeting they had been asked to attend was really a surprise Christmas party.
Then Jane Stewart, the home's administrator, announced that the Swiss Home would be closing at the end of January.
"I nearly had a heart attack," said Esther Liljegren, 89.
"I couldn't sleep the whole night because it is a very big shock."


San Francisco Journal; A Pharmacy for the AIDS Epidemic
Even in San Francisco's Castro district, the heart of the gay community and epicenter of the AIDS epidemic, Gerald S. used to slink into the Walgreen's pharmacy to fill his prescriptions, hoping no one would recognize him or interpret his errand.
"I'd constantly be looking over my shoulder," he said, nervously twisting a pair of gold earrings in his right ear and speaking only on the condition that his last name not be used.
"I'd go in at odd hours when no one would be around. I could never rationally explain it, but I didn't want everybody in the store to know my business. Here, I feel comfortable."


U.S. NAMES FIGURES IT WANTS CHARGED WITH WAR CRIMES
The United States named President Slobodan Milosevic of Serbia and other Serbian and Croatian political and military figures today as possible war criminals who should be tried someday by a "second Nuremberg" tribunal.
"We know that crimes against humanity have occurred, and we know when and where they occurred," Secretary of State Lawrence S. Eagleburger told delegates at a conference on the fighting in the Balkans.
"We know, moreover, which forces committed those crimes, and under whose command they operated. And we know, finally, who the political leaders are and to whom those military commanders were -- and still are -- responsible."


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
7.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
4.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.00
3.17
4.50
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.19
3.20
4.12
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.32
3.49
4.18
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.40
6.45
6.73
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.43
7.44
7.75
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.43
8.43
8.80
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.42
6.39
6.78
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Clean Up the Law of Speech
"There goes a white boy, go get him." Is that free speech or criminal talk?
Prosecutors in Kenosha, Wis., found evidence of crime in those words, which came from one of a band of black youths who proceeded to beat up a 14-year-old white.
The state's highest court ruled otherwise.
Now the U.S.
Supreme Court will decide the matter.
The case of Todd Mitchell, who uttered that racial incitement, could make clear once again what used to be fairly settled in American law: Not every utterance is constitutionally protected in the name of free speech.
It gives the Court a chance to clarify law that it muddied up last June in a cross-burning case in St.
Paul, Minn.


Skinner Gets Presidency Of Utility
Proving that there is life after a less-than-stellar run in the White House, Samuel K. Skinner, President Bush's former chief of staff, has landed a job as president of Commonwealth Edison, the utility announced yesterday.
Commonwealth Edison is the nation's third-largest electric company and may have the largest regulatory problem.
In 1990, after it finished three nuclear reactors, it asked the Illinois Commerce Commission for more than $1 billion in rate increases to pay for them, and the commission granted it $750 million in three stages.
But the Illinois Supreme Court threw out the second and third stages, told the company the first phase could be subject to refund and sent the case back to the Commerce Commission for rehearing.
A decision is due next month.


Prison Problem Still Starts on Poverty Street
To the Editor:
In "The Inmate Riddle, and Its Moral" (editorial, Nov. 29), you note a "startling contradiction" uncovered by a study conducted by the National Research Council: The rate of imprisonment is way up; yet the violent crime rate has not dropped.
You conclude that locking up more and more offenders for longer periods is not the solution to the crime problem.
The real answer is to stop crime before there's any need to send someone to prison, you declare.
You recommend deploying more police officers; making drug treatment available to all addicts who need it, and controlling criminals in ways other than incarceration, for instance through education and work programs as conditions of probation.


No Headline
Rabbi Alexander M. Shapiro, a national spokesman for Conservative Judaism who was a leader of the successful effort to ordain women as Conservative rabbis and worked to reconcile differences between the major branches of Judaism, died on Thursday at Suburban General Hospital in Philadelphia.
He was 63.
He died of heart failure, said his son-in-law, Rabbi David Ackerman.


U.S. CABINET AIDE BEGINS CHINA VISIT
The United States Commerce Secretary, Barbara H. Franklin, arrived here today with an entourage of business executives and a mandate to sell American products in a visit broadening high-level exchanges between Washington and Beijing.
Portraying the trip as a victory, the Chinese are saying it is a sign that ties between China and the United States are being normalized.
They say trade links are soon to be restored, and note that American investment in China has topped $6 billion and that the first of 7,000 American cars, worth $130 million, arrived at the Chinese docks over the weekend.


Big Companies Cloud Recovery By Cutting Jobs
The economy may be expanding modestly, even adding some jobs at last, but big companies are continuing to cut -- a trend that promises to keep the pace of recovery slow.
A recent survey of more than 800 companies by the American Management Association found that one in four companies is planning work force reductions by the middle of 1993.
That is the highest level since the research group began its survey six years ago.


INTO THE LIMELIGHT WITH: Jaye Davidson; A Star to Match A Mystery Role
THE tale of how "The Crying Game" found its sultry new star, Jaye Davidson, gives the Cinderella story a truly modern spin.
When Neil Jordan, the film's writer and director, came up with an idea that was (to put it mildly) unusual, he found himself in need of someone equally offbeat.
The pivotal role of Dil, a London singer and hairdresser with an air of mystery, was all but uncastable.
Dil had to be, among other things, poised, photogenic, black, extremely changeable and able to carry off the sleight-of-hand on which one of the film's secrets depends.
In short, Dil had to be an actress with a difference.
Many people, Stanley Kubrick among them, warned Mr.
Jordan he would never find the right performer for the part.
Some even suggested the film could not be made.
But hundreds of hopefuls auditioned to play Dil, while casting assistants combed London.
The only diffident candidate was Jaye Davidson, who had friends in the film world and was spotted at a wrap party for Derek Jarman's "Edward II." That very night, an invitation to try out for the role was offered.
It was promptly rebuffed: "I said no and staggered off," Jaye said.
"Afterward, I didn't even remember any of it happening."


A Fistful of Problems That Aren't Solved
Like the police inspector in the movie "Casablanca" who "discovered" gambling in Rick's place, Gil Stein is shocked -- shocked! -- to find that premeditated fistfighting still takes place between consenting adults in his kinder, gentler National Hockey League.
Stein, the N.H.L. president, has six weeks left as commander in chief before Gary Bettman takes control as commissioner.
Until then, Stein gets to crack down on lawbreakers.
He may choose to make a harsh example of Tie Domi and Bob Probert, who chose to make a mockery of the league's efforts to reduce fighting and clean up its image.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Rise Robots Rise
Wetlands  TriBeCa
Rise Robots Rise plays songs that keep hopping styles.
On Saturday night, Joe Mendelson would be rapping over funk chords from his guitar at one moment; the next, the beat would shift to reggae, while Derin Young and Kelli Smith sang in harmony or traded serpentine solos.
Dissonant progressive-rock, West African-style percussion and blues-rock guitar leads also took their turns.
It's a video-era idiom, zapping from style to style; if one didn't hit the spot, another would arrive within seconds.


RESULTS PLUS
HOCKEY It Ends Like This?
Although the Washington Capitals had just about every streak going for them at Hartford last night, about the only streak that survived belonged to the Whalers.
Terry Yake scored twice and four other Whalers scored as Hartford jumped to a 5-0 lead and held on for a 6-3 victory.
The victory extended Hartford's home unbeaten streak to 3-0-1, their longest such regular-season streak since January 1992.
The loss ended the Capitals' seven-game winning streak, their five-game road winning streak and the scoring streaks of Al Iafrate (10 games), Peter Bondra (8), Mike Ridley (7) and Pat Elynuik (6).
Sylvain Cote of the Capitals had an assist to extend his scoring streak to six.
The Whalers' Geoff Sanderson, Yake and Chris Govedaris scored first-period goals.
Hartford was held shotless for more than eight minutes in the second period, but Patrick Poulin and Doug Houda scored on the Whalers' first two shots.
That sent goalie Don Beaupre, who had won five straight, to the bench at 9 minutes 38 seconds after giving up five goals on 17 shots. (AP) Nordiques 5, Canadiens 1: The Nordiques maintained their dominance this season in the Battle of Quebec as Martin Rucinsky scored two goals in the victory over Montreal.
Quebec has won the first two games this season between the provincial rivals.
The Nordiques also beat Montreal twice in the preseason.
Rucinsky and Andrei Kovalenko scored in the first period and Joe Sakic added one in the second for Quebec.
Kirk Muller scored for Montreal to open the final period and bring the noisy crowd of 17,582 back into the game, but Rucinsky scored Quebec's third power-play goal of the game to decide the issue.
Mats Sundin added an insurance goal on a breakaway at 13:15 of the final period.
Montreal outshot Quebec, 36-31.
The Nordiques (17-10-6) moved into a tie with the Boston Bruins for second place in the Adams Division, two points behind Montreal (19-10-4). (AP) Oilers 4, Canucks 2: Shorthanded goals by Esa Tikkanen and Craig MacTavish against a lax Vancouver defense led the Edmonton to the victory at the Northlands Coliseum.
Tikkanen, who now has three goals in his last four games after scoring only one in his first 30, beat goaltender Kay Whitmore at 7:59 of the first period on a two-on-one break.
Vancouver defenseman Gerald Diduck was caught trying to pin Edmonton's Dave Manson behind the Edmonton net, and Tikkanen swept in front to score his second shorthanded goal of the season. (AP) BOBSLEDDING First Loss for American
Brian Shimer can't win them all.
But the American came as close as you can, losing by one hundredth of a second in his fourth World Cup bobsled competition at La Plagne, France, yesterday.
Shimer's three-event winning streak was ended by a two-time Olympic champion, Wolfgang Hoppe, of Germany in the four-man event.
Hoppe drove his team to a time of 1 minute 57.29 seconds for the two runs on the 1992 Olympic track.
Shimer's crew had 1:57.30. (AP)


Review/Dance; With a Suitcase Full of Ideas
There were gifted dancers and a wealth of ideas at work in a program presented by Janis Brenner and Dancers on Saturday night at the Cunningham Dance Studio.
But the material was strangely unaffecting and needed tightening.
If awards were given for dance names, Ms.
Brenner's "Non Sinatra Songs," a play on a Twyla Tharp title, would surely win one.
Performed to often peculiar interpretations of popular song classics, the suite of dances had some delightfully inventive moments.
A dance for a woman spinning around a half-circle of eager would-be partners was a highlight of the evening.
Laurie Shayler was the giddy solo dancer.


Brace the Coffe Table (or Make a New One Out of a Big Book)
THE NATURALLY ELEGANT HOME: ENVIRONMENTAL STYLE ,
by Janet Marin
elli with Robert Kourik (Little,
Brown
; $45).
Solar A-frames had a problem: they weren't pretty.
"The Naturally Elegant Home: Environmental Style" offers proof that a home can be both environmentally responsive and pretty.


Marketer Named Heir Apparent at Merck
Merck &amp; Company, the world's largest drug maker, crowned a 42-year-old marketing executive, Richard J. Markham, yesterday as heir apparent to the chairman and chief executive, Dr.
P.
Roy Vagelos.
Mr.
Markham will become Merck's president and chief operating officer on Jan. 1.
Dr.
Vagelos has said he plans to retire shortly after turning 65 in October 1994.


UNREST RAVAGING TOURISM IN EGYPT
The tourist industry, a bulwark of the Egyptian economy, is in danger of collapse after a series of attacks by Islamic militants against foreign tourists, including one in November that killed a Briton.
The decline is being compared to that during the Persian Gulf war when Europeans and Americans virtually stopped traveling to the Middle East.


Neilson and Rangers Hit Road Dragging
Roger Neilson figures he got just about as many hours of sleep Tuesday night as goals his team scored against Calgary earlier that evening: zero.
Late to bed in the suburbs after pondering the Rangers' 3-0 loss to the visiting Flames, the Rangers' coach suffered through a short night.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Enja All-Stars
Sweet Basil  88 Seventh Avenue South  West Village  Through Sunday
Judging from the pale turnout on Tuesday night for the Enja All-Stars, Enja, a European jazz label, hasn't found its way into the national consciousness.
The label, which has been the home for everything from mainstream jazz to compositionally adventurous jazz-related music, didn't quite bring out its real all-stars.
But the band, featuring the saxophonist Willie Williams, the vibraphonist Gust William Tsilis, the pianist Uri Caine, the bassist Michael Formanek and the drummer Cecil Brooks 3d, comprises a handful of fine, often overlooked musicians.


33 Students Are Hospitalized After Brooklyn School Lunch
More than 30 students, many complaining of stomach pains, nausea and headaches, were taken to hospitals yesterday afternoon when they became ill following lunch at their Brooklyn elementary school.
By late yesterday, most of the 33 students who were hospitalized were treated and released.
The principal of Public School 306 in East New York, Arthella Addei, said she was told by hospital officials that the illness afflicting the students appeared to be mild food poisoning.


Bond Insurer Hit by a Voter Revolt
The fallout from a voter revolt in Brevard County, Fla., reached Wall Street yesterday, pulling down the stock price of the nation's largest municipal-bond insurer.
The reaction of stockholders may also be an early warning for investors in a popular version of local government borrowing that the voters in Florida are challenging.
The stock of the Municipal Bond Investors Assurance Corporation dropped more than $5 in early trading but rebounded a bit and ended $1.75 lower, at $61.625, on the New York Stock Exchange.


CHRONICLE
MICHEL PETRUCCIANI and GILDA BUTTA are both pianists, so when they marry, on Monday, they will have their reception at the Village Vanguard.
"Why not?" said Mr.
Petrucciani, a jazz pianist.
"It is the temple of jazz, and lots of musicians will be there."
The ceremony will take place at St.
Ann's Church on East 12th Street in the afternoon.
The wedding party, which Mr.
Petrucciani predicted would last till dawn, will be a first in the 59-year history of the Greenwich Village club.
"Even I didn't get married there," said LORRAINE GORDON, the owner, and widow of Max Gordon, the founder.


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday about a new microwave television transmission system misidentified the company involved.
It is the V. S. Hovnanian Group.


Court Allows 3d Trial in '63 Medgar Evers Slaying
A bitterly divided Mississippi Supreme Court refused today to block the trial of Byron De La Beckwith, paving the way for him to be tried for the third time for the 1963 murder of the civil rights leader Medgar Evers.
The court voted 4 to 3 to deny Mr.
Beckwith's claim that the case should be dismissed without going to trial.
In doing so, it defused for the moment an emotionally charged issue.
Many blacks in Mississippi said dismissing the case would compound what they considered miscarriages of justice when Mr.
Beckwith was allowed to go free during the civil rights era.


Brasilia Journal; In a 'Fantasy' Capital, Collor Plays the Conjurer
Flies from the nearby savanna buzzed through open windows of a library here today while Fernando Collor de Mello confidently outlined his goals for governing Brazil through 1995.
Reaching over notepads marked "Presidencia da Republica," Brazil's President, wearing a linen suit in the heat, pulled from a leather case his 1993 agenda for modernizing South America's largest nation.


Bridge
When the dummy has an embarrassment of riches, a declarer often has trouble deciding what he should abandon and what preserve.
An interesting example is the diagramed deal from a Regional Swiss Team Championship in Cincinnati in October.
Sitting South was John Solodar of Manhattan, whose long list of successes include a world title in 1981.
He landed in three no-trump after an opening bid on his left and a failure to respond on his right.
West led the club king and shifted to a spade, removing dummy's ace.


Prison Problem Still Starts on Poverty Street; Teach Them Respect
To the Editor:
Your editorial on the overcrowding of jails (Nov. 29) lists as the three "effective ways to fight crime": more police, greater availability of drug treatment and punishment other than incarceration.
Why is it that the most basic strategy for fighting crime is unmentionable?
It is a little late to teach the person to abide by the law after he has robbed the bank.


Gerald Storzer, Professor, 54
Prof.
Gerald H. Storzer, who taught French language and literature and African and Caribbean literature at Brooklyn College, died yesterday at Tisch Hospital of New York University.
He was 54 and lived in Brooklyn.
He died of a coronary thrombosis, the college said.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY PEACEMAKING IN CROWN HEIGHTS
For the first time since the racial violence in Crown Heights 16 months ago, Mayor Dinkins met face to face with representatives of the Lubavitcher Hasidim and other Orthodox Jews who have criticized him harshly for his leadership during the civil disturbance and its aftermath.
A1.
COUNCIL'S YEA WILL NOT START TRUMP PLAN
The New York City Council is expected to approve Donald J. Trump's ambitious plan to build a huge apartment complex along the Hudson River, but the vote does not mean construction will begin any time soon or that the financially troubled Mr.
Trump will be able to build it, real-estate experts said.
B3.


Brace the Coffee Table (or Make a New One Out of a Big Book)
IN ARTISTS' HOMES: THE LIVING SPACES OF CONTEMPORARY ARTISTS , by Roberta Kimmel with Edith New hall; photographs by Kari Haavisto, (Clarkson N. Potter; $40).
It's hard to shake the notion of a contemporary artist living anywhere other than in a wide-open loft in a gritty part of town.


Elaine Whitelaw, 77, March of Dimes Backer, Dies
Elaine Whitelaw, for half a century the chief fund raiser and a major force for the March of Dimes, died on Tuesday at a hospice in Manhattan.
She was 77.
She died of cancer, said her daughter, Patricia Snyderman of San Francisco.


Brace the Coffee Table (or Make a New One Out of a Big Book)
WHEN ART BECAME FASHION: KOSODE IN EDO-PERIOD JAPAN , by Dale Carolyn Gluckman and Sharon Sa dako Takeda (Los Angeles County Museum of Art, $35.95, paperback; Weatherhill, $60, hard cover).
Beginning in the 16th century, Japanese women wore the narrow-sleeved forerunner of the kimono, a T-shaped silk robe called the kosode (pronounced ko-SO-deh).
These extraordinary gowns were dyed, stitched and painted, sometimes by prominent artists, with landscapes, intimate scenes, stylized flowers, swirling graphics and abstract motifs.
Many patterns anticipate the flat, optical imagery that emerged in 20th-century Western art.


We Have to Retool Workers, Not Machines
To the Editor:
"Turning Off the War Machine" by Ann Markusen, director of the Rutgers University Project on Regional and Industrial Economics (Op-Ed, Nov. 22), gives bad advice on how to do the right thing.
In today's highly competitive global economy, defense contractors are not going to be successful very often if they attempt to convert their facilities to serve civilian applications.
In recent years many of America's premier companies have suffered heavy losses in their attempts to enter new business areas, even though these areas appeared to be logical extensions of their businesses.


No Headline
Free subway and commuter rail passes for transit workers are perquisites that have been around almost as long as the trains themselves.
But an audit has found that the Metropolitan Transportation Authority has been lax in keeping track of the free passes it provides to its employees and their families, resulting in $10 million in lost fares.
The audit, conducted by State Comptroller Edward V. Regan's office and released yesterday, found that 52 percent of the authority's former employees did not return the passes when they left their jobs and that little effort was made to recall them.
In many cases, free passes were used by the spouses and children of employees who had left the authority.


MARINES ESCORT FOOD TO HUNGRY
With more firepower than this small town had ever seen, more than 700 American marines and French troops secured the local airstrip today and guarded a truckload of food as it moved from a warehouse to an orphanage.
It was the first food actually delivered to the hungry under the protection of the American-led military operation in Somalia.
The amount of food delivered was meager compared to the quantities that relief agencies have managed to distribute even before the arrival of the marines, although there were plenty of television cameras to record the delivery.


Dinkins Confronts Jewish Critics in Crown Heights
For the first time since the Crown Heights racial violence 16 months ago, Mayor David N. Dinkins met yesterday with Jewish representatives who have criticized him the most harshly for his leadership during the disturbance and its aftermath.
The meeting, with members of the Lubavitcher Hasidim and other Orthodox Jews, took place around a dining-room table in the Crown Heights home of a Lubavitcher businessman lasted two and a half hours.
Five or six religious and community leaders, from the Brooklyn neighborhoods of Crown Heights, Borough Park and Williamsburg, the Lower East Side in Manhattan and other neighborhoods, addressed the Mayor on subjects ranging from police protection during the four days of violence to general access to City Hall.


INVESTIGATOR FINDS EVIDENCE OF CRIMES IN HOUSE BANK USE
After a nine-month inquiry, the Justice Department special counsel investigating the House bank concluded today that some lawmakers had probably committed crimes at the sloppily run financial institution that became a politically potent symbol of Congressional excess.
Without identifying any former or current lawmakers suspected of wrongdoing, Malcolm R. Wilkey, a retired Federal appeals court judge appointed by Attorney General William P. Barr to conduct a preliminary inquiry, found that "actual criminal conduct by some members appears to have taken place." 'Serious Problems' for Some
Judge Wilkey urged Mr.
Barr to carry out a broader criminal investigation of possible fraud and other crimes involving a small number of lawmakers who would never be identified by the Justice Department unless they were indicted.
In response, the Attorney General announced today that he was setting up a special five-person unit within the department's criminal division to carry out the inquiry.


Economic Scene; More Advisers, Less Council?
JAWS dropped last week on word of the appointment of Laura D'Andrea Tyson to head Bill Clinton's Council of Economic Advisers.
To win this most coveted job in the economics profession, Ms.
Tyson had to beat out a half-dozen high-profile heavyweights, some of whom had been tirelessly lobbying the Clinton transition team.
And until a few months ago, Ms.
Tyson was known simply as a competent scholar who had thrown in her lot with the trendy minority of economists and political scientists intent on waging techno-warfare with Europe and Japan.
Her surprised colleagues concede the 45-year-old University of California professor made her own luck -- that in her encounters with Mr.
Clinton she was exceptionally persuasive and well organized.
On reflection, that should not have been surprising: Ms.
Tyson is a very successful teacher, as well as a polemicist with a flair for winning arguments without making enemies.


Dr. Elders's Bully Pulpit
In the five years she has served as director of the State Health Department in Arkansas, Dr.
Joycelyn Elders has been remarkably forthright in facing the daunting facts of adolescent life.
She has spoken out candidly on AIDS, sexual abuse of children and the necessity of sex education and easy access to contraceptives for teen-agers.
She is unflinchingly realistic about adolescent sex, a necessity when a quarter of sexually active teen-age women under 18 have had four or more sexual partners.
"I really feel we must put our children first and I'm willing to do whatever we have to do to save the children," she said.


Swingtime Hits Jamaica and Faldo Is the Impresario
Nick Faldo's hold on his position as the No. 1 golfer in the world goes far beyond possessing a swing that is now being modeled on the secrets of Sam Snead and Ben Hogan.
The force of Faldo's grip at the top is conveyed in his relentless desire to improve, in his chilling demeanor during competition and perhaps most graphically in the torrent of tears he couldn't control after winning his third British Open, at Muirfield, Scotland in July.


NBC's New Worry: Will Dana Carvey Stay With Network?
In the latest bizarre twist in the machinations of who will win the battle over the stars of late-night television, NBC and the agent for one of its stars, Dana Carvey, could not agree yesterday over whether Mr.
Carvey has a long-term deal with the network or whether he will be available to jump to another network sometime early next year.
The dispute further muddied the critical decisions NBC now must make in its efforts to retain the services of its late-night star David Letterman.


In Sex Case, Witness Talks Of Confusion
Testimony today from the mildly retarded young woman at the heart of the Glen Ridge sex assault trial made it clear that she was confused about her allegiances in the case.
She testified that she had lied on Tuesday when she said she voluntarily performed fellatio on one of the defendants.
But she was reluctant to say more.


Psychiatrist Settles Suit In a Death for $1 Million
Margaret Bean-Bayog, the former Harvard psychiatrist accused of seducing a medical student who was her patient and driving him to commit suicide, has paid the student's family $1 million to settle a wrongful death lawsuit, a lawyer for the student's family said.
The settlement, ending a lawsuit brought by the family of Paul Lozano, who committed suicide in April 1991, was reached on Tuesday and announced today after two weeks of negotiations, said the family's lawyer, Andrew C. Meyer Jr.
The case became public last spring after Mr.
Meyer filed about 3,000 pages of documents in Middlesex Superior Court, including materials involving sexual fantasies and "flashcards" in Ms.
Bean-Bayog's handwriting, to support the family's accusations of malpractice and wrongful death.


Prison Problem Still Starts on Poverty Street; Real Drug Treatment
To the Editor:
It is refreshing to see accolades for prison-based drug therapeutic communities in your Nov. 16 report.
In your article, Dr.
Harry K. Wexler attests to a success rate of 75 percent at the Stay'n Out therapeutic community at the Arthur Kill Correctional Facility for those who complete three years of treatment.
We can also vouch for its effectiveness for inmates who spend fewer than three years in the program.
Those who enroll on release in the Stay'n Out after-care facility, Serendipity House, have an even higher success rate.
Stay'n Out is used as a model for prison-based drug programs throughout the world.
We, as coordinators of training, using immersion training techniques, have instructed corrections personnel from as far away as Norway.
Gov.
Ann Richards of Texas chose Stay'n Out to train key personnel who will open her state's new visions program, which will eventually serve 20,000 inmates.


Insurers Sifting Through Claims
Jeanne Calabrese perched precariously on top of a ladder, taking pictures of a tangle of shingles, branches, furniture and wood beams that were once a master bedroom.
"Oh my God, oh my God, oh my God, this is horrible," said Mrs.
Calabrese, a claims supervisor at Aetna Life and Casualty, as she assessed the wreckage of a split-level ranch house in Port Washington.
On Friday, a pine tree had smashed into the roof, and now, she was there to estimate the damage.


Ideology Seems to Doom Cabinet Contender
A senior official of the Clinton transition associated with the far left wing of American politics appears to have fallen as the first victim of a battle to shape the ideological character of the incoming Administration.
A week ago the official, Dr.
Johnnetta B. Cole, president of Spelman College, was regarded by some in the Clinton organization as a strong possibility for appointment as Secretary of Education.
Now, after a run of bad publicity, her chances of being named to any job requiring Senate confirmation appear near nil.
The furor began last Friday with the publication in The Forward, a weekly Jewish newspaper, of an article detailing her association with Marxist-oriented groups,


PARENT &amp; CHILD
MANY children are kept from doing their best in elementary school because of slightly below average skills at reading and writing.
These children are not learning disabled, so they don't qualify for special classes and support services.
They are simply struggling harder or less effectively than their classmates.
"For most children who are having problems in the first grade, you can get them jump-started if they get individual attention for a semester or so," said Dr.
Michael Pressley, a professor of educational psychology at the University of Maryland in College Park, who studies ways to increase children's reading skills.
He added that few teachers have the time to provide that individual attention to all the students who could benefit, so it's up to the parents.


New Dispute On Response To Accident
The Brooklyn District Attorney's office began an investigation yesterday into a shoving incident involving a police officer and a firefighter at the scene of a car accident over the weekend.
New York City's Police and Fire Commissioners said that the incident was isolated and added that the relationship between their departments was generally good.
The firefighter, Henry Miller, a 19-year veteran, was handcuffed and arrested in the clash, which occurred as officers and firefighters argued over who would remove an injured man from one of the cars.


Accounts
*
Rainbow Programming Holdings Inc., New York, to Wills &amp; Evans, New York, as the first agency to handle its "Romance Classics" television network.
The agency already handles Rainbow's "American Movie Classics" network account.
Billings were not disclosed. *
Sebago Inc., Westbrook, Me., to Holt, Hughes &amp; Stamell, Portland, Me., to handle the casual footwear company's advertising and public relations account, previously at Potter Hazelhurst, Warwick, R.I.
Billings were not disclosed.


Mets Are Trying to Fill an Outfield Gap
The Mets, with only one significant exercise in off-season restructuring left, have targeted Joe Orsulak as their first choice to fill the final outfield position for 1993.
Orsulak, who hit .289 for the Orioles in 1992, tops a short list of three candidates for the job as the club's fourth or fifth outfielder.
The Mets have begun preliminary negotiations aimed at signing the free agent, and top club officials wouldn't rule out a deal being finalized soon.


Gingerly, the Great One Puts In a Workout
The Great One glided to center ice, paused and then rushed toward the goal.
He nimbly worked the puck with his stick before unleashing an errant shot.
WAYNE GRETZKY's accuracy was off, but more important, he was on the ice.
He put in a tough 40-minute, no-contact workout yesterday at the Los Angeles Kings' practice rink in Culver City, Calif.


For 60 Minutes, Safe Play for Toddlers
THE last time I tried to amuse my 1-year-old daughter for an entire hour, the experience was nothing less than a crashing success.
Choosing the last resort of desperate parents, I took Emma to a local toy store.
Within minutes, Emma was buried under a pile of Rattlin' Rocking Rings, the remains of two shelves of tempting toys that had been just out of reach.
It should probably be easy to find toys to entertain a child for an hour, but 60 minutes can seem like a lifetime when one is playing with a toddler who has an attention span of 30 seconds.
Unless, of course, she's tearing up magazines, dialing Australia on the phone or putting aerobics shoes in her mouth.


Court Orders Retrial In Mercury Case
An appeals court has overturned the conviction of two brothers and their company, the Pymm Thermometer Corporation, in a case involving charges that they recklessly disregarded the possible exposure of their employees to mercury.
The brothers in the case, William and Edward Pymm, were convicted in State Supreme Court in Brooklyn in 1987 on charges of conspiracy, falsifying business records and reckless endangerment in the operation of their plant in Bushwick, Brooklyn.


Brace the Coffee Table (or Make a New One Out of a Big Book)
AMERICA'S PAINTED LADIES: THE ULTIMATE CELEBRATION OF OUR VICTORIANS , by Elizabeth Pomada and Michael Larsen;, photographs by Douglas Keister (Dutton; $40).
Tanna Abell, the owner of an 1874 Victorian house in the Queen Anne style in Oneida, N.Y., asked that it be painted in colors that would make people smile when they walked pass.


Princeton Gives N.C. State A Lesson
Princeton administered a lesson tonight, teaching North Carolina State how to play a slow-paced basketball game.
That's what the Tigers did in a 50-41 victory over N.C.
State in the second game of a doubleheader at the Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


Brace the Coffee Table (or Make a New One Out of a Big Book)
SPANISH SPLENDOR: PALACES, CASTLES AND COUNTRY HOUSES ,
photographs by Roberto Schezen,
text by Juan Jose Junquera y Mato (Rizzoli
; $125).
You need a sturdy coffee table to hold "Spanish Splendor." This is a gigantic picture book that takes readers on a journey through spectacular Spanish buildings and homes, with page after page of dreamy houses and countryside, architectural details and interiors.
Each place has its own chapter, and the text, though brief, charts the history of Spanish style and culture.
Shown are medieval castles like the Castillo de Batres in Madrid, which dates from the 12th century but has been sensitively altered over time.
There are also palaces like the Palau March in Palma de Mallorca, built in the 1930's by Luis Gutierrez Soto for Juan March Ordinas, a financier.
It boasts a music room whose ceiling was painted by Jose Maria Sert and a so-called ivory room that displays an extraordinary collection of ivory artifacts.
The book is full of details that show the rich building materials of the country, as well as breathtaking views of the Spanish landscape and the immense historic gardens, designed with bold plantings, that are themselves outdoor rooms.


It's Back to the Futuristic Machine Age
WARREN McARTHUR'S material of choice was steel-reinforced aluminum tubing, which became the frames for the tables, chairs and sofas he started designing in the mid-1920's.
Made of interchangeable standardized tubular metal parts, joined with interior screws concealed by anodized aluminum bands, pieces by Mr.
McArthur typified the nascent Machine Age of American furniture.


Winfield Ready To Go Home
The Minnesota Twins are looking homeward again for a push toward a division championship.
The Twins have scheduled a news conference today to announce they have reached agreement with Dave Winfield, a native of St.
Paul.
The last time the Twins signed a St.
Paul native, Jack Morris led them to the 1991 World Series championship.
Winfield signed with the Toronto Blue Jays as a free agent a year ago tomorrow, and he wound up driving in the run that won this year's World Series.
One of his teammates was Morris, who signed with the Blue Jays on the day before Winfield last year.


Nassau Ordered to Revaluate Property
Ask any real-estate agent the three most important factors in a home's value and the answer is usually a cliche: location, location, location.
Until now, Nassau County has used a one-of-a-kind system for assessing homes in which location did not matter.
This week, a judge said that it did.
In a ruling dated Wednesday, Justice Leo E. McGinity of State Supreme Court in Mineola, L.I., declared Nassau County's assessment system unconstitutional because "similarly situated taxpayers necessarily receive disparate treatment."


Why Security Council Should Stay at Five
To the Editor:
In "The World's Only Other Cop" (editorial, Dec. 8), you make three good suggestions to strengthen the United Nations -- adopting the Secretary General's call for standby peace enforcement units, getting the United States and other members to pay their dues on time and continuing the management reforms.
Your suggestion to restructure the Security Council is, however, unwise.
The Council's five permanent members embody not only "power 1945-style," but also power 1992-style.
They control the preponderance of world military forces by any measure; Germany, Japan, India and Brazil do not.
The "big five" also control the vast majority of world arms exports, and they are the only states with large, openly declared nuclear arsenals and long-range missiles.


Iraq Reported to Mass Troops Near Kurds' Enclave
In a move that has worried Pentagon officials, Iraq has moved military forces to the northern part of its country within striking distance of the Kurdish enclave there, officials said today.
A senior Administration official said Iraq had massed about half a dozen divisions in the northern part of its territory, close to the Kurdish enclave.
Iraq has said that the troops are there for an exercise, but the Iraqi forces have the ability to mount an attack against the Kurds at any time with no notice, Pentagon officials said.


Scholastic Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 3


Rangers Lose Leetch but Hold Off Blues
From the beginning, the evening promised problems for the Rangers' star defenseman, Brian Leetch.
In the latest twist in Roger Neilson's world of mix-and-match lineups, Leetch found himself divorced from his usual defensive partner, Jeff Beukeboom, and forced to skate on the right side -- opposite his usual position -- with rookie Mike Hurlbut in tonight's game against the St.
Louis Blues.
This, though, would end up being the least of Leetch's concerns.


A Notable New Jersey Bond Issue
New Jersey sold the second-largest municipal bond issue in history yesterday and included a new type of bond product that appeared highly popular with some portfolio managers.
The $1.8 billion of general obligation bonds is second only to the $2 billion issued by the New Jersey Turnpike Authority in 1987, according to the lead underwriter, Lazard Freres &amp; Company.
The new product is a "detachable call." In effect, New Jersey is selling the ability to call, or redeem, a small portion of the bonds before they mature if interest rates decline.


Sylvania Awards Consumer Account
Sylvania Lighting said yesterday that it had awarded its consumer lighting products account, with billings estimated at $3.5 million to $4 million, to Leonard Monahan Lubars &amp; Kelly in Providence, R.I.
The account was previously handled by DDB Needham New York for more than 20 years.
Leonard Monahan was selected to handle the account after the final stages of an eight-month review involving Keiler Advertising in Avon, Conn., and Arnold Fortuna Lawner &amp; Cabot in Boston.


Passenger in Van Is Shot
One of four prisoners in a police van going through the Tremont section of the Bronx was shot in the chest last night by sniper fire that is believed to have come from a nearby rooftop, the Police Department reported.
Sgt.
Tina Mohrmann, a spokeswoman, said the shooting took place about 8 P.M. at the intersection of 174th Street and Walton Avenue.
The victim, Maximo Rosa, 24, of the Bronx, was described as being in guarded condition at Lincoln Hospital after surgery.
He had been arrested on narcotics charges, the police said.


Connecticut to Get Aid
President Bush declared three Connecticut counties damaged by last week's storm eligible for Federal disaster relief yesterday, and officials said they expected a similar declaration for part of New Jersey.
Article, Page B8.


General Mills Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 29


Isuzu Considers Ending Production of Cars
Reversing previous denials, Isuzu Motors Ltd. conceded today that it was considering withdrawing from the passenger car business.
Such a move would allow the company to concentrate on trucks and recreational vehicles, product lines in which the company is stronger, and would help Isuzu stanch heavy losses.


Last Junket to Russia Is Called Off
The Commerce Department announced this evening that it had canceled a trip to Russia at Government expense, planned for shortly before the inauguration of President-elect Bill Clinton.
Douglas E. Lavin, the Acting Assistant Secretary of Commerce for export enforcement, said the plans were dropped after an article in The New York Times today described them and reported that the United States Embassy in Moscow had tried to discourage the trip as unnecessary.


Commercial Metals reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Officer's Account of Shooting Is Said to Differ
The lawyer for Derwin Pannell, the transit police officer who was shot and critically wounded last month by fellow officers as he tried to arrest a fare beater, said yesterday that Officer Pannell's version of the incident sharply differs with the version offered by the other officers.
The assertion by the lawyer, Arthur M. Luxenberg, comes a month after Officer Pannell was shot outside a Brooklyn subway station by a team of officers who have said through accounts given by the Transit Police Benevolent Association that they mistook Officer Pannell for an armed mugger.
They fired only after Officer Pannell turned toward them, gun in hand, the union has said.


PROSECUTOR NAMED TO REVIEW SEARCH OF FILES ON CLINTON
Attorney General William P. Barr has arranged the appointment of an independent prosecutor to conduct a criminal investigation of the State Department's search of Bill Clinton's passport files, lawyers and Government officials following the case said today.
It is not clear who will be the primary subjects of the criminal inquiry by Joseph E. diGenova, a former United States Attorney for the District of Columbia who was appointed by a Federal appeals court panel in a sealed court document that has not been made public.


With Russian Music
The cellist Sharon Robinson and the pianist Ilana Vered are to present a concert entitled "From Russia With Love" at 8 P.M. tomorrow at the 92d Street Y, at Lexington Avenue.
The program features Russian works written from 1901 to 1978, and will include Rachmaninoff's Sonata in G minor, Schnittke's Sonata and Shostakovich's Sonata in D minor.
The concert is part of Miss Vered's "In Praise of Women" project, which consists of concerts, a musical-theater presentation and a series of workshops about women in music.
Tickets are $12 and $20.
Information: (212) 996-1100.


U.S.-Europe Discord on Trade Talks
Vehement exchanges between European and American officials, the most vitriolic since a trans-Atlantic trade war was averted by an accord on Nov. 20, suggested today that a world trade agreement might not be achievable in the next few months.
Foreign Minister Roland Dumas of France described the November agreement between the European Community and the United States on European oilseed production and agricultural exports as "null and void" -- the most strongly worded French rejection yet of an accord that had been widely seen as opening the way for a successful conclusion of broad six-year trade negotiations intended to reduce barriers to world trade.


Dining Out In New York On $50 a Day
"LUNCH and dinner in New York City for $50 a day?" sniggered a seasoned veteran of Manhattan restaurants.
"Is that sitting down?"
A wisecrack like that would have been justified five or six years ago, before a recession, evolving dining habits and changing demographics opened a trap door in dining rooms through which customers disappeared at alarming rates.


Heilig-Myers reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Police Investigate Appeals for Money
No name on the downstairs doorbells, no office directory, no company logo or commercial sign betrays the purpose behind the door of Room 205 on the second floor of the small building in the Bronx: just an American flag decal with the legend "The American Police Hall of Fame."
Inside, next to a spindly Christmas tree, a wall chart is scrawled with numbers, and the desks along the walls are piled with index cards bearing more numbers.
The plain office at 685 East 187th Street is a telemarketing center, the largely anonymous satellite of a money-raising operation being investigated by the New York City police and the State Attorney General's charity-frauds office.
Singling Out Business People
In what officials say is a pervasive problem, particularly during the holidays, telephone solicitors often mistaken for police representatives are getting hundreds of thousands of dollars in donations, singling out business people in New York City and throughout the region.
Many donors believe the money is for local law enforcement, but it often goes chiefly to the fund-raisers, investigators say.
New York City police officers are forbidden to solicit money; the appeals are by civilians, usually soliciting for out-of-town organizations.


When to See New Visions Of Germany
"Recent Films From Germany" opens today and continues through Jan. 10 at the Roy and Niuta Titus Theater 2, Museum of Modern Art, 11 West 53d Street, Manhattan.
Screenings are included in the museum admission: $7.50; $4.50 for students and the elderly; free under age 16.
Unless noted, all films are in German with English subtitles.
Information: (212) 708-8480.
Here is the
schedule. Today
"HAPPY BIRTHDAY, TURK!" (1991), directed by Doris Dorrie. 3 P.M.


Howard Stern Employer Faces $600,000 Fine
After weeks of wavering on the murky issue of "indecency," the Federal Communications Commission has decided to impose a $600,000 fine on the company that employs Howard Stern, the New York radio host known for his obsession with sexual organs and bodily functions and his nasty comments about minorities.
But the commission backed away from a much tougher proposal to block the company, the Infinity Broadcasting Company of New York, from the $100 million purchase of three big radio stations.


NATO Offers Support
The North Atlantic Treaty Organization agreed today to support the United Nations if it votes to enforce the ban on Serbian flights over Bosnia and Herzegovina, signaling the first time in its 43-year history that NATO forces could be engaged in combat to defend a country outside the alliance.
The 16-nation body did not indicate how it would help enforce the ban, but Secretary of State Lawrence S. Eagleburger said that NATO was preparing contingency plans to enforce the no-flights zone and that the United States was prepared to provide aircraft in such an operation.
Options ranged from overflights to what Mr.
Eagleburger called "more muscular measures." He acknowledged that if the ban is enforced, it could put United Nations troops at risk of retaliation and that it was a "possibility" that they might be forced to withdraw, at least temporarily.
Warning to U.N.
The NATO decision came as the leader of the Bosnian Serbs, Radovan Karadzic, warned that United Nations troops in Bosnia may be attacked if Western nations attempt to enforce the ban on flights.
The Serbs are reported to have violated the ban on flights 225 times since it was imposed in October.
But there is no proof that they have resumed combat missions.
NATO has already contributed personnel and equipment to the United Nations peackeeping operation in the Balkans, and its ships are in the Adriatic, helping to enforce a blockade.
NATO reconnaissance aircraft are providing data on violations of the flight ban.
On another issue, Mr.
Eagleburger warned Ukraine that its relationship with the United States will suffer if it continues to delay ratification of the nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty and the strategic arms reduction treaty slashing the arsenals of nuclear weapons in the United States and the former Soviet republics.
The Ukrainian Foreign Minsiter, Anatoly Zlenko, told Mr.
Eagleburger earlier in the week that the Kiev Parliament would not take up the issue until January at the earliest.
Mr.
Eagleburger said he made clear during the meeting that the United States "is not particularly happy with the delays," adding that he expected "ratification and without reservations," and if progress is delayed much longer it will "inevitably have an impact" on the two countries' relations.


Review/Film; Steve Martin as a Healer With Faith Only in Lies
It is a tacit seasonal tradition that smaller, more interesting films arriving in December are often trampled in the all-star holiday stampede.
It would be too bad if that happened to "Leap of Faith," the lively story of an Elmer Gantry for the computer age.
Well acted and amusingly told, featuring a fine performance by Steve Martin in the central role, this tale ultimately switches gears and takes a deeply serious turn.
"If I get the job done, what difference does it make?" Mr.
Martin's Rev.
Jonas Nightengale, a bogus faith healer, asks twice during the story.
The second answer he receives sums up the film's fundamental message: "It makes all the difference in the world."


In the Area of Words, It's a Tough Road to Hew
IN the area of human affairs, it has been written, poets are the world's unacknowledged legislators.
To be very truthful, that was written by the late Percy Bysshe Shelley, who, being a poet, was not exactly a disinterested party in elevating that occupation to the top summit of society.
Paul Roche, who at 64 isn't late yet, is another poet who can process ordinary English words in his particular mind and out they come through his amply ringed fingers onto paper in poems whose lush lines and rare rhythms give extraordinary meanings to everyday things most of us miss.


Bergen Brunswig Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Art in Review
George Tooker
Marisa del Re Gallery  41 East 57th Street  Through tomorrow
George Tooker's reputation rests primarily on paintings like "The Subway," from 1950.
Its tableau of haunted-looking people in an underground urban labyrinth seems to have been taken as a profound statement about alienation in its day, although it looks theatrical and contrived now.


Immigration Stimulates the Economy
To the Editor:
In "Immigration Reform Holds Key to Economy" (letter, Nov. 27) Prof.
Vernon M. Briggs Jr. of Cornell University's New York State School of Industrial and Labor Relations uses a Nov. 10 news analysis, "How to Lift the Poor," as a springboard from which to promote his own anti-immigrant agenda.
In the process, he confuses the issues and misleads readers by asserting, without offering any evidence, that our immigration policy fosters poverty and urban blight.


Sounds Around Town
Benefit for Roulette
Lee Ranaldo, Ikue Mori and Zeena Parkins, Roulette, 228 West Broadway, at White Street, TriBeCa, (212) 219-8242.
Lee Ranaldo channels most of his love for guitar noise and tape-looped sustained sounds into his regular job, as one of Sonic Youth's guitarists and songwriters.
But in a benefit concert for the new-music loft Roulette, he will be improvising outside song structures with Ikue Mori, whose clatter and thump has been a part of New York's avant-rock since her days with DNA, and with Zeena Parkins, who plays electrified harp that is both resonant and percussive.
Saturday at 9 P.M.
Tickets are $15.


Shoney's Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 25


Review/Architecture; At the Modern, a Showcase Of Designs for a New Japan
The small, elegant tips of several large, intellectually hazardous icebergs have floated into view in the architecture and design department of the Museum of Modern Art.
The occasion is "Preview: Nara Convention Hall International Design Competition." On view are 10 finalists' schemes for a convention hall for the city of Nara, Japan.
Organized and beautifully installed by Terence Riley, the department's new director, the models and drawings make a smart if visually frosty display, and they hint at possible shifts in the climate of taste.
But there's a good chance the show will drift away without making an impact.
The issues it raises lie largely submerged.
The convention hall is one element in Silk Road 21, an ambitious master plan to revitalize one of Japan's oldest cities.
Designed by Kisho Kurokawa, the plan includes housing, health clinics, a sports complex, a museum, a new train station and a bus terminal, each to be designed by a different architect.
The convention hall's site is pivotal, not only because it is adjacent to the city's rail gateway, but also because it occupies the meeting place of Nara's two street grids.
Of modest size by American standards, the hall is to include three auditoriums of different sizes and flexible configurations.


James A. Jones; Professor, 60
Dr.
James A. Jones, an associate professor at the Columbia University School of Social Work and a consultant to government and private agencies, died on Wednesday at Hackensack Hospital.
He was 60.
The school said he died of a heart attack or stroke or both.


Neediest Cases Fund Aids A Woman Without a Job
Patricia K.'s life began to crumble on a sunny day in the spring of 1990.
She was sitting in her daughter's home on Long Island when the phone rang.
On the other end of the line was her former husband, who had abandoned her and their children 42 years before and had not been heard from since.
She was stunned and overwhelmed, as if she had been contacted by a man who had been long dead and buried.
Then her relationship with her children collapsed because she was angered that they wanted to meet him.
Last spring, she fell into a deep depression that kept her from working as a nurse and led to an eviction notice from her apartment in Bay Ridge, Brooklyn.


Money Fund Assets Down
The total assets of the nation's 615 retail money market mutual funds decreased $1.32 billion, to $386.19 billion, for the week ended Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
The assets of the 384 taxable retail money market funds were down $890.4 million, to $306.44 billion, while the assets of the 231 retail tax-exempt funds decreased $432.2 million, to $79.75 billion.


AAR Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Diner's Journal
Four Seasons in a New Role
Including the Four Seasons in a column on dining bargains might seem like adding the Queen Elizabeth 2 to a list of bargain excursions to Europe.
Yet even this celebrated expense-account lair is tightening its belt with a special lower-priced menu in the Grill Room that is paired with affordable wines.
"The Grill Room was so quiet at night that we decided to do something to get people in," said Alex von Bidder, the restaurant's general manager.
From 6:30 to 10:30 P.M.
Mondays through Saturdays, three-course meals are served for $26.50 to $37.50, depending on the entree.
A recent sampling began with tender stewed octopus with cannellini beans, tomato and fried oregano.
Another inviting starter is called sesame "scallopops," sesame-encrusted fried sea scallops on a stick with zesty beet and ginger compote on the side.


Autotote Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


SIMIAN TESTS RAISE AIDS-VACCINE HOPE
An experimental vaccine developed from a genetically altered virus has completely protected monkeys against an AIDS-like disease for more than four years, scientists said today.
They said the protection was the strongest and longest lasting of any AIDS-related vaccine.
Federal health officials who financed the experiments hailed the finding as "a significant advance" in the search for a human vaccine to protect against H.I.V., the virus that causes acquired immune deficiency syndrome.


Koreans Look to Vote That Seems Less Tainted by Bribes and Army
For a day or so this week the campaign to elect South Korea's next President looked chillingly like 1987, when votes were being openly bought in the street and the Government was clearly doing its best to rig the polls.
The mayor of Pusan, South Korea's second largest city, met in the back room of a small restaurant along with a top police official, a senior officer in the South Korean intelligence agency and a prominent local businessman.
Over a meal they talked about strategies for manipulating the results in the presidential election on Friday to assure a victory for Kim Young Sam, the candidate of the ruling party.


African and Mideast Bases Aid Somalia Airlift
African and Middle East countries have quietly agreed to give the United States access to their air bases to enable American transport planes to reach Somalia, military officials said today.
Gen.
Joseph P. Hoar, commander of the United States Central Command, said on Monday that about 12 countries had agreed to provide the United States with overflight rights, basing rights and refueling rights to construct an air bridge between the United States and Somalia.


National Service Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Material Sciences reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Damage in New York State From Recent Storm Put at $234 Million
New York State officials yesterday increased the preliminary damage assessment from last week's storm to $234 million as emergency assistance workers for the White House to approve Federal disaster relief for New York and New Jersey.
President Bush declared three counties in Connecticut eligible for Federal assistance yesterday.
A Presidential declaration of disaster is required before the Federal Emergency Management Agency opens telephone lines and centers to take applications for assistance.


Critics' Circle Votes 'The Player' Best Film
"The Player," Robert Altman's satirical film depicting a supremely amoral Hollywood, was voted the best film of 1992 yesterday by the New York Film Critics' Circle.
Mr.
Altman was named best director.
The 27-member group, voting its 58th annual film awards, also cited "The Player" for best cinematography; Jean Lepine was the director of photography.
Denzel Washington was voted best actor for his performance in "Malcolm X," playing the title character through the many stages of his spiritual evolution.
Emma Thompson was named best actress for her role as the astute heroine of "Howards End." Miranda Richardson was voted best supporting actress for roles in three films: "The Crying Game," "Damage" and "Enchanted April." Gene Hackman received the best supporting actor award for "Unforgiven," the film that was runner-up in both best film and best-director categories.


SCROLL SCHOLARS RESOLVE DISPUTE
After days of rancorous dispute, scholars of the Dead Sea Scrolls sought yesterday to patch up their differences and move ahead with the promised analysis and more rapid publication of the remaining 2,000-year-old documents from a crucial time in the history of Judaism and Christianity.
It took an apology from one of the authors of a new book claiming to offer the first complete translation and interpretation of 50 of the documents, and then the retraction by 19 leading researchers of their protest against the book.
In a letter last week, the researchers accused the authors of using the work of other scholars without giving credit.


Rating Santas, From Naughty to Nice (C33)


After Storm, Bush Designates 3 Counties as Disaster Areas
President Bush declared three coastal counties in Connecticut eligible for Federal disaster relief yesterday, and administration officials said they expected a similar declaration today for parts of New Jersey damaged by last week's storm.
The President signed the Connecticut declaration last night and the White House notified officials in Hartford shortly after 8 P.M.
The action came two days after Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. asked for $60 million in Federal grants, loans and other assistance for Fairfield, New Haven and Middlesex counties.


Topics of The Times; Poetry in the Subways
"The subway now has an on-time record of 90 percent. That's better than a lot of clocks."
"Every subway car is now new or overhauled. Don't you wish you could say that about yourself?"


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday with an article in The Home Section about ethnic mail-order gifts misidentified the doll shown, from African Inspirations.
It was the Niya doll, not the Willie Pearl doll.


City Council Votes for Civilian Board to Investigate Police Officers


For Children
'A Christmas Carol'
Westbeth Theater Center  151 Bank Street  West Village  (212) 996-7287  Recommended ages: 6 and up  Through Sunday
"What's Christmastime for you but a time for paying bills?" an upper-crust Scrooge asks his nephew, Fred.
The Playwrights' Preview Productions version of the Dickens story seems ripe for these churlish days.


Israel Expels 400 From Occupied Lands; Lebanese Deploy to Bar Entry of Palestinians
Buses filled with nearly 400 bound and blindfolded Palestinians crossed the border into Lebanon tonight as Israeli troops carried out mass expulsions ordered by the Government and sanctioned by Israel's Supreme Court after a day of legal arguments and rancor.
There had not been deportations of Palestinians on anything approaching this scale since the period soon after Israel took control of the West Bank and Gaza Strip in the 1967 Middle East War.


It Runs in the Family: Bowden's Son at Auburn
TERRY BOWDEN, son of Florida State's BOBBY BOWDEN, was named head football coach at Auburn yesterday.
Bowden leaves as coach of Division I-AA Samford University, in Birmingham, Ala., for an Auburn program that was among the nation's best before a National Collegiate Athletic Association investigation that led to the resignation of the former coach, PAT DYE, last month.


Congressional Panel Investigating Fiscal Plight of Empire Blue Cross
A Congressional panel has begun a wide-ranging investigation of Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield to see whether mismanagement at the big New York insurance company contributed to its huge financial losses in the last two years.
The panel, the Senate Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations, has issued a subpoena to New York's State Insurance Superintendent, Salvatore R. Curiale, for vast amounts of data on Empire's operations over the last 10 years.
Aides to Mr.
Curiale said today that the Insurance Department would comply with the subpoena.


Corrections
An article on Nov. 5 about German indecision over moving the country's Government to Berlin located the city of Greifswald incorrectly.
Readers have written to point out that it is in Mecklenburg-Pomerania State. (Forwarding of the readers' letters to Bonn, by way of New York, delayed this correction.)


Keep Strict Bank Rules, Officials Urge
Federal banking authorities said today that it cost banks $17.5 billion each year to comply with increasingly stringent and complex regulations, but they cautioned against relaxing the rules as a way of stimulating the flow of credit to encourage economic growth.
The conclusions were made in the annual report to Congress by the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council, a committee of banking regulatory agencies.


Critic's Choice/Animation; Cartoon Creations With Silent Sentiments
Before Mickey Mouse was a gleam in Walt Disney's eye, Oswald the Lucky Rabbit was a gleam in Walt Disney's eye.
A rambunctious, accident-prone creature who liked to take off his foot and kiss it for luck, Oswald became the hero of a popular series of cartoon shorts.
When it turned out, in 1928, that the producer of the Oswald series owned the rights to the character, Disney set out on his own.
The rabbit's floppy ears were rounded (the better to make Mouseketeer hats one day), his puffy tail became long and skinny, and faster than anyone could say "Magic Kingdom" there was Mickey.
Within months, Mickey starred in his own silent cartoon, "Plane Crazy," tousling his hair to look like Lindbergh's and giving a plane ride to Minnie.


Settling Question of Statehood Tops Agenda of New Puerto Rico Governor
Eager to resolve their political status and economic future, Puerto Ricans last month elected a governor who promised to be "a new leader for a new beginning." But when Pedro Rossello takes office in early January, he will have to grapple immediately with many of the same problems that have bedeviled his predecessors.
As has been the case for the last 50 years, Puerto Ricans are divided about which relationship they prefer with the rest of the United States: statehood, independence or a continuation of the island's commonwealth status.
Mr.
Rossello and the pro-statehood New Progressive Party have raised the stakes of that debate by pledging to hold a plebiscite on the issue in 1993.


Commercial Intertech reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


People
*
Maria Genovesi was named to the new position of marketing director at Vogue magazine, New York.
She was previously vice president and associate media director at Lintas New York.


Grist Mill Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Council Backs New Board To Review Police Conduct
The City Council voted overwhelmingly last night to establish an all-civilian agency to investigate police misconduct, ending for now a racially charged debate that has polarized the city several times since the idea was first proposed in the 1960's.
The vote was 41 to 9.
The bill was a political compromise that reflected the changing demographics of the city and the declining political clout of the Patrolmen's Benevolent Association, the police union.
Many Council members said the union had galvanized support for the measure in September when it held an ugly demonstration at City Hall in which some officers shouted racial epithets about the Mayor.


Iacocca Term Nears an End At Chrysler
If a country-western tune commemorates the business career of Lido Anthony Iacocca, it ought to be called "How Can We Miss You When You Just Won't Go Away?"
For a time, it looked as though Mr.
Iacocca might never retire from the Chrysler Corporation.
"The only thing Lee likes about the Japanese system is that their retirees don't leave when they're 65," said Gerald Greenwald, the president of Olympia &amp; York Developments and a former Chrysler executive.
"Japanese executives remain honored advisers."


Accounts
*
Business Week magazine, New York, to Ted Chinn &amp; Co., New York, to handle its trade advertising account, with billings estimated at $1.5 million.
The account was previously at Margeotes Fertitta &amp; Weiss, New York, for four years, until the agency resigned it last month citing "creative differences." *
LDDS Communications Inc., Jackson, Miss., to Austin Kelly Advertising Inc., Atlanta, to handle the telecommunications company's account, previously divided among various agencies.
Billings were estimated at $2 million to $3 million.


U.S. Picks Concessionaire for Yosemite Park
The National Park Service today awarded the Delaware North Companies the contract for hotel, restaurant and other visitor services at Yosemite National Park, the largest and most important concession in the park system.
The 15-year agreement, which takes effect next Oct. 1, will increase the annual revenue to the park service to about $20 million from $700,000 and is expected to set the standard for all new concession contracts in the system.


COMPANY NEWS
ENTERGY INC.  moved closer to acquiring Gulf States Utilities Co., as the companies' holders cleared the deal.
CENTEL CORP.  said its holders cleared its purchase by Sprint Corp.


Critic's Notebook; A Diversity of Viewpoints From Reunified Germany
WERNER HERZOG hasn't lost his greatest gift: a deep and true sense of the loony.
His 1991 film, "Scream of Stone," begins with the hilarious absurdity of indoor mountain-climbing as a televised sport.
In a studio, two world-class mountaineers literally climb the walls, with Donald Sutherland giving the play-by-play.
Soon a middle-aged champion and his arrogant young challenger agree to race to the top of a killer mountain in Patagonia.
Brad Dourif, as the most space-shot climber of all, pops in and insists he has already been there.
"I dedicated my climb to Mae West," he says.
"They say she's dead, but she's not. She owns a beauty parlor." He gets the last word with the film's funny final turn.
Although it has dull patches and laughable moments of seriousness, this new film is a link to the dazzling old Herzog, who seemed to have disappeared.
It offers spectacular photography of the treacherous, icy climb and characters who are as gloriously demented as the heroes of "Aguirre: The Wrath of God" or "Fitzcarraldo" (the forays into the South American jungle that brought the director his widest acclaim).


Court Limits Appeals of Juror-Interview Errors
Averting what prosecutors and judges had feared would be a legal calamity, New York State's highest court ruled yesterday that thousands of criminal cases involving errors in jury selection do not have to be retried.
Such errors prompted a decision by the Court of Appeals two months ago to reverse a conviction in a minor case that raised concerns that the state's criminal justice system would be overwhelmed with retrials.
Prosecutors said then that convictions in major cases were in jeopardy, including those of the Central Park jogger and the Happy Land Social Club fire that killed 87 people.


The Art Market
Cuts at Christie's
Christie's announced this week that it would cut about 60 jobs, primarily in Europe, as of Jan. 1 as part of a plan to reorganize its major specialist departments.
"We haven't operated as efficiently as I would like on the world stage," said Christopher Davidge, the auction house's managing director.
Under the revision, five areas representing 70 percent of Christie's income worldwide are each to report to a specific board member.
Until now, these departments -- 19th- and 20th-century pictures; jewelry; Old Master pictures and drawings; furniture, and Oriental pictures and artworks -- have operated regionally.


Detective in Glen Ridge Case Discusses a Bat
A detective testified today in the Glen Ridge sex-assault trial that the authorities did not have a precise description of a baseball bat used in sex acts involving a mildly retarded teen-ager for more than three years after the episode.
When the four former Glen Ridge football players on trial here now were arrested in May 1989, the Essex County Prosecutor, Herbert H. Tate Jr., said in a news release that a miniature bat was involved.
That description was widely circulated in news accounts of the arrests.


New Rating for Movies Is the Same Old 'X' in 'NC-17' Undress
To the Editor:
Your Nov. 30 article on the NC-17 movie rating is a sad reminder of how irresponsible Jack Valenti has been in his stewardship of the Motion Picture Association of America's rating administration.
In July 1990, a film my company was about to release, Wayne Wang's "Life is Cheap . . . but Toilet Paper is Expensive," was branded with an "X" rating.
The association had been under pressure to address what many in the film industry believed was an obsolete system in which the award of an "X" rating was capricious and damaging to writers, directors, producers and distributors.
Mr.
Wang and I were determined to do more than appeal the rating.
We wanted to increase pressure on the association.


A Tale of Black Liberators
"Liberators: Fighting on Two Fronts in World War II," the documentary that was shown last night at the Apollo Theater, is the creation of William Miles and Nina Rosenblum.
In making the 90-minute film, the producers tracked down several veterans from among the 500,000 blacks who served in World War II and reunited them with some of the concentration camp prisoners whom they helped free in 1945.


Guanay Journal; Bolivians Follow the Rainbow, to a Brutal Death
Arminda Quintanilla, an emaciated, elderly woman wearing a faded orange baseball cap, kneels in the brown waters of the Tipuani River.
She says that she does not know her age, but that she has been panning for gold here for about four years.
She has one meal a day, and to relieve the hunger pangs she chews coca leaves.
If she finds two or three tiny flakes of gold, worth about 90 cents, during her 14-hour day, she is happy.


Rating the Santas, From Naughty to Nice
On the surface, at least, it would seem that one department store Santa is pretty much like another.
They've all got the red suit, white trim, stocking cap and beard, right?
At this oh-so-commercial time of year, it's easy to conceive of Santa as basically a costume.
As rational adults, we all acknowledge that Santa is not real.
It's just a guy, maybe an out-of-work actor, who dresses up and listens attentively as the children tell him what they've already told you.
A cartoon myth is brought to life.
The moment is captured on Polaroid film.
But our unscientific research has proved that all Santas are indeed not alike.
Over the last week, we visited six Santas around Manhattan and had extremely varied experiences with each.
Some we spoke to.
Some we simply observed.
What we found was that a really good Santa, a Santa whose spirit is more than costume-deep, will do what the myth says: he will gracefully and genuinely summon a very childlike impulse in all of us.


Alexandria Journal; TV Program for Somalis Is a Rare Unifying Force
As the blue-and-white Somali flag with its single star filled the television screen, Sahra Jama and her five children clapped and cheered.
"Somali Television," a half-hour weekly program believed to be North America's only Somali-language broadcast, was on the air.


Topics of The Times; A Russian Democrat
The democratic temperament -- respect for the rights of others, adherence to the rule of law, a willingness to compromise -- is difficult to nurture.
And no part of the world has seemed historically less hospitable to it than Russia.
So when a forceful President and a recalcitrant Congress manage to avert a constitutional confrontation that could destroy Russia's fragile democracy, it's important to identify who brokered the compromise.


On My Mind; Toys or Torture
At the end, President Bush had one fine political opportunity left.
He could walk into history cleanly, with dignity.
Poor Mr.
Bush.
No American can take pleasure watching a departing President soil the leave-taking by a last-minute cynical maneuver that can mortgage the successor Administration -- and the lives of those who suffer under tyranny.


Setback for Labor-Management Teamwork Efforts
In a decision that may affect initiatives to involve workers in improving quality and efficiency in American industry, the National Labor Relations Board ruled yesterday that one such program violates Federal labor law.
The complaint was filed in 1989 by the Teamsters union, which was trying to organize workers at the Electromation Company of Elkhart, Ind.
The union said the company had illegally set up committees that were dominated by management representatives to determine pay scales and work rules rather than to discuss issues like the quality of products or efficiency of production.


Mason Is Traded by Mets For the 'Other Maddux'
The Mets, once more reshuffling their bullpen and at least theoretically strengthening themselves in the process, yesterday traded right-handers with the Padres, sending Roger Mason to San Diego for Mike Maddux.
The Mets are also deep in negotiation with the free agent Joe Orsulak, and could sign the 30-year-old outfielder as early as this morning.
He spent the last five seasons with the Baltimore Orioles.


Coal Miners in Poland Strike Over Wages and Job Threats
In the largest industrial action since the fall of Communism in Poland in 1989, hundreds of thousands of coal miners have gone on strike to protest low wages and a Government reorganization that would eliminate 180,000 jobs in 10 years.
The strike, which began on Monday, could threaten the Polish economic recovery, which is gathering strength from consumer-oriented industries.
Miners, once among the highest-paid workers in the Communist system, have been among the losers in the transition to capitalism.
The walkout is also a challenge to Prime Minister Hanna Suchocka, who earned an 80 percent approval rating after facing down automobile workers and copper miners who struck in the summer.


Abroad at Home; Pressure on Serbia
In the last days of his Presidency, George Bush has altered his course on the tragedy in Bosnia.
From a posture of seeming indifference, his Administration has moved to strong condemnation of Serbian aggression.
It is using open pressure, indeed threats, to stop the killing.
Secretary of State Lawrence S. Eagleburger gave dramatic evidence of the new policy this week when he told an international conference that Slobodan Milosevic, President of Serbia, was among those who should face possible trial for "crimes against humanity." The listing of his and other names was an extraordinary step: about as somber a warning as one can imagine in international life.


Germany Still Firm on Rates
The president of Germany's central bank, Helmut Schlesinger, said today that pressure from abroad for lower German interest rates was only causing new mistrust.
In a speech at the University of Frankfurt, Mr.
Schlesinger said inflation was still not under control in his country.
He reiterated his belief that because the mark served as an anchor currency in Europe, excessive inflation in Germany would also endanger the value of currencies in other European countries.


Review/Art; Promising Start at a New Location
The opening of Exit Art in a vast new space is one of the most heartening events of the fall art season.
For a decade, this nonprofit gallery spotlighted artists like David Hammons and Jimmie Durham when they were underappreciated.
Its founding directors, Jeanette Ingberman and Papo Colo, embraced diversity, not just racial, ethnic and sexual, but also artistic.
From its site at 578 Broadway, near Prince Street, the gallery helped to shift the center of activity in SoHo eastward and to make Broadway the locus it has become.
Now renamed Exit Art/The First World, the gallery has moved half a block south into a former warehouse that has been converted into 17,000 square feet of space for exhibitions, a store, a cafe and a 150-seat theater.
The cafe is under construction, and the theater will not be completed until next year.
But the first show has opened, a survey put together by Mr.
Colo and Ms.
Ingberman titled "Fever."


The Spoken Word
PANEL DISCUSSION, 92d Street Y, at Lexington Avenue.
"Israel and the Press," a discussion with Morton Zuckerman, editor in chief of U.S.
News &amp; World Report; Judith Miller, the staff writer for The New York Times Magazine, and Michael Kramer, a writer with Time Magazine.
Charlie Rose, a journalist with WNET in New York City, is to be the moderator.
Sunday at 7:30 P.M.
Tickets are $14.
Information: (212) 996-1100.
POETRY READINGS, Nuyorican Poets Cafe, 236 East Third Street, East Village.
A reading by a poetry "choir" of about 18 writers.
Tonight at 7:30.
A poetry competition featuring eight writers is to follow at 10 P.M.
Tickets to the 7:30 P.M. reading are $6; to the 10 P.M. event, $5.
Information: (212) 505-8183.


Robb Expecting U.S. Grand Jury Will Indict Him
Senator Charles S. Robb made a second, voluntary appearance today before a Federal grand jury here, and indicated afterward that he expected to be indicted for what prosecutors call his role in eavesdropping on his longtime political rival, Gov.
L.
Douglas Wilder.
"That's the only conclusion I can draw at this point," Mr.
Robb, a Virginia Democrat, told reporters when he emerged from the grand jury room after almost six hours of testimony.


Stocks Gain in Tokyo
Stocks finished higher in Japan today.
The Nikkei average of 225 issues gained 242.83 points, or 1.39 percent, to close at 17,680.74.
On Thursday, the Nikkei rose 169.2 points.


Market Place; Supercomputer Tensions Rise
THE United States and Japan are nearing a confrontation over supercomputers.
Japanese Government and corporate officials are growing increasingly irritated by the United States' refusal to consider Japanese complaints that the American Government market is closed to Japanese supercomputers.
At the same time, their American counterparts say the Japanese have failed to comply with a 1990 bilateral trade accord under which Japan agreed to open its Government market to American makers of the fastest computers.


Let Jets Win and Moore Will Throw a Reception
This has not been the kind of season Rob Moore had imagined for the Jets or for himself.
While the team has been reeling from losses all season, Moore has been hampered by injuries -- a severely sprained ankle and a sciatic nerve problem -- that have cut into his effectiveness as a receiver.
With only 42 receptions for 599 yards going into Sunday night's game against Miami, Moore isn't even close to matching last season's 70 catches for 987 yards.
But it's not his numbers that are the source of consernation to him; it's the incessant losing that has plagued the Jets since Moore was signed out of Syracuse in the supplemental draft in 1990.


Art in Review
Suzanne McClelland: Painting
Whitney Museum of American Art at Philip Morris  Park Avenue at 42d Street  Through Dec. 31
Suzanne McClelland has avoided one of the signal problems of installation art -- that it often seems more staged than made -- by creating an emphatically hand-drawn and hand-painted environment covering three walls and spilling onto bits and pieces of drywall propped around the gallery.
This walk-in painting is executed in Ms.
McClelland's characteristic style, in which letters and words emerge from the chaos of an assured Abstract Expressionist-inspired gesturalism.
It has a terrific improvisational energy, something like a good studio visit when a great deal of promising work is under way.
The floor, covered with paint-smeared cardboard, enhances the impression that artistic activity may resume any second.


We Need More Political Activity by Charities; A Bipartisan Abuse
To the Editor:
Anthony Lewis is correct that the "Christian Right" churches that paid for an anti-Bill Clinton campaign ad in USA Today almost certainly violated section 501(c)(3) of the Federal tax code (column, Nov. 30).
That section grants an exemption from income tax for churches and other "charitable" organizations, but only on condition they refrain from any intervention in electoral campaigns.
But focusing on the misdeeds of churches whose political agendas we dislike obscures the First Amendment travesty of the prohibition as the Internal Revenue Service has interpreted and enforced it over the years.
For example, under tax regulations that bar even "indirect" attempts to influence voters, there can be little question that the legal line was crossed by members of the Louisiana clergy who exhorted their congregations to avoid endorsing racism when they cast their ballots during David Duke's gubernatorial run.


Bowe Decks His Halls With 6 Paydays
When the lights went on and Riddick Bowe stepped up to the podium yesterday, an entire room fell silent.
There were faces out there, and a bank of cameras, and Bowe seemed to search momentarily for just the right thing to say.
Then he smiled a champion's smile, looked into the crowd and said, "I hope you all have a merry Christmas, because I know I will."


William A. Wood, 80, A Journalism Professor
William Almon Wood, a broadcast journalist and professor emeritus at Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism, died on Tuesday in Chapel Hill, N.C.
A former resident of New Canaan, Conn., and Savannah, Ga., he was 80.
The cause of death was cancer, said his wife, Louisa.


Review/Theater; A Flamboyant Tribute to Duchamp's World
When one artist is inspired by the work of another artist, the result can be a true homage.
This is the case in "The Mysteries and What's So Funny?" in which Red Grooms creates a fanciful visual design to pay tribute to Marcel Duchamp.
Unfortunately, the play itself, written and directed by David Gordon, does not have Mr.
Grooms's euphoric humor.
It is an excessively wordy and arch excursion into art theory and domestic drama.
Should a theatergoer become restless with Mr.
Gordon's attempted shenanigans, there is the scenery to brighten the journey.
Mr.
Grooms's contribution begins with the drop curtain, a flamboyant rebus-like interpretation of the title of the show.


Bowe, Who Knows Boxing, Hopes He'll Mean Business
RIDDICK BOWE, the new heavyweight boxing champion, appears to know a thing or two about marketing, too.
Although the main event at a news conference in Manhattan yesterday was an announcement of a six-fight deal with HBO and Time Warner (contingent upon his continuing to win, of course), Mr.
Bowe and his promoter, Rock Newman, have hopes to make the boxer a pitchman for products that range from sportswear to razor blades to underwear.


At Elizabeth High School; No Name Doesn't Translate Into No Identity
"I hate to say it but girls are different," said Shannon Luby, clenching her lean, fine-boned face.
"The female makeup is more temperamental, and girls seem to be more distracted by their lives, what's going on at home. Boys seem able to shut it off when they get on the court."
Coach Luby shrugged, raised her palms to the gym ceiling.
That's life.
Lights glinted off her gold-framed glasses.
No time for reflection.
Elizabeth High School's girls basketball season begins tonight at home, and the team with no nickname might not have a center.


Art in Review
Willy Heeks
David Beitzel Gallery  102 Prince Street  SoHo  Through Wednesday
Despite (in fact, because of) the skillful and elaborate way they are painted, Willy Heeks's abstractions continue to disappoint.
Mr.
Heeks has a repertory of round shapes and meandering lines that he combines with drips, smears, splashes and washes to create spatially complex, multi-layered images.
The tone is somber, for the most part, but there is a sense of inner light that gives to these works a certain brilliance.
Every inch of canvas teems with activity.
Mr.
Heeks conveys, above all, a love of line and paint and decoration.
His art brings to mind not only Abstract Expressionists, but also contemporaries like Carroll Dunham and Terry Winters.


Carjacking Prevention
To the Editor:
Risks from carjacking could be reduced if cellular phone companies would sponsor, without a monthly charge, an emergency call tariff service activated by a button on the phone.
The phone could be available in the car or parking lot, and the emergency service would recoup its costs as used.


Kasler Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


British Air's World Is Growing
British Airways P.L.C. took another big step in its quest to become a global airline today by taking a 25 percent stake in Qantas, the Australian national carrier.
The Australian Government selected a $450 million bid from British Airways over a bid of undisclosed size from Singapore Airlines for the stake in Qantas, which the Government is selling in stages to private investors.


Islanders Make Feast Of Senators
Gary Bettman, commisioner-elect of the National Hockey League, got stuck in traffic tonight on his way to the Nassau Coliseum.
He was late for his pre-game news conference and arrived only a few minutes before the faceoff of the game between the Islanders and the Ottawa Senators.
It wasn't as if all those cars were heading for the Coliseum.
The announced attendance of 7,689 probably included the no-shows, the players scratched from the lineup and Santa Claus, who rode the Zamboni as it resurfaced the ice between periods.


A Lincoln Manuscript Is Sold for $1.5 Million
The earliest-known draft of Abraham Lincoln's "house divided" doctrine opposing slavery was purchased on Wednesday at Sotheby's in New York for $1.5 million, a record at auction for an American autograph and manuscript.
The buyers were the New York businessmen Richard Gilder and Lewis E. Lehrman.


Trade Warrior Packs Briefing Books
Carla A. Hills, the only economic official in President Bush's Cabinet to emerge with an enhanced reputation, has helped to forge more than four dozen free-trade agreements during nearly four years as the United States trade representative.
"You look at the economic achievements of the Bush Administration, and most of them lie on her doorstep," said Jeffrey J. Schott, a trade policy expert at the Institute for International Economics here.


Review/Dance; Ailey Troupe Presents Its First Work by Zollar
It would have been hard for the company premiere of Jawole Willa Jo Zollar's "Shelter," presented by the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater on Wednesday night at City Center, not to have been an event.
The dance is a departure for the Ailey company.
And it was the first time a work by Ms.
Zollar, a choreographer with a style and passion all her own, had been presented by a major dance company outside her own Urban Bush Women troupe.
It would be impossible to match the Bush Women's honed intensity.
The six Ailey women bring out the dance values in "Shelter" to a greater degree than Ms.
Zollar's dancers tend to, thereby revealing her complex, seamless weave of dance, words and music.
No untrained dancer could perform "Shelter" credibly.
And yet these are taut, angled bodies that communicate something a good deal less rarefied than even the most accessible and popular pieces in the Ailey company's repertory.


George Bush's Last Chance on Vietnam
In the remaining weeks of his term, President Bush can finish the last chapter of the Vietnam War.
More than 17 years after the end of formal hostilities, the groundwork has at last been laid for mutually profitable economic cooperation and normal diplomatic ties.
Mr.
Bush has already made a good start by freeing U.S. companies to bid for future business in Vietnam.
But Americans are still prohibited from doing such business, Washington still opposes loans to Hanoi from development banks, and diplomatic relations remain ruptured.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  PRINCIPAL SLAIN IN SCHOOL CROSSFIRE
The principal of a grade school in one of Brooklyn's toughest neighborhoods was slain in an apparent crossfire as he searched for a missing pupil in a crime-ridden housing project.
The victim, Patrick Daly, 48, the principal of Public School 15 in Red Hook, was looking for a fourth-grade boy who had left school in tears earlier after a fight with another 9-year-old.
Page A1.
MAYOR GOES TO CROWN HEIGHTS AGAIN
Mayor David N. Dinkins went to Brooklyn for the second day in a row to meet with more religious and community leaders from Crown Heights in search of long-term racial and ethnic harmony in the neighborhood.
B3


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  BOSTON RED SOX -- Announced they will not offer a contract to Ellis Burks, outfielder.
CHICAGO WHITE SOX -- Named Mike Barnett hitting instructor and Kirk Champion pitching coach at Birmingham of the Southern League.
CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Agreed to terms with Felix Fermin, shortstop, on a two-year contract, and Jeff Treadway, infielder, on a minor-league contract.
MINNESOTA TWINS -- Agreed to terms with Dave Winfield, outfielder, on a two-year contract.
OAKLAND ATHLETICS -- Agreed to terms with Ron Darling, pitcher, on a three-year contract.
National League  METS -- Traded Roger Mason and Mike Freitas, pitchers, to the San Diego Padres for Mike Maddux, pitcher.
Named Al Harazin chief operating officer, effective Jan. 1, and Frank Cashen senior vice president-consultant.
ATLANTA BRAVES -- Agreed to terms with Tom Glavine, pitcher, on a four-year contract, and Steve Bedrosian, pitcher, on a minor-league contract.
CHICAGO CUBS -- Released Phil Bradley, outfielder, and Jerry Kutzler, pitcher, from Orlando of the Southern League.
Named Jerry Weinstein manager and Alan Dunn pitching coach at Geneva of the New York-Penn League; Steve Kolinsky manager, Ray Sadecki pitching coach and Phil Hannon coach at Huntington of the Appalachian League; and Butch Hughes manager and Stan Kyles pitching coach at their Gulf Coast League affiliate.
Signed Jose Bautista, Jim Czajkowski, Blaise Ilsley and Mike York, pitchers; Kelly Mann and Orlando Mercado, catchers; Dan Lewis, Greg Lonigro and Greg Smith, infielders; and Eduardo Zambrano and Roberto Zambrano, outfielders, to contracts with Iowa of the American Association.
Signed Jimmy Williams, pitcher, to a contract with Orlando.
SAN FRANCISCO GIANTS -- Claimed Charles Phillips, first baseman, off waivers from the California Angels.
Named Barney Nugent assistant trainer.
Basketball  National Basketball Association  NBA -- Named Jeffrey Mishkin senior vice president-legal and business affairs and promoted Joel Litvin, general deputy counsel, to general counsel.
Continental Basketball Association  COLUMBUS HORIZON -- Signed Ronald Rutland, guard.
GRAND RAPIDS HOOPS -- Signed Eric McLaughlin, guard.
LA CROSSE CATBIRDS -- Signed David Rivers, guard.
OKLAHOMA CITY CAVALRY -- Signed Mike Bell, forward.
ROCHESTER RENEGADE -- Acquired Elliot Perry, guard, from the La Crosse Catbirds for future considerations.
WICHITA FALLS TEXANS -- Signed Frank Kornet, forward.
Placed Elston Turner, forward, on the injured list.
United States Basketball League  JACKSONVILLE HOOTERS -- Named Dicky McGriffin director of communications.
Football  National Football League  JETS -- Waived Huey Richardson, defensive end.
PITTSBURGH STEELERS -- Signed Maury Toy, running back, to the practice squad.
Hockey  National Hockey League  HARTFORD WHALERS -- Sent Jamie Leach, right wing, to Springfield of the American Hockey League for two weeks of conditioning.
TORONTO MAPLE LEAFS -- Sent Joe Sacco, left wing, and Drake Berehowsky, defenseman, to St.
John's of the American Hockey League.
VANCOUVER CANUCKS -- Sent Shawn Antoski, left wing, to Hamilton of the American Hockey League.
Colonial Hockey League  FLINT BULLDOGS -- Activated Larry Bernard, forward, from the injury list.
Placed Doug Garbarz, defenseman, on the injury list.
Track and field
USA TRACK &amp; FIELD -- Suspended Gordon Bloch, marathoner, for four years after she tested positive for the banned substance probenecid following the New York City Marathon on Nov. 1.


Kohl May Send 1,500 Troops to Somalia
Chancellor Helmut Kohl announced today that he wanted to send up to 1,500 German soldiers to Somalia early next year to help the American-led international relief effort there, the first time since World War II that German forces would be sent outside NATO's territorial confines.
Deploring endless legalistic discussions about whether the 1949 Constitution allowed the deployment of German troops beyond NATO territory -- an impasse that prevented Germany from taking part in the military operation against Iraq last year -- Mr.
Kohl asked his coalition Government today to take action.


22 Arrested In Cellular Call Thefts
The police said today that 22 people had been arrested and an array of equipment seized as part of a nationwide investigation into the theft of millions of dollars of air time from local cellular-phone networks.
"This is a new and growing business, and companies want to put an end to it very quickly," said Susan Passoni, analyst with Smith Barney.


Art in Review
'NASA' 'A Quarter-Century of Space Exploration'
Robert Mann Gallery  42 East 76th Street  Through Jan. 30
Space travel has become something of an everyday marvel, but this valuable show recalls the days when it was a national obsession and fascination.
In prints made directly from the original negatives and transparencies, the highlights of the American side of the space race are depicted from the first suborbital flight, by Alan B. Shepard Jr. in 1961, to the space shuttle.


A Man Who Won Trust And Offered a Way Out
Patrick Daly hoped he could make a difference in a neighborhood where the sprawling brick Red Hook housing projects are as hemmed in by poverty, crime and violence as they are cut off from the rest of Brooklyn by the asphalt and concrete Maginot line of the Gowanus Expressway.
When his young charges were in danger of going astray, he left his principal's office at Public School 15, escorted them home for an old-fashioned talk with their parents, venturing down violent streets.
In a way, each step was an affirmation of his mission -- the power of education to transform a life.


No Coach Decision, Giants Say
The Giants' management insisted today that contrary to reports, no decision had been made on whether Ray Handley would be retained as the team's coach next year.
"Nothing will be done until the season is over," said John K. Mara, the team's executive vice president and legal counsel.
"That's when we will evaluate everyone. There will be nothing before the season ends. No decision has been made. He has not been asked to resign.


American Recreation Centers reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 25


U.N. About to Step Up Action on Serbia
The United Nations Security Council has all but agreed on a series of new measures, some involving the use of military force if necessary, to compel the leadership of Serbia and the Serbs in Bosnia to obey its orders and curb aggression against Croats and Muslims.
The resolution the Council is considering would provide United Nations military escorts for inspectors and relief workers investigating reports of Serbian atrocities, permit the use of force to back up a ban on flights over Bosnia and Herzegovina and send observers to halt the spread of ethnic violence into Kosovo province, in Serbia.


Art in Review
Candida Alvarez
Bronx Museum of the Arts  1040 Grand Concourse  The Bronx  Through Jan. 10
The four multi-panel paintings in Candida Alvarez's show date from the last two years, and with their shared theme of organic growth and change, they make a cohesive group.
Three panels of "In Formation" are filled with swirling strokes of blended black and white paint, suggesting a kind of primordial chaos of whirlpools and tornadoes.
The fourth holds the image of what could be an undeveloped, embryonic human form.


Williams Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


A Bad Knicks Rehearsal Before Curtain Goes Up in Boston
An angry Pat Riley walked briskly from the floor after today's practice, upset at what he had just witnessed.
Was this New York's worst practice of the season?


Selig Altschul, an Aviation Expert And Investment Adviser, 78, Dies
Selig Altschul, long a premier financial expert and counselor to the aviation industry and those investing in it, died yesterday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 78 and until recently also kept a home in Pawling, N.Y.
He died of cancer, his family said.
Mr.
Altschul's company, Aviation Advisory Service Inc. in Manhattan, served leading airlines and aircraft companies in this country and abroad.
He established his consulting practice in 1947 and headed it as president until he suffered a stroke in 1990.


Art in Review
Sally Gall
Julie Saul Gallery  155 Spring Street, at West Broadway  SoHo  Through Thursday
Sally Gall continues to use Pictorialist devices, including soft focus and warm print tones, in her decorous landscape photographs.
Here she shows pictures made in Java, Bali and Scotland.


Shopko Stores reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 5


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The company that employs Howard Stern faces a $600,000 fine imposed by the F.C.C. for "indecent" comments on the air by the New York radio host.
But the commission backed away from a much tougher proposal to block Infinity Broadcasting from the $100 million purchase of three big radio stations.  [ Page A1. ]
Complying with regulations costs banks $17.5 billion a year, Federal banking authorities said in an annual report.
But they cautioned against relaxing the rules.  [ D1. ]


Heads of Their Class
JIM COURIER and MONICA SELES have been named world champions by the International Tennis Federation.


CHRONICLE
MONTEL WILLIAMS, the television talk-show host, has been both a marine and a lieutenant commander in the Navy.
When American troops went to Somalia, he decided he had to do a show on "the families left behind," he said.
Yesterday, Mr.
Williams was aboard the U.S.S.
Essex, an amphibious assault ship, off San Diego with 450 spouses of servicemen and servicewomen and their children.
He was taping a show in which family members talked about being apart at holiday time.
The syndicated program, "The Montel Williams Show," is to be seen around the country on Monday.


Gumbel in Lead Chair For '94 Winter Games
On the A list of prime-time Olympic anchors, two names stand out: Jim McKay and Bob Costas.
McKay set the standard.
Costas more than equaled it.
Unfortunately, CBS's experiment in pairing Tim McCarver and Paula Zahn last February at the Winter Olympics in Albertville, France, was unsuccessful.
Overly scripted with stilted chit-chat in a sterile studio, Zahn and McCarver appeared eager to bolt for spontaneous work on a slope.


Executive Changes
BANC ONE CORP., Columbus, Ohio, appointed Frederick L. Cullen chief financial officer.
COMERICA INC., Detroit, named Judith C. Lalka Dart executive vice president, general counsel and corporate secretary of Comerica Bank.


Gunmen Reappear in Somalia, Renewing Security Concerns
A week after American marines landed here, Somali gunmen have reappeared in large numbers on the streets, apparently deciding that the foreign troops will make no serious effort to disarm them.
In addition, violence has increased in regions where there is no foreign military presence, United States officials said today.


Corrections
A picture caption on Nov. 19 about the unveiling of New York City's new Police Academy omitted the identity of a principal designer.
Peter Pran is design principal-in-charge of the project; Michael Fieldman is design principal.


THE TRANSITION: Clinton Selects Ex-Mayor for H.U.D. and an Ex-Marine for Veterans Affairs; Defender of the Rights of Veterans Masters Thickets of Regulations
Had Jesse Brown been a lawyer, he would have been a defense attorney, not a prosecutor.
In the world of veterans' affairs, defenders of veterans' rights have survived and flourished; people raising questions about those rights have not.
Bill Clinton's choice of Jesse Brown, the executive director of the Disabled Veterans of America, to head the Department of Veterans Affairs serves to underscore that point.


Morton Stavis, 77, Lawyer Active In Variety of Civil Liberties Cases
Morton Stavis, a civil liberties lawyer and a founder of the Center for Constitutional Rights, died yesterday at South Coast Hospital in Laguna Beach, Calif., where he was visiting.
He was 77 and lived in Manhattan.
He died of head injuries from a fall, his family said.


In Spirit of Giving, the Giants and Handley May Get It From the Fans
Two intriguing questions remain about the Giants' game here against the Kansas City Chiefs Saturday, and neither concerns who wins or who loses.
Instead, at issue, is how many people will show up for the final home game of the season and how harshly they will treat the home team.


G.M. Papers Detail Costs In Plant Shift
The General Motors Corporation believed it would be cheaper in the long run to keep a Michigan assembly plant open, but opted to spend less up front and move production of large cars to Texas, according to company documents.
The previously confidential papers were unsealed on Wednesday by Judge Donald Shelton of Washtenaw County Circuit Court in Ann Arbor.
They show that G.M. had estimated it would save more than $74 million a year by using the Willow Run plant near Ypsilanti.





NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-15  ISRAELIS EXPEL ARABS  Buses filled with nearly 400 bound and blindfolded Palestinians crossed the border into Lebanon as Israeli troops carried out mass expulsions ordered by the Government and sanctioned by Israel's Supreme Court after a day of legal arguments and acrimony.
A1  U.S. opposes the deportations as violations of international law.
A12  Clinton suggested that Israel's action may imperil peace talks.
A13  GUNMEN RETURN TO STREETS  A week after the U.S. military were deployed in Mogadishu, Somali gunmen reappeared in large numbers on the streets, apparently after deciding that the foreign troops will make no effort to disarm them.
A1  GERMAN SOLDIERS FOR SOMALIA  Chancellor Helmut Kohl announced that he wanted to send up to 1,500 German soldiers to Somalia early next year to help the international relief effort, the first time since World War II that their forces would be sent outside NATO territory.
A3  Heat is the enemy of U.S. soldiers in Somalia.
A10  U.N.
BACKS NEW CURBS ON SERB  The United Nations Security Council has all but agreed on a series of new measures, some involving the use of military force if necessary, to compel President Slobodan Milosevic and his Serbian allies in Bosnia to obey its orders and curb aggression against Croats and Muslims.
A14  NATIONALIST SYMBOLS FOR CROATIA  Nearly 18 months have passed since Croatia declared its independence from Yugoslavia, and the signs of self-conscious nationalism are everywhere.
This involves reaching back across history for flags and emblems and ceremonial uniforms to a time when Croatia was an outpost of the Austro-Hungarian empire.
A14  WAITING FOR SERBIAN ELECTION  In the Serbian heartland, voters were divided as they await the opening of polls on Sunday for what may be the most important election ever held in Yugoslavia, the election for the Serbian President.
A14  YELTSIN ON CHINA VISIT
President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia arrived in Beijing for a three-day visit that is intended to cement economic ties with China.
A3  The Hungarian Parliament voted to codify its laws on abortion.
A5  Polish coal miners went on strike, protesting low wages.A6  National A16-34  PROSECUTOR IN PASSPORT CASE  Attorney General William P. Barr has appointed an independent prosecutor to conduct a criminal investigation of the State Department's search of Bill Clinton's passport files, officials say.
A1  MORE CABINET SELECTIONS  President-elect Bill Clinton has chosen Representative Les Aspin, chairman of the House Armed Services Committee, as Secretary of Defense and former Gov.
Richard Riley of South Carolina as Secretary of Education, officials say.
A1  A SPOKESMAN FOR VETERANS  Jesse Brown, Bill Clinton's choice to head the Department of Veterans Affairs, has long been a defender of veterans' rights.
A32  REBUILDING A POLITICAL CAREER  Since leaving the San Antonio mayor's office in 1989, Henry G. Cisneros has worked to resuscitate his personal and professional prospects.
He succeeded.
Bill Clinton chose him to be the next Housing Secretary.
A32  PENALTY FOR RADIO REMARKS  Federal regulators will impose a $600,000 fine on the company that employs Howard Stern, the New York radio host known for his sexually explicit remarks.
But the company will not be blocked from buying three big radio stations.
A1  NEW GOVERNOR, OLD PROBLEMS  Puerto Ricans elected a governor last month who promised to be "a new leader for a new beginning." But Pedro Rossello will have to grapple with many of the problems that have bedeviled his predecessors.
A16  ROBB TESTIFIES TO GRAND JURY  Senator Charles S. Robb appeared before a Federal grand jury in Norfolk, Va., and later indicated that he expected to be indicted for what prosecutors call his role in eavesdropping on his political rival, Gov.
L.
Douglas Wilder.
A16  NEW YOSEMITE PARK OPERATORS  The National Park Service awarded the Delaware North Companies the concession contract for Yosemite National Park, the biggest concession in the park system.
A22  RULING ON WORKER PARTICIPATION  In a decision that may affect employee participation initiatives like management-worker teams at companies across the nation, the National Labor Relations Board ruled that one such program violates the Federal labor law.
A23  ADVANCE IN AIDS RESEARCH  An experimental vaccine developed from a genetically altered virus has protected monkeys against an AIDS-like disease for more than three years, scientists said.
A30  A nuclear panel responds to radiation deaths.
A27  An inquiry finds hurricane repairs in Florida are often shoddy.
A28  Alexandria Journal: A rare unifying force for Somalis.
A16 Metro Digest B1  BROOKLYN PRINCIPAL IS SLAIN  The principal of a grade school in one of Brooklyn's toughest neighborhoods, a man who often took children by the hand through streets ruled by drug gangs and violence, was slain as he searched for a missing pupil in a crime-ridden housing project.
A1  EMPIRE BLUE CROSS INVESTIGATED  A Congressional panel has begun a wide-ranging investigation of Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield to see whether mismanagement at the big New York insurance company contributed to its huge financial losses in the last two years.
A1  Business Digest D1  Weekend C1-38  Film: "Toys." C1  "Leap of Faith." C14  Law B14  A furor in Cincinnati after a ruling on displays of religious symbols.
Sports B15-20  Basketball: Petrovic 3-point play wins for Nets.
B15 Obituaries B13  Morton Stavis, founder of the Center for Constitutional Rights.
Editorials/Op-Ed A38-39  Editorials  Don't orphan the peace process.
Real responses to Crown Heights.
Bush's last chance on Vietnam.
Topics: A Russian democrat.
Letters  A. M. Rosenthal: Toys or torture.
Anthony Lewis: Pressure on Serbia.
John C. Fager: School custodians' dirty tricks.
Ruth Behar: A bridge to Cuba.
Neediest Cases B10


Horizon Healthcare reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Edwards (A.G.) Inc.(N) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


INSIDE
Trade Pact Is Signed
The leaders of Mexico, Canada and the United States signed a free-trade agreement ending barriers to commerce in North America.
Page D1.
Limiting Juror Error Appeals
Averting a potential legal calamity, a New York court decided criminal cases involving jury selection errors don't have to be retried.
Page B1.
U.S.
Sued on Cable Law
Bell Atlantic sued to overturn a law keeping phone companies out of the cable TV program business.
Page D1.


Ex-Schott Aide Appeals
A former Cincinnati Reds employee whose lawsuit focused public attention on the use of racial slurs by the team's owner, MARGE SCHOTT, has taken his case to a state appeals court.
TIM SABO asked the First Ohio District Court of Appeals on Wednesday to reinstate the part of his lawsuit that charges that he was dismissed because of damaging testimony he gave in a lawsuit that limited partners of the Reds filed against Schott.


Clinton Is Critical Of The Expulsions
President-elect Bill Clinton suggested today that Israel should not have deported 400 Palestinians, saying he was concerned it could imperil Middle East peace talks.
Mr.
Clinton, at a news conference, also called on Serbs to use their votes on Sunday to oust their president, Slobodan Milosevic.
On Wednesday, the Bush Administration named Mr.
Milosevic and other Serbian and Croatian leaders as "possible war criminals" who should be put on trial.


Blacks and Jews Join Hands for a Brighter Future
After more than 18 months of racial and ethnic unrest, Jews and blacks joined hands last night in an emotional session at Harlem's historic Apollo Theater to recall their past alliances and pray for future healing.
The reason for the gathering was the showing of a documentary on the black soldiers who liberated Jews from Nazi concentration camps at the end of World War II.
But the real drama occurred on the great stage of the Apollo after the house lights came up and Jews and blacks hugged, wept, held hands and vowed to put their differences behind them.
Jackson and Dinkins Speak
It was an emotional catharsis that included the singing of "We Shall Overcome," personal reminiscences from the Rev.
Jesse Jackson and Mayor David N. Dinkins's quoting the great Talmudic sage Hillel.


Duplex Products reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Board Chief Assails Aides To Fernandez
H.
Carl McCall, the president of the New York City Board of Education, offered pointed and public criticism of aides to Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez yesterday over their role in writing and reviewing a multicultural teaching guide, "Children of the Rainbow."
Mr.
McCall, who has been a staunch ally of the Chancellor, said that Mr.
Fernandez lacked staff sufficiently "grounded" in multicultural education, an issue that has become a growing source of strife because of the Rainbow guide's efforts to promote respect and appreciation for gay people.


Lucien Goldschmidt, Rare-Book Dealer, 80
Lucien Goldschmidt, a dealer in rare and illustrated books, prints and drawings, died yesterday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 80 years old.
He died of a viral infection, his family said.


Cuomo Loves New York, And He's Explaining Why
When he announced almost exactly a year ago that he would not be a candidate for President, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo said his greatest regret was giving up a national forum to rebut the attacks on New York being leveled by Republican politicians.
The campaign may be over, but Mr.
Cuomo is still rebutting.
At New York University yesterday, he kicked off "The Real New York" lecture series, a six-month program of speeches by state officials aimed at debunking what Mr.
Cuomo refers to as "the shibboleths" about the state and, more to the point, about his record in governing it.


In Serbian Town, the Voters Are Sharply Divided
Here in the Serbian heartland, voters are sharply divided as they await the opening of polls on Sunday for what may be the most important election ever held in Yugoslavia.
Some support Slobodan Milosevic, the militantly nationalistic President of the Serbian republic who is seeking a new mandate for the drive to create a "greater Serbia" extending far beyond the republic's current borders, incorporating parts of Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Others fear that Mr.
Milosevic's re-election would bring disaster to their isolated nation, and believe the only hope for peace lies with the opposition candidate, the Serbian-American millionaire Milan Panic, the Yugoslav federal Prime Minister.


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L.
Jagr's Overtime Goal Wins It for Penguins  Jaromir Jagr scored with 2 minutes 10 seconds remaining in overtime to lift the Pittsburgh Penguins over the host Philadelphia Flyers, 5-4, last night.
Jagr picked up a deflected pass from Mario Lemieux in the right circle and beat Philadelphia goaltender Tommy Soderstrom, who was making his National Hockey League debut.
The winning goal was Jagr's league-leading seventh of the season.
He has 14 goals over all.
Pittsburgh has won five of its last six and is unbeaten in its last 11 against the Flyers (8-0-3).
Philadelphia's sixth straight loss tied the club record set in 1970.
Kevin Dineen had given Philadelphia a 4-4 tie at 5:10 of the third period when he skated in front of the Pittsburgh net and lifted a backhander that beat Tom Barrasso.
The goal also snapped an 11-game scoreless drought for Dineen. (AP) Canadiens 8, Nordiques 3: Montreal scored six first-period goals in Quebec and went on to avenge a loss to its provincial rival a night earlier.
The Canadiens, who lost by 5-1 to Quebec at Montreal on Wednesday, retained first place in the Adams Division, 4 points ahead of the second-place Nordiques.
In the wild first period, the teams combined for 9 goals on 18 shots: Montreal took a 4-0 lead, Quebec rallied to make the score 4-3, and the Canadiens added two more goals to lead by 6-3.
Montreal stopped Quebec's five-game unbeaten streak and also earned its first victory over the Nordiques in five regular-season games since last Dec. 26. (AP) Blackhawks 5, Jets, 1: Ed Belfour ran his unbeaten streak to seven games as Chicago remained unbeaten for the 11th straight time at home by beating Winnipeg.
Belfour stopped 29 shots to extend his streak to 6-0-1.
The Blackhawks' penalty-killers shut down the Jets on all 10 of their power plays.
Jeremy Roenick scored two goals to lead the Blackhawks, who are 9-0-2 in their last 11 at home and have won five straight over all. (AP) TENNIS Injured Cash Quits Match The former Wimbledon champion Pat Cash, bothered by a recurring knee injury, retired yesterday while trailing fellow Australian Wally Limberger in the Colonial Mutual Classic, an exhibition tournament in Melbourne, Australia.
Limberger had taken the first set, 6-4, when Cash decided that the tendinitis in his knee was too painful to continue.
Cash, who did not withdraw from the round-robin tournament, said he was still hoping to play for Australia in its first-round Davis Cup match against the United States in late March.
That matchup will be held on the same Kooyong grass courts being used for this exhibition. (AP)


Legislature Passes School-Financing Bill
With their attention fixed on next year's elections, both houses of the New Jersey Legislature today passed a compromise school-financing bill intended to keep the politically explosive issue out of the campaign.
Gov.
Jim Florio has said he will sign it.
The bill provides more money for poorer districts, insures that affluent districts will get as least as much as in the past and appoints a study commission to come up with a new financing formula.


We Need More Political Activity by Charities
To the Editor:
Overt political activity by churches and tax-exempt religious organizations is indeed illegal, as Anthony Lewis points out in "Tax-Exempt Politics?" (column, Nov. 30).
But revoking their tax-exempt status is not likely, especially in the case of the Roman Catholic Church, one of the worst offenders.
We ought to look at another solution: let all charities engage in limited political activity.
Charities (including churches and religious organizations) are now permitted to engage in a limited amount of lobbying, which is defined as advocating the passage or defeat of legislation.
They are absolutely prohibited, however, from advocating the election or defeat of candidates.
This means charities cannot endorse candidates, donate money to them or engage in overtly partisan activities.
Nonpartisan voter education and get-out-the-vote activities are permitted if in compliance with strict guidelines.
Organizations that violate the rules can have their tax-exempt status revoked, and their managers are subject to fines and penalties if the violations are found to be willful.


Premier Industrial reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
7.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
4.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.93
3.02
4.50
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.18
3.19
4.05
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.35
3.32
4.15
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.39
6.40
6.66
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.42
7.43
7.65
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.42
8.43
8.75
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.42
6.42
6.77
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Response to Radiation Deaths
The chairman of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission said yesterday that it would reform its regulation of nuclear materials used in medical treatments, partly in response to news articles in The Cleveland Plain Dealer disclosing fatal overdoses.
The chairman, Ivan Selin, said one change would be to follow up each case of overexposure and tell the patient the extent of the problem.
The Plain Dealer said that information had been kept from many patients and their survivors.


Council Approves Trump's Plan For Apartments on the West Side
Donald J. Trump's huge residential project along the Hudson River on Manhattan's West Side won final approval last night from the City Council.
But with a continuing recession and a deep real-estate slump in New York, there were doubts that anything would be built soon.
The $3 billion project is by far the most ambitious and expensive development approved by the Council since it assumed land-use power from the old Board of Estimate, which was abolished two years ago under a new City Charter.
The vote was 42 to 8, with one member absent.


Sounds Around Town
Gospel From Alabama
Inkhay, Merkin Concert Hall, 129 West 67th Street, Manhattan, (212) 362-8719.
This musical ensemble and dancers, from the Andes Mountains in South America, makes folk music that is highly ethereal and rhythmically charged using 26 different instruments.
The arsenal includes pan pies, a variety of flutes and percussion, and the 10-string miniature guitar known as the charango.
The group, which was formed in 1984, is led by Pepe Santana, a pioneer in the presentation of traditional Andean music in New York.
Show time is tomorrow at 8 P.M.; tickets are $15.


Pro Bono Accounts
*
Department of Health, New York, to Marshall Jaccoma Mitchell, New York, to introduce a public service campaign that urges tuberculosis patients to take their prescribed medication.


Trouble in Paradise, Courtesy of Winds and Rough
Amid lush-life luxury in a tournament in which last place gets $50,000 and first gets better than 10 times more, the world's best golfers were ambushed on Thursday at the Johnnie Walker World Championship.
Lying in wait was the Tryall Golf Club, formerly a friendly resort course that has converted to a United States Open-like monster specifically for this occasion.
In the customary wind tunnel conditions that cool this steamy vacation land, Tryall's tropical rough swallowed golf balls and easily defended par.


U.S. Trade Deficit Narrows to $7 Billion
In a surprising tally that conveyed mixed messages about the economy, the Commerce Department reported today that the nation's trade deficit narrowed sharply in October, to $7 billion, as exports jumped to a new record.
Imports fell moderately.
The $1.6 billion monthly improvement, to the smallest merchandise trade gap since June, was hailed by the Bush Administration but greeted skeptically by most private analysts.


Pop/Jazz
The trumpeter Wynton Marsalis starts to sing the melody to "Jingle Bells," and then breaks off to give a quick lesson.
"See, the program we're doing on Saturday is based around the idea of syncopation, so I'll identify the downbeat" (he sings some more, and claps his hands), "the backbeat" (he changes what he sings), "and the offbeat" (the clapping changes).
"Christmas songs are a great way to teach kids about music," he said.
"They're fun to play, and most people have heard them, so it's obvious what we're doing to them."


Parole Board Denies Release Of Chambers for 2 More Years
Robert E. Chambers Jr., who killed Jennifer Levin in Central Park in 1986 in what became known as "the preppy murder," will not be released from prison for at least two more years, a state parole board announced yesterday.
Mr.
Chambers, 25 years old, was eligible to be paroled in February, when he will have spent five years in custody.
But the three-member parole board, which interviewed Mr.
Chambers on Wednesday at the Clinton state prison in Dannemora, denied the parole.
The board also said he must wait the maximum period, two years, to reapply for release.


Indresco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Syncor International reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Books of The Times; The Way the West Was Won, and Reinvented
Gunfighter Nation The Myth of the Frontier in 20th-Century America By Richard Slotkin 850 pages.
Atheneum. $40
Since 1893, when Frederick Jackson Turner delivered his epoch-making address on the crisis America faced in the closing of its geographic frontier, historians have been busy debating the winning and losing of the West.
The latest study to tackle this widely written-about subject is the scholar Richard Slotkin's stirring new book, "Gunfighter Nation: The Myth of the Frontier in 20th-Century America," the concluding volume in an ambitious trilogy tracing the evolution of the myth of the American frontier.
"Gunfighter Nation" builds on ideas laid out in the trilogy's first two volumes, "Regeneration Through Violence" (1973) and "The Fatal Environment" (1985).
It often echoes the work of other scholars as well, most notably, Henry Nash Smith's influential "Virgin Land: The American West as Symbol and Myth" (1950) and "The West of the Imagination" (1989) by William H. and William N. Goetzmann.
At the same time, the book breaks new ground in its careful explication of the continuing dynamic between politics and myth, myth and popular culture.


Corrections
An article on Nov. 25 about a recommendation by an advisory committee of the Food and Drug Administration that food be fortified with folic acid referred incorrectly in some copies to the amount that might be taken by people with vitamin B12 deficiencies.
It is more than one milligram, not more than 1,000 milligrams.


Art in Review
Damien Hirst
Cohen Gallery  1018 Madison Avenue (near 78th Street)  Through Jan. 28
In his first solo show in a New York City gallery, Damien Hirst, an English artist best known for suspending a whole dead shark in a tank of formaldehyde (in a London exhibition), takes a relatively low-key approach.
His installation piece "Pharmacy" has a certain shock value, but it's the kind that sneaks up on you, slowly and, one should add, Conceptually.


Clinton Picks Aspin and Ex-Governor for Cabinet
President-elect Bill Clinton has chosen Representative Les Aspin of Wisconsin, chairman of the House Armed Services Committee, as Secretary of Defense and Richard W. Riley, a former Governor of South Carolina, as Secretary of Education, transition and Congressional officials said today.
Mr.
Aspin flew to Little Rock, Ark., today to meet with Mr.
Clinton.
With the expected selections of Warren M. Christopher as Secretary of State and Anthony Lake as national security adviser, Mr.
Clinton hopes to conclude his major Cabinet announcements before he leaves for vacation sometime after Christmas.


Klan's Plan for Cross Stokes Anger in Cincinnati
For weeks now, questions about racial and religious tolerance in this city have centered on the owner's box at Riverfront Stadium.
But come Sunday the focus will move three few blocks north, from Pete Rose Way to Fountain Square, where the Ku Klux Klan will erect a judicially approved cross amid the wreaths and lights.
Just as revelations about the racist and anti-Semitic remarks of Marge Schott, the owner of the Cincinnati Reds, seemed to be subsiding, the holidays arrived.
And Cincinnati, having been ordered by a Federal judge last October to allow a menorah in Fountain Square during the eight days of Hanukkah, could in no way keep out the Klan.
So on Sunday, several plainclothes Klansmen will mount a 10-foot cross, a rough-hewn model of cherry and spruce designed to resemble the original.
Demoralizing Episodes
For this community, which has always considered itself more culturally sophisticated and socially enlightened than nearby rivals like Louisville and Indianapolis, the succession of racial episodes has been demoralizing.
It has also proved divisive and frightening.
When the Klan last tried to raise a cross in Fountain Square, two years ago, the gathering quickly became a melee of rocks, bottles and tin cans.


TV Weekend;   Charlton Heston Finds Another Biblical Career
No, he is not Moses, but he did play Moses in the 1958 Cecil B. DeMille movie "The Ten Commandments." And Charlton Heston clearly knows how to parlay an image into an annuity.
Beginning Sunday, the Arts &amp; Entertainment Network will offer "Charlton Heston Presents the Bible" over four consecutive nights at 8 P.M.
Each installment lasts an hour.
Taped in Israel this year, the series seeks out the sites of events in the Bible.
Sometimes a little fudging is required.
Jerusalem's Church of the Holy Sepulcher, for instance, is described as the place built where Christ "is said to have been" crucified.
Mr.
Heston's approach is primarily artistic, considering the Bible as a work of art.
"I'm not a priest or a rabbi," he notes.
"I'm an actor, and actors tell stories. From my perspective, there are simply no greater stories to tell."


Argument Ends in Death on Subway
A subway rider who had been punched by a stranger pulled out a gun and killed his assailant when the man returned to resume the argument late Wednesday night, the transit police said yesterday.
The slain man was identified as Anthony Johnson, 24.
A friend of Mr.
Johnson was wounded, but it was not clear whether the shooter was aiming for him.
Before about 20 other stunned passengers could react, the gunman left the train and fled.


Review/Theater; Patrick Stewart's Dickens
Patrick Stewart's one-man version of "A Christmas Carol" was originally presented on Broadway last season.
The show has reopened at the Broadhurst Theater, 235 West 44th Street, Manhattan.
Following are excerpts from Mel Gussow's review, which appeared in The New York Times on Dec. 20, 1991.
"A Christmas Carol" has been so musicalized and cinematized that it may be difficult to remember the beautiful simplicity of the original Dickens story, an ode to Christmas past, present and future and a moral fable of heartwarming intensity.
Patrick Stewart's one-man dramatic version is restorative, revealing the work's full narrative splendor.


Crown Hts. Gets Offering From Mayor
Mayor David N. Dinkins went to Brooklyn yesterday for the second day in a row to meet with more religious and community leaders from Crown Heights in search of long-term racial and ethnic harmony.
This time, the Mayor brought with him an array of relatively small initiatives intended to demonstrate what City Hall can do for the neighborhood.
The two meetings strongly suggest that the Mayor and many religious and community leaders in Brooklyn are trying to shift the debate from the broad, often bitter, accusations that have dogged Mr.
Dinkins since the racial violence in August 1991 to a more specific, measured discussion on pragmatic questions of delivery of city services.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows, performances and art exhibitions in the New York metropolitan region that are to close soon: Closing This Weekend
"JOINED AT THE HEAD," Manhattan Theater Club Stage II, City Center, 131 West 55th Street.
A drama by Catherine Butterfield about a successful novelist who meets her high-school sweetheart during a book-signing tour.
Through Sunday.
Performances: today at 7:30 P.M. and tomorrow and Sunday at 3 and 7:30 P.M.
Tickets: $32.
Information: (212) 581-7907.


YELTSIN STARTING 3-DAY CHINA VISIT
President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia arrived here today for a three-day visit that is intended to cement economic ties with China and reassert a working relationship that was thrown into doubt by the collapse of the Soviet Union and the abandonment of Communism there.
"We have to open a new era in relations between Russia and China,"


No Headline
In a decision seen as a setback to the Government's war on child pornography, a Federal appeals court has struck down key portions of a law prohibiting production and distribution of pornographic materials depicting minors.
The ruling issued on Wednesday by a three-judge panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit declared that the 1977 law used to convict a distributor of adult videos was "fatally flawed." In its 2-to-1 decision, the court said the provision of the law, the Protection of Children Against Sexual Exploitation Act, dealing with distribution violated the First Amendment's guarantee of freedom of speech.


Welcome to Yanks (Pardon the Chaos)
The day was supposed to be about Jimmy Key, about how thrilled one of the marquee free agents was to have signed a four-year contract worth $17 million to pitch for the Yankees, about how excited the former Blue Jays left-hander was to be in New York and how puzzled he was that other free agents did not share his enthusiasm.
But the planned main attraction of the news conference yesterday turned into a preliminary event at Yankee Stadium because the emphasis was quickly shifted by reporters to the latest controversy within the Yankee organization: Who is responsible for pursuing free agents and making the team's baseball decisions?


Real Responses to Crown Heights
I am calling upon all people of good will in all communities to step back from their anger.
I urge them to join me in stopping the jarring verbal confrontations that are impeding us from finding answers to our city's problems.
With these words, Mayor David Dinkins of New York began a whirlwind round of community meetings to ease the angry war of words sparked by the conflict in Brooklyn's Crown Heights.
But meetings and rhetoric alone won't dispel the tensions between the Caribbean-American blacks and the Hasidic Jews who share the neighborhood.
What's needed is vigorous action.


Don't Orphan the Peace Process
The Arab-Israeli peace talks are imperiled by terrorist murders carried out in Israel by Islamic militants and by Israel's retaliatory expulsion of some 400 Palestinians yesterday.
The escalating confrontation threatens to eclipse a rare historic moment when peace in the Middle East appears achievable.
A firm response from Washington and from Little Rock, showing that the United States is determined to keep the peace talks on track, is urgently needed.
What's at risk is disastrous loss of momentum.
Israel has a new and pragmatic Prime Minister, Yitzhak Rabin, who's willing to make territorial concessions in return for a secure peace.
But if the Bush Administration dithers and the incoming Administration wastes months getting its act together, Mr.
Rabin and his potential Arab partners will have little to show as gleeful extremists assail the very notion of reciprocal compromise.


Hungarian Parliament Approves Relatively Liberal Abortion Law
Parliament voted today to codify Hungary's relatively liberal abortion practices.
The law, adopted by a large majority in a series of votes, requires women to consult with a committee before they can seek an abortion.
The composition of such a committee was not specified.


Dining Out in New York City on Just $50 a Day: Bargains Blossom as Restaurants Seek Customers
Here are Bryan Miller and Eric Asimov's tips on dining in New York (lunch and dinner) for $50 a day.
MOVIES TOUR Upper East Side
You don't have to walk far in this neighborhood filled with movie houses to find satisfying, inexpensive fare.
Clustered around the corner of 60th Street and Third Avenue are four solid dining choices, all under the same ownership: Arizona 206 (and its contiguous Arizona 206 Cafe), Contrapunto, Yellowfingers di Nuovo and the Sign of the Dove.
Not all are inexpensive, but if you know when to go and what to order, $50 can cover an exceptional lunch, Milk Duds at the movies and dinner.


Sports of The Times; Newman Also Scored Some Points
THE last time Rock Newman was seen in public in New York, he was wearing a multicolor sweater with Howard University stitched on the front, and a bright kufi, while he brassily supervised Riddick Bowe's triumphant homecoming to Brooklyn.
That was in November, when life was simple, when Bowe was merely the new heavyweight champion of the world.
This time, Rock Newman touched down in New York again, wearing a brown double-breasted suit with wide lapels.
This was his deal suit.
"A very minor figure in Washington said I have an identity crisis," Newman said yesterday.
"He said I went from a dashiki to a three-piece suit. I don't have any three-piece suits. I always buy double-breasted jackets, to hide my gut."


DELTA AIR TO CUT DIVIDEND AND MOST SALARIES
Delta Air Lines said yesterday that it expects to cut its quarterly dividend to 5 cents a share from 30 cents, and on Feb. 1 to cut the pay of 85 percent of its 75,000 employees by 5 percent.
Ronald W. Allen, chairman and chief executive, said the latest austerity measures stemmed from continuing weak economic conditions and the impact of fare wars.
Delta is seeking the same pay cut from its unionized workers -- about 9,400 pilots and 150 members of a union for flight dispatchers.


BRIEFS
Debt  *
Coral Gables, Fla., is tentatively offering $31.7 million of tax-exempt water and sewer revenue bonds with a maximum yield of 6.172 percent for a bond due in 2013 through William R. Hough &amp; Co.
Shorter-maturity serial bonds are priced to yield from 2.80 percent in 1993 to 6.15 percent in 2011.
All the bonds are insured by Financial Guaranty Insurance Co. and rated triple-A by both Moody's Investors Service Inc. and Standard &amp; Poor's Corp. *
CIT Group Holdings Inc. is offering $150 million of 3.95 percent medium-term notes due in 1993 at an initial price of 100 through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.
The noncallable notes are rated A-1 by Moody's and A+ by both S.&amp; P. and Duff &amp; Phelps.


At the Bar; Wherein a judge sits down with lawyers for a beer, then finds that's a reason to cry into it.
The 101 Club is a watering hole less than a block from the St.
Clair County Courthouse.
There, over brew from the nearby Budweiser plant, cases are fomented, settled and rehashed.
When Shakespeare described how lawyers "strive mightily, but eat and drink as friends," it was surely places like this he had in mind.
But recently the 101 Club has become the latest front in the tobacco wars.
And, as Judge Robert LeChien can attest, it has also become a reminder of how fraternizing with lawyers can be hazardous to a judge's health.
His sad saga could bear the same title as the W. C. Fields film, "The Fatal Glass of Beer."


Gary Essert, 54, Dies; Film Festival Founder
Gary Essert, the founder and director of the Los Angeles International Film Festival and the founder and chief executive officer of the American Cinematheque, died on Wednesday at his home in Los Angeles.
He was 54 years old.
He died of AIDS, said Barbara Smith, the managing director of the Cinematheque.


CHRONICLE
In 1928, NORMAN D. VAUGHAN dropped out of Harvard College to accompany Adm.
Richard E. Byrd on his expedition across Antarctica.
Next year, the 65th anniversary of the trip, Mr.
Vaughan, who will turn 87 on Saturday, is planning to return to Antarctica and bring a chapter of history full circle.
"I was the first American to drive a dogsled team there, and I will be the last," he said during a visit to New York from his home in Trapper Creek, Alaska.
An international treaty that takes effect on April 1, 1994, bans dogs from Antarctica on the ground that they can transmit distemper to seals, he said.


When Royalty Proves Merely Mortal
To the Editor:
Re "Charles and Diana Are Separating 'Amicably' " (front page, Dec. 10): What is royalty?
What are its intrinsic qualities?
As Americans, we stand once removed from the complete awe and obedience royalty has demanded from its own through the ages.
And yet, even over here, there has always been a certain acceptance of its greatness, of its majesty.
To see this last bastion of decorum and self-control fail, just as we simple common mortals can fail, is disappointing.
It's a crack in the last hard surface of discipline.
If the stiffest of upper lips crumble, what hope is there for the rest of us?


Review/Film; Chaos in the Fantasy Factory
BARRY LEVINSON'S "Toys" is a magnificent mess, a chaotic fantasy set in a brilliantly vivid, Surreal landscape that recalls the paintings of Magritte and the pop-up illustrations in children's books.
Dada is also evoked, though less consistently.
"Toys" dazzles the eye even as the mind goes numb attending to the narrative, which is about the apocalyptic battle for control of Zevo Toys, where whimsy is said to be a tradition but is more like a curse.
Here is a nonmusical "Babes in Toyland" crossed with "Dr. Strangelove," a danceless "Nutcracker" that suggests "Paradise Lost," yet plays as if it were the nightmare of a child of 4.
"Toys" is supposed to be spontaneous and fun, but it has a drearily self-important message stolen from a bumper sticker: War is hazardous to children and other living things.


Sports Betting Is Way Behind In 4th Quarter
A bill that would have made New Jersey the second state in the nation to offer sports wagering in casinos suffered a setback today that was probably fatal.
The measure, openly opposed by some of the senior Republican leadership, stalled in the Assembly Appropriations Committee, making it extremely unlikely that it will reach the full Assembly for a vote this session, which ends on Jan. 12.
If the measure passes, it would allow New Jersey voters to decide on the November 1993 ballot whether to permit wagering on professional and college sports at Atlantic City's 12 casinos.


'Baby Bell' Fights Cable Law, Citing Right to Free Speech
The escalating turf war between cable television and telephone moved into the courtroom today, as the Bell Atlantic Corporation filed a lawsuit charging that its right to free speech was violated by a law that blocks telephone companies from owning cable television programming.
Bell Atlantic, which owns local telephone companies throughout the mid-Atlantic region, has been the most aggressive of the seven regional Bell companies in seeking to compete head-to-head against cable television companies.


Geneva, the Law and Israel
Deportations of suspected Palestinian militants from the occupied territories have been repeatedly condemned by the United States and other countries as violations of international law, but successive Israeli governments and Israeli Supreme Court rulings call the expulsions legal.
Israel's Emergency Defense Regulations, dating from the British mandate in Palestine, empower regional military commanders in the West Bank and Gaza Strip to order deportations for security reasons.


A Walk in the Sun, Where the Heat Is the Enemy
For the 30 Americans in flak jackets, helmets and heavy gear, the biggest enemy today on the muddy, crowded streets of Baidoa was the heat.
At noon, as the temperature climbed above 110 degrees, the marines of Company E waded two abreast through groping children and wary adults, pouring water on their heads and necks and warning each other to slow down and drink often.


Continental Homes Holding reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Farrel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 1


No Headline
"I asked him not to give up. I told him he had to breathe, and he said, 'Thank you,' before he passed away." -- EDGARDO TORRES, who tried to save the life of a school principal killed in Brooklyn.  [ A1:2. ]


Boitano Speaks Out
BRIAN BOITANO, widely recognized as the best male figure skater, yesterday called an article linking his sport with AIDS "ridiculous" and "a joke."
The Calgary Herald reported last weekend that 40 male skaters and coaches have died of AIDS in North America in recent years and that at least a dozen prominent American and Canadian male skaters have H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS.


Croatian Uses Past to Hide the Present
When visitors ascend the winding road that leads to Franjo Tudjman's sprawling presidential villa, they are greeted by guards who could have stepped out of a Viennese opera.
Stock still, they seem like wax figures in their scarlet tunics with a cross-hatching of gold brocade, and matching cloaks slung dashingly across one shoulder.
Nearly 18 months have passed since Croatia declared its independence from Yugoslavia, and the signs of self-conscious nationalism are everywhere.
Mostly, this involves a reaching back across history, for flags and emblems and ceremonial uniforms harking back to a time when Croatia was an outpost of the Austro-Hungarian empire.


Trade Pact Signed in 3 Capitals
The leaders of Mexico, Canada and the United States signed a free-trade agreement today that would eliminate import taxes and other barriers to commerce across North America.
But the pact faces an uncertain future under the Clinton Administration.
President-elect Bill Clinton said he supported the agreement as a way to create more American jobs and foster economic growth in Mexico and Canada.
But he said again, as he did during the election campaign, that he would seek to negotiate three supplemental agreements and make unilateral changes in American law on labor and environmental issues before he would sign legislation putting the agreement's provisions into law.


Restaurants
A Brazilian theme, a lot of noise and even some Brazilian food.
It's like awakening from a dream and finding yourself in a hip Manhattan restaurant, circa 1985.
First there is the aggressively perfumed, out-of-season-tanned crowd at the reservation desk.
Thudding pop music renders communication with the hostess about as easy as talking on a pay phone from a busy subway platform.
Curiously, your name doesn't seem to be in the reservation book, but, you are assured, by the time you check your coats ($2 minimum) the problem should be solved.


Brooklyn Principal Shot to Death While Looking for Missing Pupil
The principal of a grade school in one of Brooklyn's toughest neighborhoods, a dedicated, gentle man who often took children by the hand through streets ruled by violence, was shot and killed yesterday as he searched for a missing pupil in a crime-ridden housing project.
The authorities said they believed he was caught in a crossfire between drug gangs.
The victim, Patrick Daly, the 48-year-old principal of Public School 15 at 71 Sullivan Street in the notorious Red Hook waterfront district, whose quiet 26-year struggle on behalf of his pupils had been featured in news articles and on national television, was out looking for a fourth-grade boy who had left school in tears earlier after a fight with another 9-year-old.


Not a Happy Day
Auburn students and supporters verbally assailed a former football player, ERIC RAMSEY, when he and his wife walked across a stage to collect their diplomas Wednesday.
Ramsey's charges that he received cash and other gifts as a player led to the resignation of Coach PAT DYE three weeks before the commencement.
As the announcer called Ramsey's name over the public address system at Eaves Memorial Coliseum, the reaction included a chant of "Go to hell, Ramsey, go to hell!"


German Soldiers for Somalia
Chancellor Kohl said he wanted to send soldiers to Somalia, the first German deployment outside NATO confines since World War II.
Page A3.


Corrections
A music review on Dec. 7 about a program at Merkin Concert Hall on Dec. 3 misidentified one performing group.
It was the String Trio of New York, not the New York String Trio.


THE TRANSITION: Clinton Selects Ex-Mayor for H.U.D. and an Ex-Marine for Veterans Affairs; Cisneros Achieves Career Comeback With Nomination
In the spring of 1989, as he prepared to leave the San Antonio mayor's office still bruised by disclosures of an extra-marital affair, Henry G. Cisneros looked to the future with subdued confidence, reminding a reporter that he would only be 53 years old at the turn of the century.
"History has a rhythm," he said at the time, reflecting on a career that had seemed headed for statewide or even national office before it was suddenly derailed.
Not content to let history take its course, Mr.
Cisneros set out with methodical zeal to resuscitate his personal and professional prospects.


Trenton Aims at Dinkins In Commuter-Tax Battle
Saying it was taking defensive action, the New Jersey Assembly today unanimously approved a bill that would increase the income tax on some New Yorkers and residents of other states who work in New Jersey.
According to Richard McGrath, spokesman for the New Jersey Treasury Department, the proposed new law could affect 130,000 New Yorkers who commute to work in New Jersey, raising $27 million in new taxes.
It would also affect 15,000 people from other states, mostly Delaware.
Pennsylvania commuters would not be affected, because New Jersey has an agreement with the state not to tax commuters.


On Stage, and Off
Is This Reality?
The cool critical reception of "My Favorite Year," which opened at the Vivian Beaumont Theater at Lincoln Center last week, has been a deflating experience, because it throws into some relief the feeling in the theater world that the successes of last season were misleading, a serendipitous aberration rather than a signal that Broadway has turned around.


Many a 'Burned' Manuscript Lives On
To the Editor:
Apropos of the youthful score by Berlioz you report on Dec. 2 in "Belgian Finds a Score Berlioz Said He Burned," although the composer says in his memoirs that he burned it, one should remember that in the 19th century, and even earlier, poets, playwrights and composers used "burn" to mean destroy or suppress.


Istec Industries &amp; Technologies Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Holland Put on Hold
Green Bay Packers linebacker JOHNNY HOLLAND has a herniated disk in his neck and has been advised not to play football again until the condition is corrected surgically, the team said yesterday.
But General Manager RON WOLF said that the injury to the six-year veteran is not career-threatening.
Wolf said he was told Holland's condition wasn't necessarily caused by a tackle in last Sunday's game against Houston but might have built up over the years.
A Packers teammate, TIM HAUCK, slammed into Holland's helmet on a play.


Cox Stays in Atlanta
The Atlanta Braves signed Manager BOBBY COX to a two-year contract extension through the 1995 season.
The terms of the deal were not disclosed, but The Atlanta Journal-Constitution reported yesterday that Cox, who managed the Braves to National League championships in 1991 and 1992, would make more than $350,000 a year. (AP)


Hilcoast Development reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Sybil Claiborne, 69, Writer and Foe of War
Sybil Claiborne, a novelist and short story writer, died Wednesday at the Jacob Perlow Hospice of Beth Israel Hospital.
She was 69.
She died of lung cancer, said Grace Paley, the writer, who was a friend.


M.T.A. Sets Toll Increases For Jan. 31
The Metropolitan Transportation Authority yesterday increased the tolls on major bridges and tunnels by 50 cents each way, rebuffing Staten Island residents who say the increase hits them too hard.
The increase, the seventh in 13 years, begins Jan. 31 and will raise the toll to $3 from $2.50 on the Triborough, Throgs Neck and Bronx-Whitestone Bridges, as well as at the Brooklyn-Battery and Queens Midtown tunnels.
The toll on the Verrazano-Narrows Bridge, which is collected only from Staten Island-bound drivers, will rise to $6 from $5.


New Work Corps Could Change People's Lives; California-Style
To the Editor:
Stephen Ambrose's suggestion to create a 1990's version of the Civilian Conservation Corps (Op-Ed, Nov. 28) certainly caught our attention.
The California Conservation Corps, modeled after the Depression-era, program has been going strong for more than 16 years, and there are other corps programs in this state and many other states.


Bank 'Doomsday' May Not Be So Bad
To the pessimists, this weekend was supposed to be the bankers' doomsday.
The scenario predicted by the House Banking Committee chairman, Henry B. Gonzalez; Ross Perot, and other influential figures was of a December surprise.
They warned about an avalanche of bank failures, concealed by regulators and set off by new rules that take effect on Dec. 19 and require tougher and swifter action against the weakest banks.
But the deluge is turning out to be more of a trickle.


Review/Music; The Reassurance of a Winter Solstice Festivity
Reassurance is a big part of Christmas festivities, and probably of older solstice festivals as well: the reassurance of abundance, of community, of continuity and tradition strong enough to survive the long cold nights ahead.
The Winter Consort's "Winter Solstice Whole Earth Christmas Celebration" provides secular reassurance, telling its audience that they share good taste, a willingness to hear from other cultures and a concern for vanishing species and habitats, thus qualifying as members of a global village.
The annual event, now in its 13th year, also uses the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine as a backdrop for new-age spectacle.
Where else can thousands of people watch a large gong rise like the sun, while the church organ tolls out chords worthy of Quasimodo?


400 Arabs Ousted by Israel Are Mired in Frozen Limbo
More than 400 Palestinians deported by Israel to Lebanon were mired today in a fog-bound no-man's land, physically and politically, as the Lebanese authorities refused to take them and the Israelis warned them against turning back.
Despite their plight, many of the Palestinians -- Muslim fundamentalists from the Hamas and Islamic Holy War groups -- seemed far from unhappy because they saw a chance to muster international sympathy that their declared armed struggle against Israel might not ordinarily bring.


CHRONICLE
OLIVER NORTH'S 15 minutes in the spotlight may be fading fast, but they're not quite over.
He was given a hero's welcome when he went to Allentown, Pa., on Thursday to help the city raise money for the bulletproof vests his company, Guardian Technologies, is selling to the city's police force.
Mr.
North, the former national security aide made famous by his role in the Iran contra affair, received a key to the city, a proclamation, and a standing ovation from some 250 people attending his speech Thursday, the Associated Press reported.


Morehouse Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


The Business of McDaniel Is McDaniel
Xavier McDaniel never expected the Boston Celtics to be under .500 only one week before Christmas, and he never expected to be spending more time at power forward than at small forward, his natural position.
But if he has any regrets about leaving the Knicks and signing with Boston as a free agent last September, he is not saying so.
Who could blame him?
At age 29, McDaniel is with his fourth team in four years.


Nike Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Time Warner Said to Plan Board Cuts
Time Warner Inc. is planning to shrink its 21-member board by reducing the number of both inside and outside directors, several executives close to the board said yesterday.
"We want to bring in more outside directors," one executive said.
"The clear wish is to get some new blood. There are some insiders that will step down." He added that the company had been working on a plan for some months to reduce the board's size.


'Lemon Law' Ruling: A Happy Ending to a New-Car Nightmare
When her new car had a series of frightening malfunctions despite repeated repair attempts, Mary V. Bertucci of Oceanville, N.J., concluded she had bought a lemon.
Armed with detailed records, she took her case to court and won a refund.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
7.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
4.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.50
2.97
4.50
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.13
3.18
3.72
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.30
3.32
3.83
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.41
6.39
6.53
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.42
7.42
7.57
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.42
8.42
8.69
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
8.42
6.42
6.73
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Supervalu Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 5


Good for G.M., but Bad For Buyers of Its Offer
MANAGERS at General Motors may not be rocket scientists when it comes to running a car company, but investors could pick up a few tips from them on the arcane subject of stock market timing.
G.M. was a seller of 55 million new common shares on May 19 -- a marketing coup that brought $2.1 billion in new funds to the company.
A master of timing, G.M. pulled in $39 for each of the 55 million new shares.
And the stock had traded as low as $26.88 only five months before.


Clinton Wants Wife at Cabinet Table
Hillary Clinton has sat at corporate board tables, campaign strategy tables and lawyers' round tables.
Now, President-elect Bill Clinton and his aides say she will be welcome to sit at his Cabinet table as well.
Because of a law enacted after President John F. Kennedy named his brother Robert as Attorney General, Mr.
Clinton cannot legally place his wife in the Cabinet.
But she has been a political and policy adviser to him in the campaign and the transition, and he has made it clear that she will continue to play that role in his Administration.


Alfin Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Highlighting the New Year


Texas Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Cabletron Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


At Oasis in Red Hook, Anguish and a Vow
They came in droves yesterday to the two-story elementary school in Brooklyn, first parents, then students, then old friends and finally city officials, to the place they called "an oasis."
Women of all ages arrived pushing strollers and pulling toddlers to gather for consolation outside the Red Hook neighborhood school.


Tax Advisers Say the Time for Substantial Gifts May Be Now
For families committed to the notion that charity begins at home, legal advisers are recommending that substantial gifts -- like a vacation home or a share of the family business -- be made as soon as possible.
The reason: Congress may tighten the laws governing gift and estate taxes.
"One thing on everybody's lips -- but nobody has any magic answer -- is: What is going to happen to the $600,000 gift and estate tax exemption?" said David A. Ludgin, a partner at McCarter &amp; English, New Jersey's largest law firm.
"There has been talk about reducing it down to something, but nobody knows just what that something would be," he continued, or what the effective date of any legislation would be.


Dow Jumps In Heavy Trading
Driven by the heaviest trading volume in three years, stocks surged sharply higher yesterday.
The broad rally was fueled largely by the complex trading requirements of professional investors holding options and futures contracts that expired at the close of trading.
With volume on the New York Stock Exchange hitting its sixth-highest level ever, the Dow Jones industrial average rose 44.04 points, to 3,313.27.
Advancing issues outnumbered declines by more than 2 to 1.


Wausau Paper Mills reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Arming Inmates for Life To Pay Back a Promise
FIVE years ago, when Fernando Mateo was 29, he promised God that if He helped him prosper as a carpeting dealer and contractor, he would do something to help poor people in prison.
"It's a Dominican tradition -- we call it 'la promesa,' " said Mr.
Mateo, a high school dropout, who has been making good on his vow.
"Some people promise to wear white for five years or wear black; me, I promised to provide vocational training and jobs for people in jail."


Picking Life Insurers Rated as Least Risky
THE failure in recent years of a number of major life insurance companies has captured the attention not only of those who bought policies from these companies, but also of many others contemplating the purchase of a new policy.
For in an environment where the Mutual Benefit Life Insurance Company, the Executive Life Insurance Company and other well-known insurers can fail, picking an insurance company is an even more important decision than it has been in the past.
With more than 2,000 companies selling life insurance in the United States, chosing one can be difficult.
Nevertheless, there are three key criteria that can be followed in selecting an insurer, experts say: financial strength, price and service to policyholders.


Steel Technologies Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Dimark Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Frederick Marcham, Cornell Professor, 94
Frederick G. Marcham, who became one of the nation's longest-serving professors in a 68-year teaching career at Cornell University, died on Wednesday at his home in Ithaca, N.Y.
He was 94.
The cause of death was not specified, but a Cornell spokeswoman said he had been in failing health.


Classical Music in Review
Thomas Yehudah Tirino  Pianist Merkin Concert Hall
In his piano recital on Saturday evening, Thomas Yehudah Tirino presented several inviting rarities: David Diamond's two Sonatinas, a movement from Tchaikovsky's "Seasons" and a few dances by Ernesto Lecuona, along with repertory staples by Beethoven, Chopin and Liszt.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY
YOUTH ARRESTED IN PRINCIPAL'S DEATH
A 17-year-old boy wanted in another shooting and known to neighbors in the Red Hook Houses as a high school dropout who sold drugs and defended his turf with guns was arrested and charged with killing Patrick Daly, the grade school principal slain in a crossfire at the Brooklyn housing project on Thursday.
Page 1.
Parents, students, old friends and city officials gathered to mourn a beloved principal.
Page 27.
A 9-year-old boy who says he was the child the principal was seeking tells his story.
Page 27.
MOTHER HALE IS DEAD AT 87
Clara M. Hale, who nurtured hundreds of abandoned and orphaned babies, the most fragile victims of New York City's drug abuse and AIDS epidemics, died at Mount Sinai Hospital.
Page 1.
MAN CONFESSES IN SUBWAY SHOOTING
A 25-year-old man who says he was the gunman who killed one man and wounded another on a Manhattan subway train has turned himself in, the police said.
Page 27.
A 78-year-old woman is found slashed to death in her Queens apartment. Page 26.  REGION
A LONG ROAD BACK TO NORMAL
In the week since the wind, the rain and the moon conspired to put their homes below sea level, families throughout the region have struggled to evict the ocean, salvage what they can and start again.
For thousands of families, cleaning up has been a painstaking and painful process, one that will not end with President Bush's expected announcement of disaster relief for New York.
The problems of two Long Island families suggest the struggle they face.
Page 1.
Six New Jersey counties are declared disaster areas.
Page 29.
INSURANCE BAILOUT CALLED UNLIKELY
Negotiators in Albany said an agreement on an infusion of cash to stave off a big rate increase at Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield looked increasingly unlikely.
Page 28.
REPORT ON L.I.
BREAST CANCER IS RELEASED
A long-awaited Federal report has concluded that the high incidence of breast cancer on Long Island can be explained by the known risk factors for the disease, like the Island's larger Jewish population.
Jewish women have a higher risk of breast cancer.
But the report was harshly criticized by the Long Island woman who served on the panel that drafted it.
Page 29.
PSYCHIATRIST CALLS WOMAN 'BEWILDERED'
A psychiatrist testified at the Glen Ridge, N.J., sex assault trial that an "ordinary" woman would have fled or voiced alarm when a sexual encounter became painful and that the mentally retarded young woman who remained in a room with the four young men accused of assaulting her was unable to understand or exercise her right to refuse to engage in sex.
Page 29.
Republican State Senators propose new fiscal restraints for school districts. Page 28.
A Long Island man is sentenced in beating of a black high school football star.
Page 29.
About New York by Michael T. Kaufman 26
Neediest Cases 26
Chronicle 28


Republic Capital reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Dial Page reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


2d Visit Was the Fatal One
When Patrick Daly was caught in the crossfire that took his life on the rainswept grounds of the Red Hook Houses in Brooklyn late Thursday morning, it apparently was the second time that day that the principal of Public School 15 had ventured into the project because of a disruptive student.
The mother of one of the students involved in the two separate incidents said Mr.
Daly brought her son home about 10 A.M., after catching the 11-year-old running in the school halls.
Mr.
Daly left her apartment immediately, the woman said, and an hour and a half later she heard the shots that killed him.


Suspect, 17, Is Arrested in Killing Of Principal Caught in Gun Battle
A 17-year-old Brooklyn youth, known to neighbors as a high school dropout who sold drugs and defended his turf with guns, was arrested yesterday and charged with killing Patrick Daly, the grade school principal slain in a crossfire on Thursday.
The suspect, Shamel Burroughs, who was wanted in another shooting, was seized before dawn in a friend's apartment at the Red Hook Houses after an all-night investigation by city and housing police detectives.
They received a tip on his whereabouts from a citizens outraged by the slaying of a man who had served its children for 26 years and represented decency and hope in one of the city's toughest neighborhoods.
Hundreds Gather to Mourn
No gun was recovered, the police said, and Mr.
Burroughs was taken into custody without a struggle at 6:15 A.M. at 453 Columbia Street, a block from the shooting.
The police said 13 shell casings found at the scene showed that at least three people had engaged in a running gun battle in which Mr.
Daly, who was apparently not a target, was shot once.


Kevlin Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Annual Winter Solstice Celebration at St. John the Divine


Observer; Needles And Chisels
The worst tree we ever bought?
It was when we lived in Greenwich Village.
It was shaped like a boomerang.
Put the bottom end of the trunk upright in the tree-holding gizmo, and the upper half of the tree pointed toward the wall at an angle of about 45 degrees above the horizontal.
You can't visualize that?
O.K., imagine a howitzer aimed for targets on a mountainside.
We couldn't have that.
It was peace-on-earth time.


Vance Asks Bush for More Time for Bosnia Talks
Cyrus R. Vance, the United Nations special envoy for the Yugoslav conflict, urged President Bush today to give his peacemaking effort in Bosnia more time before turning to military intervention.
The White House was noncommittal in its public response, but expressed support for Mr.
Vance's negotiations and for the "unhampered flow of humanitarian assistance" to the Balkans, which Vance aides interpreted as a sign that Mr.
Vance may have succeeded in his effort.


Little Orchestra Society
The Little Orchestra Society, conducted by Dino Anagnost, will present its 11th annual performance of Gian Carlo Menotti's opera "Amahl and the Night Visitors" today at 1 and 3 P.M. at Avery Fisher Hall.
The production, with staging created by the composer, features the young male soprano Gianmarco Marostica as Amahl; Cynthia Rose, mezzo-soprano, as his Mother: Douglas Perry, tenor, as King Kaspar; Gary Simpson, baritone, as King Melchior, and Kevin Maynor, bass, as King Balthazar.
The opera, commissioned for NBC Television in 1951, was inspired by Hieronymus Bosch's painting "Adoration of the Magi," and by the composer's childhood experience with lameness.
Tickets are $15 to $30.
Information: (212) 721-6500.


The Slain Principal's Last Lesson
Patrick Daly was a peaceful man who dedicated his life to educating youngsters in one of New York City's worst neighborhoods.
His death Thursday by a stray bullet from a drug shootout plunged the entire community into grief.
No one who cares about urban America and its children dares let that ugly triumph of violence over commitment go unchallenged.
The right response has long been obvious: serious Federal gun control laws and aggressive enforcement.
Indeed, the shooting of Mr.
Daly occurred only two days after relaxed Federal laws allowed a student in Massachusetts to purchase an assault rifle and shoot up his campus, killing two people and injuring four others.


Howard Cann, Longtime N.Y.U. Coach, Dies at 97
Howard Cann, the basketball coach at New York University for more than three decades and a member of the Basketball Hall of Fame, died yesterday after a long illness.
He was 97.
Mr. Cann, who lived in Irvington, N.Y., died at Community Hospital in Dobbs Ferry, N.Y.


Corrections
A chart in Science Times on Tuesday about mass extinctions referred incorrectly to the timing of the Final Cretaceous extinction.
It coincided with Indian lava eruptions, not Siberian eruptions.
A related diagram showed an incorrect point of origin for the Siberian eruptions.
The lava came from the boundary of earth's outer core and mantle.


Democrats Puzzled by Naming of Prosecutor on Clinton Files
Some Democratic members of Congress said today that they were puzzled that the Bush Administration had asked for an independent prosecutor to investigate the search of Bill Clinton's passport files in the Presidential election campaign.
The lawmakers said the request was surprising because the Administration had vigorously resisted appointment of independent prosecutors in other cases where there seemed to be far more evidence of wrongdoing.


American Building Maintenance reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Embarrassed Republicans Take Look at School Funds
For years, powerful Republican State Senators from Long Island have flexed their political muscles to get far more money for school districts than Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, a Democrat, wanted to give.
They scoffed at Mr.
Cuomo's arguments that some districts lacked fiscal discipline and were paying their administrators too much.
Today, stung by the embarrassing case of a Suffolk County school official who was granted a nearly $1 million retirement package, some of the same senators announced they were proposing new measures to "provide greater accountability" for certain school districts, set legal limits on compensation and provide a "full 'plain-language' disclosure" on how much their top school officials are paid.


Thor Energy Resources reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Leaders Urge Trade Accord
President Bush, Prime Minister John Major of Britain and Jacques Delors, the president of the European Community's executive commission, called today for a global free trade agreement by mid-January.
But negotiators in the 108-nation talks remain far apart on a wide range of issues, and some American officials doubted today that a deal could be struck before the inauguration of Bill Clinton on Jan. 20.


Sotheby's Request Denied In Case of Ancient Silver
The State Supreme Court in Manhattan has rejected the request of Sotheby's to be released from involvement in the tangled legal dispute over the ownership of 14 pieces of ancient Roman silver, known as the Sevso silver, which the auction house has valued at $70 million.
After Sotheby's announced in February 1990 that it would sell the Sevso silver for Lord Northampton, the Briton who says he is the owner, the Governments of Lebanon and Yugoslavia went to State Supreme Court saying they were the owners.
In May 1990, a preliminary injunction was granted barring the removal of the silver from the United States for the private sale Sotheby's had planned in Switzerland.


Blount Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


General Cinema reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


High Atop Elite Board, Who Other Than Faldo?
Being the richest tournament in the history of golf doesn't make the Johnnie Walker World Championship a major tournament, but its leader board after two rounds Friday made it seem like one.
Not only was it bereft of under-par figures, but the man at the top was Nick Faldo, the premier major championship player in golf.
Faldo fired an even-par 70 over the windy and exceedingly tough Tryall Golf Club for a one-over total of 141.


YELTSIN CUTS VISIT TO BEIJING SHORT
Saying he needed to "restore order" and protect the reformist core of Russia's Government, President Boris N. Yeltsin cut short his visit to China this morning and headed back to Moscow.
His new Prime Minister, Viktor S. Chernomyrdin, whom Mr.
Yeltsin chose this week after parliamentary pressure forced him to abandon acting Prime Minister Yegor T. Gaidar, was on his own visit to Kazakhstan, and Moscow itself seemed quiet early this morning.


L.I. Man Is Sentenced In Bias Assault
Alfred Jermaine Ewell, the high school football star who was savagely beaten in what authorities called a racial attack, appeared in court today to urge that one of his attackers "be shown the same consideration and compassion that he showed me that night -- absolutely none."
Moments later, Judge Donald E. Belfi of Nassau County Court sentenced the attacker, Shannon Siegel, to 7 to 21 years in prison, the maximum penalty for first-degree assault.


Rate of Abortions Is Lowest Since 70's
A higher percentage of pregnant American women had babies in 1990 than at any time since the late 1970's, according to new data made public today by the Federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
But specialists in fertility and demographics say it is too early to judge whether the changes reflect declining access to abortion services or an improvement in contraceptive practices bringing down the number of unintended pregnancies.


Fonic Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Review/Dance; French Canadian Newcomers Confront Puritan New England
In a highly imaginative and stirring modern-dance work called "Momentary Order," the choreographer Doug Varone recalls the far-from-easy life of French Canadians who immigrated to work in the mill towns of New England, Maine in particular.
The common image of a New Englander as a Yankee of English Puritan stock ignores the realities of the area's ethnic diversity, not to speak of the sweat and toil contributed by those who did most of the work.
Political attention tends to be paid occasionally to the Irish or Italian populations; French Americans are largely neglected except in their own literature and musical traditions.


New Work Corps Could Change People's Lives; Include Human Services
To the Editor:
The infrastructures and environment of our country can be helped by such a corps as Stephen E. Ambrose suggests in "Revive Roosevelt's C.C.C." (Op-Ed, Nov. 28).
In addition, the new Administration should not overlook human services as an area for such workers.


New Leader for University of Chicago
The University of Chicago today named Hugo F. Sonnenschein, an economist and self-professed optimist who is the provost at Princeton University, as its next president.
When he takes over next July, Mr.
Sonnenschein, a 52-year-old microeconomics theorist, will lead a university that in the last three years has produced three winners of the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Science.
During that time the university has struggled through the same painful belt-tightening that has forced most major research universities to re-examine what they do.


Dorothy Dinnerstein; Feminist Writer Was 69
Dr.
Dorothy Dinnerstein, a feminist author and professor emeritus of psychology at Rutgers University-Newark, died on Thursday in Englewood, N.J.
She was 69 and lived in Leonia.
She died in a single-car accident, her daughter, Naomi Miller, reported.


A's Keep Darling
The Oakland Athletics haved re-signed free-agent pitcher Ron Darling to a three-year deal worth $7.5 million, which includes a $3 million signing bonus.


Immedia Informatic reports earnings for Year Aug 31


New Work Corps Could Change People's Lives; A Wonderful Bargain
To the Editor:
Stephen E. Ambrose's Nov. 28 article on reviving the Civilian Conservation Corps is right on target.
To me, growing up during the Depression, the corps proved a salvation, as it did to many hopeless, unemployed and penniless youths in my dirt-poor, upstate village.


Peotone Journal; 747's May Drown Out the Sound of Corn Growing
This neighborly village 44 miles south of Chicago seems an unlikely stage for bitter charges, billion-dollar schemes and political intrigue.
But in the last few days the town has been abuzz with talk of nasty letters mailed instead of Christmas cards, protest signs and late night telephone threats to the village president.
People here cannot recall tempers ever being shorter.


Winfield Goes Home
DAVE WINFIELD, the 41-year-old player who won his first World Series ring this year, got a chance to fulfill another dream yesterday when he signed a deal to play in his native Minnesota.


Trapped In the Baltics
The plight of the 25 million Russians outside of Russia has become a foreign policy concern of President Boris Yeltsin's Government.
In this issue are the seeds of another crisis more dangerous than the breakup of Yugoslavia.
Estonia has passed and Latvia has proposed discriminatory citizenship laws requiring Russians, as well as other ethnic minorities, to go through a difficult naturalization process during which they cannot vote, own property or hold certain jobs.


Review/Music; The Reassurance of a Winter Solstice Festivity
Reassurance is a big part of Christmas festivities, and probably of older solstice festivals as well: the reassurance of abundance, of community, of continuity and tradition strong enough to survive the long cold nights ahead.
The Winter Consort's "Winter Solstice Whole Earth Christmas Celebration" provides secular reassurance, telling its audience that they share good taste, a willingness to hear from other cultures and a concern for vanishing species and habitats, thus qualifying as members of a global village.
The annual event, now in its 13th year, also uses the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine as a backdrop for new-age spectacle.
Where else can thousands of people watch a large gong rise like the sun, while the church organ tolls out chords worthy of Quasimodo?


Luxtec Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Corrections
A listing in Weekend on Dec. 11 about holiday oratorios misstated the date for a performance of Bach's Christmas Oratorio, Part III, at St.
George's Church, 209 East 16th Street, in Manhattan.
The performance will be on Thursday at 10:30 P.M., not tomorrow.


Shock and Recovery in Poland
Percentage of families in 1991 with video players: 41 percent.
With color TV: 83 percent.
With tape recorders: 82 percent.
With vacuum cleaners: 98 percent.
Which well-off European country do these statistics describe? Belgium? Italy?


Review/Music; Evoking a Terrible Night in 1938
"Kristallnacht," John Zorn's suite about the "night of broken glass" in 1938 that inaugurated Nazi terror against the Jews, may be his most literal-minded composition.
Mr.
Zorn has always been fascinated by and suspicious of music's ability to suggest mood; most of his pieces jump from texture to texture, idiom to idiom, almost as soon as each one registers, as if refusing to manipulate the listener.
But Mr.
Zorn has also composed atmospheric pieces like "Spillane," a soundtrack without a detective movie.
The six sections of "Kristallnacht" use both fragmentation and longer dramatic arcs, yet with a pervasive mood of mourning and determination.
Before the performance there were recordings of bouncy 1930's cabaret songs and then, for about 15 minutes, the sounds of a train journey; standing in the dark, packed Knitting Factory on Wednesday night, it was easy to recognize an allusion to the sealed trains that carried people to concentration camps.
When the seven musicians arrived on stage, wearing yellow six-pointed stars, the first movement, "Shtetl (Ghetto Life)" was a montage with phrases of klezmer music (from Frank London on trumpet, Mark Feldman on violin and David Krakauer on clarinet) -- the echoes of a vanished community -- amid glassy guitar sounds (Marc Ribot) and droning bass (Mark Dresser).


Crime Control, City by City
When Bill Clinton took his celebrated walk along Washington's violence- and drug-plagued Georgia Avenue, he had his eye on the long term.
What such neighborhoods need, he said, is economic development.
Look to his Administration, he promised, to revitalize the Small Business Administration.
An unidentified spectator had a more immediate perspective on the impact of his appearance.
"It sure got the drug dealers and winos off the corner," he said.


Review/Music; Johnny Cash, the Fatalist as Patriarch
Near the end of "The Johnny Cash Show," the traveling family musicale that rolled into the Ritz on Wednesday night, the graying giant of country music settled down with his five-piece band to perform a succession of his signature hits.
Singing "I Walk the Line," "Man in Black," "I Got Stripes" and "I Guess Things Happen That Way," his rumbling bass-baritone cut to the bone of each song.
And the packed house, knowing it was in the presence of a living monument, kept begging for more.
At 60 years of age, country music's "Man in Black" still seems almost as pure an embodiment of the severe, hard-bitten way of life that many of his songs chronicle as he did when he began recording in 1955.
Casting himself as a cross between an itinerant preacher and a 19th-century highwayman, he has always used his sepulchral voice to express a dour, flinty fatalism that borders on the grim.
Even in those songs with homey sentiments and humor, there is a sense that events are taking place within sight of a prison or a graveyard, with ghosts circling.


'92 Office Party: Bah to Mistletoe and Liquor
After several years of recession-prompted Scrooge-ism, businesses are giving holiday office parties again this year.
Caterers, florists and rent-a-Santa services across the nation report a resurgence of the traditional fete.
They also say there has been a widespread transformation of the custom.
In an attempt to banish the litigious potential of holiday office parties past, where liquor and libidos ran freely, corporate hosts are holding "interactive parties," events where everything from bumper cars to competitive snowflake-cutting keeps guests busy -- and away from the dark corners and the bar.


James A. Goode, 68, Editor Who Guided Various Magazines
James A. Goode, an author and a top editor of several major national magazines, died Sunday at St.
Joseph's Hospital in Burbank, Calif.
He was 68 and lived in Los Angeles.
He died of a heart attack, said Harry W. Carey, his companion.


EX-DISSIDENT WINS ELECTION IN KOREA
Kim Young Sam, who spent years under house arrest for his opposition to South Korea's authoritarian rulers and then joined forces with the ruling party two years ago, was elected President on Friday, the first in three decades to be drawn from outside the ranks of the military.
In a surprisingly strong showing after a hard-fought campaign, Mr.
Kim received about 42 percent of the vote in what many here called the most peaceful and fair election in South Korea's tumultuous postwar history.


KIT Manufacturing reports earnings for Year to Oct 31


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
National Health Laboratories will pay $111 million to settle complaints that it fraudulently billed Medicaid and Medicare programs for medical tests it performed.
The company and its president, Robert Draper, pleaded guilty to the charges in Federal court in Los Angeles, and Mr.
Draper resigned.  [ Page 1. ]
Peter Lynch, the famous stock picker, is returning to Fidelity Investments, but only as a coach of the firm's younger analysts and only for two days a week.
Mr.
Lynch managed the spectacularly successful Magellan fund before retiring two years ago.  [ 37. ]


One of Jets' Rookies Is Lined Up to Start
Siupeli Malamala, the Jets' 6-foot-5-inch, 313-pound offensive tackle, is finally starting to live up to his nickname, Supe.
"When he gets a hold of you, you are blocked," said Jets Coach Bruce Coslet of his only rookie starter.


Wedding Bells, Dotted Lines
Before remarrying, many more couples are signing prenuptial agreements, but family law specialists are questioning their value.
Page 35


Sheldahl Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Discount Auto Parts reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 1


Cubic Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Classical Music in Review
Vladimir Feltsman
Colden Center  for the Performing Arts  Queens College
Vladimir Feltsman's rather casual stage manner has often been noted.
Last Saturday night he looked out into the audience with a hand shielding his eyes, as if to gauge attendance; he removed a speck of something from the keyboard, tested the piano's frame and shrugged with a smile, as if to say, "I play with what they give me." Mr.
Feltsman seems eager to play down the ritualism of recitals, which is good; he also lets some of that casualness creep into his playing, which is not so good.


Taxable Bond Group, at the Top and Bottom
So far this year among taxable bond funds, the best performers are the most stock-like and thus the riskiest.
Top-performing junk bond funds follow the equity markets more closely than the fixed-income markets and, like the other winners, benefited from the November stock market surge.
Next come convertible securities funds -- which invest in fixed-income securities that can be converted to common shares -- and flexible income funds, which invest in stocks, bonds and cash.


Georgia L. McMurray, 58, Leader In Services for New York Children
Georgia L. McMurray, a leader in developing services for children in New York City, died yesterday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 58.
A quadriplegic, she had been suffering from a progressive nervous disease, said the Rev.
Gerald L. Wagner, a friend.


Cott Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 24


Dairy Wars: A Pitch to Local Pride; Ad Agency Fires a Protectionist Broadside on Behalf of L.I.
In the latest twist in the border wars between New York and New Jersey, a small Long Island dairy has begun an advertising campaign that features a cow grazing contentedly on the asphalt in front of a petrochemical plant.
"Ever wonder why milk from New Jersey doesn't taste as fresh as ours?" the ad asks in bold black type.


State Help For Insurer Is Considered Unlikely
A day after the disclosure that a United States Senate subcommittee had begun investigating the financially troubled Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield, negotiators here said an agreement on an infusion of cash to bolster the company and stave off a big rate increase looked increasingly unlikely.
The state must rule within two weeks on a request by Empire -- the state's largest health insurer and the nation's largest Blue Cross plan -- to increase rates for 1.4 million people in the New York City, mid-Hudson and Albany regions by an average of 25.7 percent.
Negotiators for the State Legislature and Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo have been discussing a proposal by the Governor to limit the rate increase by granting Empire $85 million from a state fund that provides malpractice insurance.


Wiltek Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Tsongas Has Rapid Heartbeat
Former Senator Paul E. Tsongas was admitted to a coronary care unit today for monitoring of a rapid heart rhythm as a precautionary step, his doctors said.
Mr.
Tsongas, a candidate for the 1992 Democratic Presidential nomination, has not suffered a heart attack or heart damage, said a statement from the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, where he has been a patient since Dec. 10.
He was alert and not suffering chest pain, and his blood pressure was normal, his doctors said.


Are These Trips Necessary?
Secretary of Commerce Barbara Franklin and an undisclosed number of high-level associates are spending a few final days of their officialdom in China.
The need for their trip is dubious.
Their travel accommodations, on a comfortably appointed Air Force jet, are clearly excessive.
The official rationale for this last-minute journey is the Bush Administration's commitment to reviving exchanges of high-level visits between Beijing and Washington.
The White House also wants to mollify Chinese authorities irritated by President Bush's generosity to Taiwan during the Presidential campaign, when he agreed to authorize the sale of 150 American-made jet fighters.


Howard Stern's Employer Vows to Appeal F.C.C. Fine
The radio company that employs Howard Stern said yesterday that his broadcasts were "not actionably indecent" and that it would appeal the Federal Communications Commission's plan to fine it $600,000.
"We're troubled that we have difficulties with the F.C.C.," said Mel A. Karmazin, president and chief executive of the Infinity Broadcasting Company, which is based in New York.
"But I sincerely believe that Howard's show is constitutionally protected material."


Classical Music in Review
Vienna Choir Boys  Carnegie Hall
Is it art?
Or is it something else?
The Vienna Choir Boys are a difficult case.
At times during their concert on Sunday night, they sang with a pleasant and reasonably musical tone; at times they merely exploited the audience's hunger for cuteness and precociousness.


GENERAL DYNAMICS OFFICIALS EXERCISE STOCK OPTIONS
In the latest example of corporate executives seeking to avoid higher taxes that President-elect Bill Clinton has vowed to impose on their pay, senior officials of the General Dynamics Corporation yesterday exercised more than 500,000 stock options valued at about $50 million.
General Dynamics, a military contractor based in Falls Church, Va., said its three top executives exercised 504,972 options on company stock granted in 1991 to buy shares at a price far below the current market prices.
They then sold some of those shares to cover the cost of the transaction and 1992 taxes.
The taxes are considerably less than they would pay next year.
The executives -- William A. Anders, chairman and chief executive; James R. Mellor, president and chief operating officer, and Harvey Kapnick, vice chairman -- purchased the shares at two prices -- $25.56 and $33.50 -- depending on their options.
Shares of General Dynamics closed yesterday at $104.50, up $2.75, in trading on the New York Stock Exchange.


Make-or-Break Time for Stores
Across the country, cash registers have been ringing since Thanksgiving, pealing a tune many of the nation's retailers have not heard with such strength in four years.
But the countdown to Christmas really begins today.
Traditionally, the Saturday before Christmas is the second-busiest selling day of the season, surpassed only by the day after Thanksgiving.
And over the last few years consumers have telescoped more and more of their shopping into the week ending on Christmas Eve.


Statistical Portrait of The Nation; Ancestry


Mets Already Look Set For '93
The Mets yesterday effectively completed their 1993 roster with the signing of Joe Orsulak, a versatile, free-agent outfielder who came cheap and who could wind up playing a lot.
The 30-year-old Orsulak, who hit .289 in 1992 to lead the Baltimore Orioles in average for the third time in the last five seasons, signed a one-year contract for $650,000, an extremely modest deal that includes incentives that could earn the left-handed batter another $100,000.


Journey's End Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Review/Music; Johnny Cash, the Fatalist as Patriarch
Near the end of "The Johnny Cash Show," the traveling family musicale that rolled into the Ritz on Wednesday night, the graying giant of country music settled down with his five-piece band to perform a succession of his signature hits.
Singing "I Walk the Line," "Man in Black," "I Got Stripes" and "I Guess Things Happen That Way," his rumbling bass-baritone cut to the bone of each song.
And the packed house, knowing it was in the presence of a living monument, kept begging for more.
At 60 years of age, country music's "Man in Black" still seems almost as pure an embodiment of the severe, hard-bitten way of life that many of his songs chronicle as he did when he began recording in 1955.
Casting himself as a cross between an itinerant preacher and a 19th-century highwayman, he has always used his sepulchral voice to express a dour, flinty fatalism that borders on the grim.
Even in those songs with homey sentiments and humor, there is a sense that events are taking place within sight of a prison or a graveyard, with ghosts circling.


Classical Music in Review
Benedetto Lupo  Pianist Alice Tully Hall
Benedetto Lupo won a bronze medal at the 1989 Van Cliburn Competition; the Van Cliburn Foundation sponsored his New York debut recital on Monday night, a prelude to the next competition in the spring and summer.
Mr.
Lupo has a flashy style well suited to that vast pianistic tilting-ring that unfolds every four years in Texas; he also seems to be a sensitive musician, although Monday's recital was rather uneven.


Classical Music in Review
Cindy Zuo-Xin Wang  Soprano Weill Recital Hall
Cindy Zuo-Xin Wang, a young soprano from China who has settled in Hawaii, made a fine impression in her recital last Saturday afternoon, especially in the second half.
There she began with "Flying Swan," by Yuan-Lin Chen, who also lives in Hawaii and was on hand to ring changes on Ms.
Wang's voice with an electric harmonizer.
The work was mildly interesting, and Ms.
Wang was captivating, keeping her bearings with firm musicality while her voice pinged and pealed around her in lively sound effects.


Drew Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


The Day the Ocean Came And Swept All Before It
Danny Vooris saved the family cat, his Led Zeppelin record collection and most of his lizards from the water that rushed into his basement apartment here the morning of Dec. 11.
But in the week since then, that, like the linoleum floor he has slept on, has been pretty cold comfort.
Almost all his possessions were destroyed.
His wife had a nervous breakdown and was hospitalized.
His 3-year-old son still follows him around, afraid that his father might be swept away.
And, while vacuuming up the water that drained from his walls all week, he wondered again and again how, with Christmas looming, he would keep ahead of his many creditors and whether a Federal disaster declaration would rescue him.


American Symphony
The American Symphony Orchestra, under the direction of Leon Botstein, is to perform at 3 P.M. tomorrow at Carnegie Hall.
On the program are Henry Cowell's "Synchrony," Ruth Crawford-Seeger's Three Songs for Mezzo-Soprano, Oboe, Percussion and Orchestra Ostinato Ad Libitum, Wallingford Riegger's Music for Orchestra, Copland's "Connotations," Roger Sessions's Fifth Symphony, Morton Feldman's "On Time and the Instrumental Factor" and Steve Reich's "Music for Pieces of Wood." D'Anna Fortunator, mezzo-soprano, is to be the soloist.
The concert has been organized in conjunction with the Whitney Museum's "Geometric Tradition in American Art," on view through Feb. 14.
Tickets are $12 to $30.
Information: (212) 247-7800.


Man Surrenders in Killing on Manhattan Subway
A Brooklyn man surrendered to the police last night, identifying himself as the man who shot and killed another man in a fight on a subway train Wednesday night.
The police were searching for a man who they said was punched by a stranger and, minutes later, pulled out a gun and killed his assailant when the man returned to resume the argument.


Coming Eventually: A New Commissioner
With the restructuring of the office of baseball commissioner due by year's end and the appointment of a search committee assigned to fill that position imminent, major league owners and the Milwaukee Brewers' owner, Bud Selig, are about to carry out two assertions made time and again: The commissioner's powers will be strengthened and Selig is not a candidate for the office.
Selig is also is chairman of the owners' executive council, which, in the absence of a commissioner, is acting as the game's supervisor.
Selig scoffed Thursday at a double-edged rumor that would have him ascending to the position that has been vacant since Fay Vincent resigned Sept. 7.
The second portion of the rumor involves the commissioner's office being moved from New York to Chicago in order to accommodate an owner from the Midwest.


Del Electronics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Dec. 10 about testimony in the trial of two Mexicans charged in the murder of a United States drug agent characterized the reaction of the President of Mexico, Carlos Salinas de Gortari, incorrectly.
Mr.
Salinas has not commented about the credibility of the prosecution witnesses in the case.
Remarks attributed to him saying that the witnesses "should not be taken seriously" and lacked "legal or moral authority" should have been attributed to a Salinas spokesman quoted by The Los Angeles Times.


L.I. Cancer Found to Be Explainable
A long-awaited Federal report has concluded that the high incidence of breast cancer on Long Island can be explained without resorting to environmental factors.
Although more women in Nassau County get breast cancer and more die from it than the national average, the report says, the differences can be explained by the known risk factors for the disease, like the Island's larger Jewish population.
Jewish women have a higher risk of breast cancer.


Winnebago Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 28


Clinton's Aides Seek Bigger Cut In Deficit Early
President-elect Bill Clinton's economic advisers are recommending that he trim the deficit more than he had proposed in the election campaign so as to fulfill his pledge of halving the deficit within four years.
Seeing that estimates of the deficit for the 1996 fiscal year have soared since last spring, Mr.
Clinton's economic advisers said they had called for the deficit to be reduced by about $145 billion for that year as against the $90 billion that he originally proposed.


Review/Theater; 5 Famous Little Babies And a One-Man Musical
It takes sheer audacity to create a musical about the Dionne quintuplets and then play all the roles.
But that is exactly what Dan Hurlin has done in "Quintland (The Musical)." Fortunately, he has talent as a writer and actor to go with his nerve.
He has also done ample research, so that in the course of the performance (at Dance Theater Workshop) he can elucidate the facts, paradoxes and longer-ranging effects of a phenomenal event.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Declined to tender 1993 contracts to Bob Milacki and Mark Williamson, pitchers, and Sam Horn, Mark McLemore and Randy Milligan, infielders.
Agreed to terms with Mark Parent, catcher, on a one-year contract and Steve Searcy, Mike Cook, David Walters, Wayne Edwards and Don Schulze, pitchers, on minor-league contracts.
Assigned Cesar Devarez, catcher, outright to Rochester of the International League.
BOSTON RED SOX -- Declined to tender 1993 contracts to Tony Fossas and Jeff Gray, pitchers.


Vallen Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


U.S. Close to $2 Billion Loan to Russia's Sagging Oil Industry
A Bush Administration official announced today that the United States was close to lending $2 billion to Russia for the purchase of American oil and gas production equipment, but legal and financial hurdles remain before any money can be disbursed.
The money from the Export-Import Bank of the United States would allow Russia to buy badly needed spare parts and halt a steep decline in oil and gas output, said Eugene K. Lawson, the bank's acting chairman and president.
The lack of spare parts has idled up to 36,000 oil wells in Russia, a fifth of the country's total, and hurt the country's ability to earn foreign currencies to pay for its economic changes, he said.


Carena Developments reports earnings for Year to Oct 31


Review/Music; Love Songs and Nostalgia In the Sephardic Manner
For decades, the music of the Sephardic Jews, those who lived in Spain until the expulsion in 1492 and then resettled around the Mediterranean, has subsisted quietly within the early-music world.
But the Columbus quincentennial has also focused attention on the contemporaneous expulsion, an event commemorated by a flourishing of Sephardic music concerts.
Voice of the Turtle, an ensemble that has specialized in this repertory since 1978, presented a few dozen songs, leavened with a couple of folk tales, in a Hanukkah concert on Sunday afternoon at Symphony Space.
Actually, the program's connection with Hanukkah was tenuous: only the first and last groups of songs referred to the holiday.
The greater part of the program was devoted to love songs, nostalgic reminiscences of Spain, allegorical Bible stories and songs about the concerns, both grand and trivial, of daily life.
The settings were in Ladino, a dialect in which Hebrew and medieval Spanish are intermingled, the Sephardic counterpart of Yiddish.


Great Country Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Yankees Rebuffed on Sierra
The Yankees considered opening their wallets to lure Ruben Sierra to New York, but they never even had the opportunity yesterday to flash any cash before Sierra's agent said the free-agent outfielder was likely to return to play for Oakland.
Bob Woolf, Sierra's agent, revealed that the Yankees called him yesterday to inquire about his client, but he said the conversation was uneventful.
Woolf conceded that Sierra would have had an interest in playing in New York, but the agent is close to completing a multiyear contract with the A's and was not interested in initiating talks with other teams.


AutoInfo reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


American Healthcorp reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


6 New Jersey Counties Declared Disaster Areas
Six New Jersey counties were declared disaster areas today, a week after a devastating storm caused flooding in scores of communities.
The declaration means that the Federal Emergency Management Agency will be able to provide loans and grants to individuals who lost property, as well as aiding businesses and local governments.


Transact International reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Yeltsin Says Atomic Treaty With U.S. Is Set for Signing
President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia surprised the White House today by announcing that he was ready to sign a major nuclear-arms treaty that American officials believed was still being negotiated.
Unsure whether Mr.
Yeltsin was only voicing general support for the treaty, or had in fact agreed to its final details, White House officials scrambled much of the day for an appropriate response.
None were willing to confirm Mr.
Yeltsin's declaration that the treaty could be signed next month, and one ranking official said the last negotiating session, this week in Stockholm, had ended with no clear agreement.


Uniquest Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


ERC Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Milastar Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


48 Solid Minutes End an 8-Year Losing Streak
Eight years of frustration was enough.
Eight years had passed since the Knicks had won a regular-season game in Boston Garden.
They had lost 23 such contests in a row here, a testimony to great Celtics' teams and a sore subject for the Knicks.
It was almost unfair to ask this season's Knick team about the streak, what with seven new players in uniform tonight who had nothing to do with past New York failures in Boston.
But until the streak ended, the subject would not die.


Northgate Computer Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


U.S. Asks G.M. to Explain Truck Safety Data
Federal safety regulators have asked the General Motors Corporation to explain apparent discrepancies in fire safety tests that the company used on about five million pickup trucks still on the road.
The request by investigators at the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration follows the opening of a formal inquiry earlier this month that could lead to the recall of full-sized Chevrolet and G.M.C. pickups made from 1973 to 1987.


Mark Goodson, Game-Show Inventor, Dies at 77
Mark Goodson, who turned his curiosity into a television institution, died yesterday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 77.
He died of pancreatic cancer, said his son, Jonathan Goodson of Los Angeles.


Clara Hale, Founder of Home For Addicts' Babies, Dies at 87
Clara M. Hale, who nurtured hundreds of abandoned and orphaned babies, the most fragile victims of New York City's epidemics of drug abuse and AIDS, died yesterday at Mount Sinai Hospital.
She was 87 and lived in Manhattan.
She died of complications of a stroke, her family said.


Japan Says It Can't Send Troops to Somalia
Japan, which was criticized for sending money but no troops to the Persian Gulf war, pledged $100 million today to support the military mission in Somalia.
But once again it said it could not send troops because its law did not allow it.
The decision could again raise questions about Japan's response to world events, especially since it contrasts with the response of Germany, which also did not take part in the gulf war.
Germany has said it will send 1,500 soldiers to Somalia despite wording in its Constitution that has been interpreted as prohibiting the deployment of troops beyond the North Atlantic Treaty Organization's territory.


Preserve, Don't Develop, Sterling Forest
To the Editor:
Sterling Forest in southern New York State faces a critical situation.
A plan is undergoing review for development of five self-contained hamlets, with more than 14,000 homes, 8 million square feet of commercial space and a build-out population estimated at 35,000 people.


Lynch Joining Fidelity Coaching Staff
Peter Lynch, Fidelity Investments' most famous stock picker, will be returning to the firm he left two years ago.
And, he is coming back as a teacher.
Mr.
Lynch, who oversaw the skyrocketing growth of the Magellan mutual fund throughout the 1980's, will return to Fidelity part time to coach the firm's younger stock market analysts.
He will work two days a week at the Boston-based company.


ADC Telecommunications reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Dorothy Dinnerstein; Feminist Writer Was 69
Dr.
Dorothy Dinnerstein, a feminist author and professor emeritus of psychology at Rutgers University-Newark, died on Thursday in Englewood, N.J.
She was 69 and lived in Leonia.
She died in a single-car accident, her daughter, Naomi Miller, reported.


Turkey Defends Itself Against Terrorists
To the Editor:
"Kurds vs. Kurds" (editorial, Nov. 30) misrepresents the situation in northern Iraq and implies that the Iraqi Peshmergas were somehow pressured into a coalition with Turkey against their "fellow Kurds."


New Work Corps Could Change People's Lives
To the Editor:
Having interviewed veterans of the 1930's Civilian Conservation Corps in the last decade, I believe they would greet Stephen E. Ambrose's proposal in "Revive Roosevelt's C.C.C." (Op-Ed, Nov. 28) with mixed skepticism and enthusiasm.


INSIDE
U.S. Gets Tougher in Somalia
The American commander of the relief operation in Somalia said United States forces would be more aggressive in disarming Somalis.
Page 3.
M.T.A. to Increase Tolls
Tolls for major bridges and tunnels linking New York's boroughs are being raised, but Albany is to consider exempting Staten Islanders.
Page 25.
New Chief at U. of Chicago
The University of Chicago has chosen Hugo F. Sonnenschein, Princeton's provost, as its new president.
Page 7.


Charles Blessing, 80, City Planner Noted For Urban Drawings
Charles A. Blessing, an architect and city planner, died Thursday at Henry Ford Hospital in Detroit.
He was 80.
He died of respiratory failure, his family said.
Mr.
Blessing was born in Montrose, Colo., and lived in Detroit.
He was one of the first American urban planners to have been trained as such.
After serving as Director of City Planning in Detroit from 1953 to 1977, he was appointed professor of architecture at the University of Detroit.
He retired from the university in 1985.


Stewart Enterprises Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Ennis Business Forms reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Is This the Final Day for That Giants Stadium Chant?
If Ray Handley must go, as many Giants fans have been chanting at games, he will be making his last home appearance Saturday as the Giants' head coach.
The disappointing Giants (5-9) will play the Kansas City Chiefs (9-5) at 12:30 P.M. in Giants Stadium.
The Giants have lost their last five games, and the Chiefs have won five of their last six.
Kansas City is a good team that should probably be playing better.
Still, the Chiefs are tied for their division lead and need one victory in their last two games to clinch a berth in the National Football League playoffs.


Dispute on Bias Policy Arises at Dow Jones
Peter R. Kann, chairman of Dow Jones &amp; Company, angered some company employees this week by saying it was unnecessary for the company to adopt a written policy banning discrimination against employees based on their sexual orientation, people who attended a meeting at the company's Manhattan headquarters said yesterday.
Mr.
Kann, whose company publishes The Wall Street Journal, Barron's and other publications, spoke at an end-of-year meeting with employees on Monday.


Clinton Gas Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Q &amp; A
Car Leasing Payments  Q Why is a large initial payment often required when you lease a car?
JUDI REDLER, EAST ROCKAWAY, L.I.
A About 70 percent of leased automobiles do not require a major initial payment, said Arthur Spinella, director of automotive research of CNW Marketing Research.
In those situations, you are generally required to give the lessor an amount comprising the first month's payment and a security deposit of another month's payment that is refunded at the end of the lease.


Wedding Bells, Dotted Lines
Marc Wein owned a prospering video production studio, a co-op in Manhattan and a vacation home on Shelter Island by the time he was planning to be remarried.
And he was anxious to avoid a bitter fight over the rights to those assets if his second marriage also ended in divorce.
So several months before the wedding he told his bride-to-be about his concerns.
That forced her to think about her own situation.
"It made me realize I had money of my own I wanted to protect," Melina Wein said.


Psychiatrist Calls Woman 'Bewildered' and Helpless in Glen Ridge Sex Case
A psychiatrist testified today at the Glen Ridge sex assault trial that an "ordinary" woman would have fled or voiced alarm when a sexual encounter became painful or intrusive.
The psychiatrist, Dr.
Gerald Meyerhoff, said in response to a prosecutor's questions that the behavior of a mentally retarded young woman, by remaining in the room with the four young men now on trial here, shows that she was unable to understand or exercise her right to refuse to engage in sex.


No Headline
The incidence of sexual-harassment claims soars after holiday parties, and there is a growing concern about liability in cases of excess alchohol consumption, as well. -- PAUL HENCKE, an editor for the National Institute of Business Management.  [ 9:1. ]


Penwest Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Bridge
In rendering a Solomonic opinion in a current case, Burrell Ives Humphreys, a Superior Court judge in New Jersey, declared that "to shroud the truth invites an unjust verdict."
About the same time he found a bridge application of this dictum in the diagramed deal from a duplicate game.
He arrived in a normal three no-trump contract and was faced by an opening diamond lead.
As this was the three, and the deuce was missing, he could not be sure whether West had begun with four diamonds or five.


Yeltsin Bolts for Home
President Boris N. Yeltsin cut short his visit to China and returned to Moscow, saying he needed to "restore order" and protect the reformist core of his Government.
The Russian leader said he had been informed that an effort had developed to replace Westernized economics.


Capturing Balanchine's Many Sides in a Gallery
George Balanchine was so prolific and mercurial a choreographer that it seems impossible for any single exhibition to do justice to all the facets of his genius.
Madeleine M. Nichols and Nancy Lassalle realized that more than a year ago when they started sifting through thousands of photographs and stage designs relating to his ballets.
But they also discovered that Balanchine's astonishing diversity could in itself be the focus of an exhibition.
The results of their labors are on display in "Balanchine," the show organized by Ms.
Nichols and Ms.
Lassalle.
It opened on Thursday in the Main Gallery of the New York Public Library for the Performing Arts at Lincoln Center, where it is to remain through May 15.
The exhibition, which commemorates the 10th anniversary of Balanchine's death in 1983, will still be on for the New York City Ballet's Balanchine Celebration in the spring.
At that time, the company, for which the Russian-born choreographer created many of his masterpieces, is to stage 70 of his works.
The library is also presenting symposiums on Balanchine throughout the winter and spring.


EA Engineering Science &amp; Technology Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Bongolo Basin Journal; On the Farm, the Frontiersman Dusts Off His Gun
Come nightfall, the Bongolo Basin Patrol sets out on its rounds, but its timing is imprecise.
It could be just after dusk, or before dawn, or any time in between.
Fighting Africa's newest frontier war, the white farmers who run it aren't saying.
The reason for their reticence, said Tony Sutton, an organizer of the patrol, whose farm was firebombed in September, is that their foe has "singled out farm watch as siding with the regime and being part of law enforcement, so we want to keep as low a profile as possible."


Simon M. Jaglom, Financier, 96
Simon M. Jaglom, a New York businessman and financier, died on Wednesday at New York University Medical Center.
A Manhattan resident, he turned 96 last Saturday.
A native of Ukraine, he moved to what was then the Free State of Danzig, where he became general director of the Ministry of Foreign Trade.
He went to London in 1937 to establish a business and came to this country two years later.


Joule Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


After a Night of Unity at the Apollo, Optimism Wavers
Something happened at the Apollo Theater in Harlem on Thursday night.
A documentary film about black G.I.'s liberating Jewish concentration camp prisoners during World War II brought an audience of 1,200 blacks and Jews to tears.
They spoke of common ground, embraced and passionately agreed that together, they had experienced a rare, powerful moment -- a catharsis in the increasingly hostile relations between blacks and Jews in New York City.
But in the colder light of day, many wondered whether theirs was a lasting epiphany on race relations or a moment as fleeting as it was strongly felt.
And yesterday, unlike the night before, not everyone could agree.
Some considered the evening at the Apollo a turning point, while others feared the truce would be about as permanent as those jaunty waves across the trenches between British and German soldiers in the early days of World War I.


Classical Music in Review
St. Luke's Chamber Ensemble and Julianne Baird, soprano Merkin Concert Hall
The St.
Luke's Chamber Ensemble, the kernel from which the ubiquitous Orchestra of St.
Luke's emerged, played sacred and secular works by Bach on Tuesday evening.
The sacred section was a group of holiday arias from two cantatas and the Christmas Oratorio, sung with graceful restraint by the soprano Julianne Baird.


Queens Woman, 78, Found Fatally Slashed
An elderly Queens woman, who served as a sort of unofficial greeter in the housing project where she lived, was found slashed to death in her first-floor apartment yesterday, the police said, the victim of a robbery turned very violent.
The killing took place in a 48-building city project, Pomonok Houses, in Flushing, where residents were already frightened by a series of robberies.
A sign taped to a lobby wall of the victim's building warned of three push-in robberies in the last two weeks.
Warning in Lobby
A police spokesman, Officer Andrew McInnis, said that Sophie Seretta, 78 years old, of 155-26 Jewel Avenue, had been found by her daughter, whom he did not identify, about noon yesterday.
Officer McInnis said Mrs.
Seretta's throat had been slashed, and that some property had been taken.
He also said there was no sign of forced entry.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-6  ISRAEL CONDEMNED AT U.N.
The United Nations Security Council voted unanimously to condemn Israel for its decision to deport hundreds of Palestinians from the occupied territories.  1


J2 Communications reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


COMPANY BRIEFS
AMOCO OIL CO., a subsidiary of Amoco Corporation, Chicago, has purchased from Shell Oil Company, a subsidiary of Shell Petroleum Inc., a procduct distribution terminal in Doraville, Ga., for an undisclosed sum.
The purchase will increase the capacity of Amoco's terminal by about 13.9 million gallons.
DIGITAL COMMUNICATIONS ASSOCIATES INC., Alpharetta, Ga., agreed to acquire Avatar TechnologiesCorp., Hopkinton, Mass., a manufacturer of Macintosh-to-mainframe software and hardware, for $8 million, a price that may increase based on the performance of the combined product line over the next three years.


The World's Poor Need Bill Clinton
Thirty-four nations, including the United States, agreed this week to continue the current pace of multilateral aid to the world's poorest nations through the International Development Association.
Their three-year pledge of $18 billion was an encouraging sign of unflagging commitment by the nations that are better off, despite widespread recession and budget deficits.
In real terms, the new pledge is roughly equal to the last one, in 1989, but in effect it works out to a little less.
Expanding populations and environmental protection stretch aid funds thinner; also, more governments, including the former Soviet republics, are likely to be seeking I.D.A. aid.


2 Nashville Officers Dismissed in Beating
In a case of police violence disturbingly similar to incidents in New York, Detroit and Los Angeles, the Police Chief here today dismissed two white officers accused of roughing up a black motorist who turned out to be an undercover vice squad officer.
The dismissals came only four days after the incident and followed a three-hour closed hearing in the office of Police Chief Robert Kirchner.


Classical Music in Review
Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center  Tully Hall
The big news at the Chamber Music Society's concert on Sunday afternoon was the world premiere of Fred Lerdahl's "Marches" for clarinet, violin, cello and piano.
In a note, the composer aptly described his work as a "hallucination of marches through a labyrinthine landscape"; the influence of Gustav Mahler, an obsessive aficionado of marches, hung heavily but not oppressively over the score.
Mr.
Lerdahl set a variety of conflicting events into motion and fluidly coordinated their intermingling.
What seemed to be missing was a contemporary tone, some indication that this collage emanated from 1992 rather than 1902 or 1932.
The performance by David Shifrin, Ani Kavafian, Fred Sherry and Lee Luvisi was alert and persuasive.


Finally, Montana Has a Shot at Playing
There's a bit of a chance that JOE MONTANA, whom the San Francisco 49ers activated from injured reserve yesterday, could play in his first meaningful National Football League game in nearly two years when his team plays host to the Tampa Bay Buccaneers today.
The quarterback, who led the 49ers to four Super Bowl victories, had been sidelined by a torn right elbow tendon suffered in August 1991.
He hasn't played in a game that counted since he broke his right hand during the 49ers' 15-13 loss to the Giants in the National Conference championship on Jan. 20, 1991.


Company to Pay $111 Million In Health-Claims Fraud Suit
National Health Laboratories Inc., one of the nation's largest providers of clinical diagnostic testing, pleaded guilty today in Federal court to two criminal charges of submitting false claims to Government health insurance programs.
The company agreed to pay $111 million to settle the case, Government officials said.
The settlement, the largest ever reached between the Government and a health-care provider, is a result of a two-year Federal investigation into the company's marketing and billing practices.


U.S. General Sees Expanded Role on Somali Weapons
The senior commander over the American-led relief operation in Somalia said here today that United States forces would be more aggressive in disarming Somali gunmen who refuse appeals or financial incentives to give up their weapons.
The comments by Gen.
Joseph P. Hoar, who heads the Central Command based in Tampa, Fla., seemed to expand the United States' narrow commitment to disarm only Somalis who threaten American forces or bring weapons into areas controlled by Western troops.


Keys to Understanding Condominium Market
To the Editor:
A Nov. 25 graphic purporting to show the ups and downs of the Manhattan condominium market is provocative, but also misleading.
Without putting in vertical lines to indicate months or financial quarters and by not indicating the cut-off point for 1992, you have sent your readers an incomplete message.
Indicating number of transactions without also giving aggregate or average per-transaction sales price results in a meaningless statistic.


Patent System Protects Inventor Better
To the Editor:
Prof.
Michael Davis's description of me as a "patent terrorist" in "Why a Single Court for Patents Isn't Enough" (letter, Nov. 28), and his attack on the patent court system, obscures my contributions to technological innovation, while it ignores the real issues in the debate, which include protecting the rights of the inventor and patent owner.


Election Monitors in Serbia Fault TV Campaign as Unfair
International election monitors described Serbia's election campaign as unfair today, singling out the Government-run television network for "insidious" bias in favor of the incumbent President, Slobodan Milosevic.
Jack Zetkulic, head of the election monitoring team from the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe, said at a news conference here today: "Every delegation that has reviewed the campaign has called attention to the insidious propaganda in official television that has distorted or ignored the message of the opposition parties and has relentlessly supported the governing party and its candidates."


Sears Ousts Chairman of Auto Division
Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company said today that it had dismissed John T. Lundegard as chairman and chief executive of its Western Auto Supply division.
Mr.
Lundegard had held those positions since 1980.
Gerald Buldak, a spokesman for Sears, said it was company policy not to discuss reasons for a dismissal.
John R. Leach, Western Auto's president and chief operating officer, will assume Mr.
Lundegard's duties until a successor is named, Mr.
Buldak said.
The company said Mr.
Lundegard was not available for comment.


Dana Andrews, Film Actor of 40's, Is Dead at 83
Dana Andrews, the sturdy, square-jawed archetypal American hero of acclaimed films of the 1940's, including "The Best Years of Our Lives," "Laura" and "A Walk in the Sun," died on Thursday at Los Alamitos Medical Center in Orange County, Calif.
He was 83 years old.
He had been hospitalized with pneumonia, a hospital spokeswoman said.
In recent years Mr.
Andrews lived at the John Douglas French Center for Alzheimer's Disease in Los Alamitos.


Intertel Communications reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


SECURITY COUNCIL VOTES TO CONDEMN ISRAELI EXPULSIONS
In a strongly worded rebuke backed by the United States, the Security Council voted unanimously tonight to condemn Israel for deporting about 400 Palestinians from the occupied territories.
The resolution approved by the 15-member Council "strongly condemns" the deportations and demands that those expelled be readmitted to the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip.
The Council was drawing on a phrase it first used to rebuke the country in January, when Israel ordered the deportation of 12 Palestinians accused of inciting terrorism.
Monitoring the Issue
The measure voted tonight, which was drafted by the Council's third-world members and representatives of the Palestine Liberation Organization, also asks the United Nations Secretary General for the first time to consider sending a representative to Israel to discuss "this serious situation" with the Government there and report back to the Council.


Yugoslav Chief Sees More Instability
Yugoslavia's federal President, Dobrica Cosic, believes that Sunday's election in Serbia will usher in a period of "social instability and turbulence," but he rejects fears that the country may soon plunge into civil war.
In an interview on Thursday, Mr.
Cosic said he was confident that the army would follow his orders and abide by the election results, even if voters reject Slobodan Milosevic, the militant nationalist who is running for re-election as President of the Serbian republic.


Golden Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 31


Schott Inquiry Is Criticized by Former A's Employee
Concerned about the effort of the baseball committee that is looking into alleged racist and anti-Semitic remarks by Marge Schott, the Cincinnati Reds' owner, one of her most prominent accusers has called for an independent investigation.
Sharon Jones, a former member of the Oakland Athletics' front office, met with two committee members for an hour and a half Thursday and came away with serious doubts about their efforts.


Religion Notes
Super Opportunity
Pastor, is your church empty on Super Bowl Sunday?


An Unbroken Tradition of Giving to Neediest
The year was 1922.
Warren G. Harding was in the White House and Rudolph Valentino was the reigning matinee idol.
Six-year-old Virginia Goldman was living in an apartment on 181st Street in the Inwood section of Manhattan, near the site where workers would later build the George Washington Bridge.
Almost a decade earlier, Virginia's parents had started contributing to a new charity sponsored by The New York Times.
That year, Virginia joined them for the first time.
She carefully stuck a dime -- her entire life savings -- to a piece of paper using paste that she made from flour and water.
She signed the letter and her mother mailed it.


Islanders Will Sorely Miss One Who's Hurting, Too
Although the X-rays showed no broken ribs, Steve Thomas didn't make the trip today with the Islanders for the weekend matinee games in Pittsburgh on Saturday and in Quebec on Sunday.
Thomas, one of the team's top scoring threats, bruised the ribs again Thursday night in a 9-3 victory over Ottawa at Nassau Coliseum, the Islanders' third consecutive victory.


CHRONICLE
GINGER ROGERS dancing without Fred Astaire?
That's what viewers will see on Dec. 30 when CBS broadcasts the 15th annual Kennedy Center Honors.
The ceremony was taped in Washington on Dec. 6, and Miss Rogers was one of the six people honored.
ROBYN ASTAIRE, the film star's widow, has threatened to sue the Kennedy Center if it allows the use of film clips or still photos of her husband in the broadcast without paying her.


Sports of The Times; Farewell To 'The Boy Next Door'
I DON'T love baseball, but I hate to see the life oozing out of the game as it goes through an excruciating, but necessary, metamorphosis.
Baseball is like a longtime neighbor whose primary value is providing a comforting sense of stability.


Applied Power reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Start-Up Will Challenge Nintendo and Sega
A small Silicon Valley company plans to introduce a high-end video game system that is attracting extraordinary attention because it is backed by both Japanese consumer electronics companies and Hollywood.
The fledgling company, 3DO, of San Mateo, Calif., was started by Trip Hawkins, founder of Electronic Arts, the computer software game company.
It will introduced its new game system Jan. 7 at the Consumer Electronics Show in Las Vegas, Nev.
New Hardware Standard
The company is trying to create a new video-game-hardware standard and has financial backing from the Matsushita Electric Industrial Company and Time Warner Inc., an industry executive familiar with 3DO's plans said.


Rangers' Leetch Sidelined By Injury
One week after trading for free-agent defenseman Kevin Lowe in order to improve their sagging defense, the Rangers have been hit with the indefinite loss of Brian Leetch, perhaps the league's best defenseman.
Leetch will miss tonight's game in Hartford and is sidelined indefinitely with nerve irritation to his neck and shoulder suffered in a crash into the boards during a 4-3 victory over the Blues in St.
Louis Thursday night.


4 Hakka Operas
Cheng Rom-shing and the Miao-Li Hakka Yodel Troupe are to perform four traditional Hakka operas at 7:30 P.M. today and at 2 P.M. tomorrow at the Taipei Theater, 1221 Avenue of the Americas, at 49th Street.
The program consists of "The Mountain Tea Harvest," "Buying Wine," "The Salesman's Story" and "The Journey of Tao Hua." Hakkas, the second largest ethnic group on Taiwan, are descendants of the Han Chinese.
Their style of mountain singing, similar to yodeling, is typical of Hakka operas, which often recount amusing occurrences from everyday life with folk songs, dances and ceremonial music.
Tickets are $8; $5 for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 373-1850.


20 and Out: Tarkanian Is Fired by Spurs
A professional coaching career that began with the jitters and included bouts with chest pains, team dissension and unaccustomed underachievement came to an abrupt end yesterday afternoon when Jerry Tarkanian was dismissed as coach of the San Antonio Spurs hours before the team's 21st game of the season, against Dallas at home.
The move, which came as San Antonio struggled with a 9-11 record, was announced by the team's owner, Red McCombs, who made it sound like an execution.


Partech Holding reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Region Continues Cleanup After Storm


Destrade Takes His Home Runs Home to Miami
When the Detroit Tigers signed Cecil Fielder three years ago for $3 million over two years, many people wondered why the tight-fisted Tigers would spend so much money on a player returning from Japan who had been a part-time player before he left.
Now comes Orestes Destrade, and the Florida Marlins hope he will be Cecil II.


Yugoslavia Votes, Divided and Fearful
Voters in what is left of Yugoslavia go to the polls Sunday, bitterly divided about their country's future yet agreeing on one thing: the weeks ahead are full of new and terrible dangers.
The two remaining republics that now make up federal Yugoslavia -- Serbia and Montenegro -- are rife with rumors of coups, military uprisings and even impending war among the rival factions who are contesting the election within Serbia.
No matter who wins the voting, most citizens believe that neither side will accept the results peacefully.


RAGE IN A TENURED POSITION
In the Nov. 29 letters column, Erica Mann Jong characterized the Columbia graduate English department of 1963 as one "designed to crush female talent and harass women into leaving." I was a candidate for a departmental M.A. from January 1962 to June 1963, and the truth is that the pronounced majority of master's degree candidates were women because they were on their way to teaching positions in the region's school systems.
Columbia reserved the right to invite only a small percentage of those taking a master's degree in English to return for the doctoral program.
Logically, since most of the students were female, the majority of those who failed to make the cut were women.
If this constituted being harassed into leaving, we shall want to redefine those terms.
Though a male, I was not invited to continue at Columbia after earning my M.A.; so I am not as well informed about the dissertation politics of the era as I might have become.
However, there was one notorious specimen of gender prejudice that all of us students, men and women alike, spoke of in something like whispers.
The woman who taught the course in 17th-century poetry was in the habit of surrounding herself with a group of favorite students, "her girls," from whom she expected complete loyalty.


It's a Brave New World for Lucas and the N.B.A.
When he purchased the Miami Tropics of the United States Basketball League 16 months ago, John Lucas said he wanted to create a facsimile of conditions in the big time, the National Basketball Association, for recovering substance abusers.
He wanted to give them a place to put their learning experiences at his Houston clinic to the test of the temptation-laden N.B.A. night life.
"It's all about learning to live with the pressure of expectation, and the temptation to try to escape from it," said Lucas.
Now it is Professor Lucas who must balance the fragile equation of being a recovering substance abuser atop the high wire under the N.B.A. big top, where the pressure to soar is great and there is not much of a safety net.


Toward Better Care For Elderly Patients
FOR months the County Hospitals Commissioner, Mack L. Carter Jr., beat an insistent path between his office in Eastview Hall and the Ruth Taylor Geriatric and Rehabilitation Institute here.
When the weather was bad, he raced underground -- a quarter mile through the basement tunnels that snake beneath the County Medical Center.


MOST LIKELY TO SUCCEED
Alessandra Stanley was clearly less interested in Frank Aller's life and death than in using his compelling story to snipe at Bill Clinton's character ("Most Likely to Succeed," Nov. 22).
The repeated comparisons between Clinton and his late friend made her intentions quite transparent.
How else to explain the inclusion of a claim that Clinton tried to seduce a girlfriend of Aller's?
What of the ridiculous implication that Clinton was a phony because he once carried a volume of William Blake's poetry in his back pocket?
STEVEN LEWIS
New Paltz, N.Y.


THE WORLD: Israel's Deportations; Rabin Kicks the Mideast Peace Table
YITZHAK RABIN got to be Prime Minister five months ago largely because he convinced enough Israelis that he was the man to promote peace and at the same time protect their security.
Last week, Mr.
Rabin put himself in the crucible: Can he really do both?
He says yes.
But if he has guessed wrong, startling actions by his Labor Government last week in the name of security conceivably have washed 14 months of peace negotiations down the drain.
After the shocking murders of four Israeli soldiers and a border policeman, Israelis felt threatened, and were primed for iron-fist tactics against Palestinian guerrillas of the Hamas group of Islamic fundamentalists who had said they were responsible.
Mr.
Rabin, an ex-general and no softie, agreed the time to strike was at hand, and his chosen method was shocking in itself.
In the dead of night and under the cloak of military censorship, his Government deported 415 suspected Hamas leaders and allies from Israeli-occupied territories to Lebanon, by far the largest single group of Palestinians sent into exile since soon after the 1967 war.


One Youth, One Crucial Vote Cast
This is America, where people are not supposed to be able to elect themselves to positions of power.
But don't tell that to 20-year-old Justin Weaver.
Or make that Town Justice-elect Justin Weaver, who was elected on Nov. 3 after receiving a single write-in vote -- his own.


U.S. Moves to Replace Japanese Head of W.H.O.
The United States and its European allies are mounting a spirited campaign to prevent the re-election of the head of the World Health Organization, the agency that leads the worldwide battle against AIDS and other threats to public health.
The official, Dr.
Hiroshi Nakajima, a Japanese citizen who has headed the agency for five years, is being strongly defended by the Japanese Government.
The election is scheduled for Jan. 20.


MOST LIKELY TO SUCCEED
Your article was illuminating for its revelation that, in 1971, The Los Angeles Times would hire a draft-resisting, antiwar activist for its Saigon bureau.
No wonder the coverage of the war was so biased. WILLIAM J. PARENTE
Scranton, Pa.


Defining the Freedom To Hate While Punching
RARELY does a Supreme Court case seem to spring as directly out of the headlines as the appeal the Court accepted last week on the validity of criminal penalties for hate crimes.
The case is from Kenosha, Wis., where a black man leading an assault on a white 14-year-old told his companions: "There's a white boy, go get him." It could just as well have come from Howard Beach, Queens, where a band of white men attacked three blacks from outside the neighborhood exactly six years ago today.
Or from Miami or Los Angeles or Crown Heights -- any place where racial or ethnic tensions have erupted.


TAIWAN ELECTION HELPS OPPOSITION
Voters elected Taiwan's first fully democratic legislature today, giving unexpectedly strong support to opposition candidates in an election that is considered likely to speed change on the island.
The Kuomintang, the Nationalist Party that has ruled Taiwan for more than 40 years, won a much smaller majority than it had expected.
The opposition Democratic Progressive Party, which was formed illegally just six years ago, emerged with nearly one-third of the seats and far more credibility than before.


Another 'Solution' To Flood Problem
There have recently been a number of letters to the New Jersey editor regarding the long-proposed drainage tunnel between the Pequannock-Singac area and Newark Bay, which is supposed to alleviate the occasional floods in the region.
This is mentioned as an alternative to the Government's buying up all the properties there and moving out the present property owners.


Corrections
A map on Nov. 8 with an article about excursions from Santa Fe, N.M., included outdated road numbers.
A reader's letter, dated Nov. 12, points out that the route labeled U.S. 85 is now Interstate 25, and that a stretch labeled both U.S. 84 and U.S. 85 is now U.S. 84.
Further research has found that many residents refer to U.S. 84 as "Old 85."


Red Cross Won't Use U.S. Troop Escorts in Somalia
The International Committee of the Red Cross, which has distributed more food in the last two years in Somalia than the United Nations, says it does not plan to use United States military armed escorts for any of its food distribution.
While other relief organizations have continued to try to deliver food without military protection when it is not available, the Red Cross is the only one that has chosen to do without it altogether.


From Boy to Boxer: Learning the Art of the Punch
It is at once the sweetest of sciences, the most brutal of sports, a proverbial way out of poverty and a passport to fame, riches and success.
But for everything that boxing is, to hundreds of New York City youngsters who frequent neighborhood gyms from Brooklyn to the Bronx, some things it is not.
It is not a game.
It is not play.
It is not fun.


Enormous Changes on a Small Planet
HAMMOND ATLAS OF THE WORLD
303 pp. Maplewood, N.J.: Hammond Inc. $65.
NATIONAL GEOGRAPHIC ATLAS OF THE WORLD
Revised Sixth Edition. 136 pp.
Washington: National Geographic Society.
Softcover, $73.
Hardcover, $89.
THE NEW YORK TIMES ATLAS OF THE WORLD
Third Revised Concise Edition. 244 pp. New York: Times Books/ Random House. $75.
OXFORD ATLAS OF THE WORLD
288 pp. New York: Oxford University Press. $65.
TODAY'S WORLD
A New World Atlas From the Cartographers of Rand McNally. 192 pp.
Chicago: Rand McNally. $29.95;
THE ECONOMIST ATLAS OF THE NEW EUROPE
288 pp. New York: Henry Holt &amp; Company. $75.


DEC. 13-19: Perils for the U.N.; In Giving Peace a Chance, Happiness Is No Guns
The United Nations is learning, the hard way, the fragility of peace without disarmament.
In Cambodia, the much-feared Khmer Rouge has boycotted the peace process it agreed to last year, refusing to disarm and warning the United Nations to stay out of areas it controls.
Last week, apparently to underline the point, Khmer Rouge guerrillas seized three groups of United Nations peacekeepers, releasing the first two groups but threatening to kill nine of those in the third.
That makes a total of four such incidents this month.


Let the Game Begin
VENISON IS suddenly a dietary darling.
It contains about the same amount of fat and calories as skinless chicken, and has a dense, beeflike texture and mild gamy flavor, like that of lean lamb.
Chefs find that it sates the appetite stirred by northerly winds and the endless evenings of winter.
Nutritionists hail it as if it were the cure for en masse beef withdrawal.
In a number of restaurants, venison has actually supplanted beef on seasonal menus in the past several years.


A la Carte
The New Year's Eve dinner to be served at Mirabelle, 404 North Country Road, St.
James (584-5999), is one of the most elaborate and expensive dinners available locally.
The four-course meal costs $90, plus tax and gratuity.
Diners will have multiple choices available for three of the four courses.
Only the second course, duck consomme with phyllo-wrapped duck, will be served to everyone.


The Thrill Seekers
IN moments of weakness -- when he is teetering on a foot-wide ledge over a thousand-foot vertical drop, for example -- Gil Friesen starts fantasizing about how his friends in the Hamptons are spending their vacations.
But then he gets a grip.
After all, in the Hamptons there are no "tiny little Nepalese people" speaking a strange tongue.
No steep stone paths slinking 3,000 feet into the clouds.
And there is not that esophagus-clenching, adrenaline-inducing, life-altering epiphany near and dear to the hearts and minds of the new adventure traveler:
Oh my God! There's no way out!


Man Is Slain Outside Club in Queens
An off-duty transit police officer shot and killed a 21-year-old man early yesterday after the officer's companions were attacked by several people on a sidewalk in front of a popular nightspot in Astoria, Queens, the transit police said.
The man who was killed, Victor Vays, of 2343 East 66th Street in Mill Basin, Brooklyn, was standing some distance away and apparently was not involved in the attack, said Albert W. O'Leary, a transit police spokesman.


The Wise Men's Gift: Was It Gold Coins?
CHRISTMAS is the time of giving, but few children will associate biblical stories with wrapped Barbies or G. I. Joes.
Of course, the first Christmas gifts were the ones the three wise men presented to the infant Jesus: gold, frankincense and myrrh.
They had brought these from the lands east of what is now Israel, according the apostle Matthew, following a vision of a new king born in Bethlehem.
The three had conferred with King Herod, and he had made them his emissaries there.
Of the three gifts, two are well known.
Both frankincense and myrrh are fragrant but bitter gums derived from plants of the region and were used to make perfume and incense.
At one time, the trade in those two items launched commercial empires spanning the Arabian Sea.


A Quarrelsome Peace
The editors of the New York Times Magazine decided it would be a fine seasonal gift to ask some of America's most accomplished writers of fiction and essays to compose short stories of reminiscences about Christmas.
The initiative was an unconventional one for this magazine, which traditionally has published nonfiction.
The startlingly contemporary reference points the writers choose - malls, a precinct station house, broken homes - also seemed unconventional at first.
But reflecting on these settings appear to sustain old tradition.
Christmas is a holiday that encourages us to celebrate out shared experience.


Don't Wax Nostalgic for Airline Regulation
To the Editor:
It is quite apparent that Mr.
Pevsner either did not take economics in college or has forgotten all that he was taught.
Return to those days when everyone was charged the same air fare, resulting in vacation travelers subsidizing business travelers?
Mr.
Pevsner seems intent on depriving millions of Americans of the advantages of low fares when they book ahead.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
THE HACKER CRACKDOWN Law and Disorder  on the Electronic Frontier.
By Bruce Sterling.
Bantam, $23.


A Women's Group Now Looks to '94
For all political action committees, the payoff begins now, as the groups' lobbyists start making their Capitol Hill rounds, calling in their chits for their pet legislation.
All political action committees, that is, except for Emily's List.


Business Diary/December 13-18
THE ECONOMY
The End of I.B.M.'s Overshadowing Role


U.N. IS TO RESUME KOREA JET INQUIRY
The United Nations agency that oversees civil aviation decided on Friday to resume its long dormant inquiry into the downing in 1983 of a South Korean airliner by a Soviet fighter.
Russian officials have assured the agency that tapes from the plane's flight-data and cockpit voice recorders will be provided for impartial analysis.
Analysis of the tapes, which the Russians announced this fall had been recovered within weeks of the downing, could help experts determine why the Boeing 747 strayed deep into Russian airspace on its flight from Alaska to Seoul.
All 269 people on board the plane, Korean Air Lines Flight 007, were killed in the incident.


Muscles Can Be Musical, Naturally
"Think of a grapefruit growing down your throat" is one way a voice teacher tried to inspire a student to produce the right sort of sound.
Another pedagogue proposed this image: "From armpits to waist is a barrel; now fill it with beer." And a third: "When you sing, a big red flower opens up in your breast, and the fragrance drifts up into the throat, and a teapot blows a stream of steam out through the very tip-top of your head."
These are all examples of vocal pedagogy lightly mocked in a new book, "Essays on the Nature of Singing" by Cornelius L. Reid (Recital Publications, Huntsville, Tex.).
One of the most vexing of contemporary musical problems is how pressured and strained many operatic voices sound, and how few succeed at suggesting character or emotion in their phrasing.
Mr.
Reid has been obsessed with this; in previous books, including "Voice: Psyche and Soma" and the invaluable "Dictionary of Vocal Terminology," he has tried to create a different way of thinking about the voice.
A fellow voice teacher, the critic Conrad L. Osborne, has called him one of the "most influential vocal teachers and theorists of the past quarter century."


Greenspan's Gift To the Nation: No Bank Crisis
The first job of the Federal Reserve System is to preserve the banking system.
And as a new administration takes over in Washington, applause is in order for Alan Greenspan and his colleagues.
This coming week was billed earlier in the year as the time for the "December surprise," when new Federal rules that took effect yesterday would lead to the shutdown of dozens of banks.
The bank crisis in 1992, people kept muttering, was just like the savings and loan crisis in 1988 -- almost ignored during the campaign but sure to be a dominant problem for whoever won the election.


Not All Music of the Disaffected Is Neo-Nazi; Cousin of Reggae
To the Editor:
"Music of Hate Raises the Volume in Germany" (front page, Dec. 2) gives a misleading impression of Oi music, apparently based on a single source, the London writer Tony Robson.
Any journalist knows the pitfalls of basing broad conclusions on a single source.


Corrections
The listing of dance events on page 38 of the Arts and Leisure section today includes an outdated entry for the Charles Moore Dance Theater.
Because of a producer's change in plans, the performance today has been canceled.


St. John the Divine: It Can't Go On. It Goes On.
A week from today, New York's greatest post-modern skyscraper celebrates its 100th birthday.
And the building is barely two-thirds complete.
An absurdity?
An anachronism?
No more so than the building itself: the glorious Cathedral Church of St.
John the Divine.
Manhattan's 20th-century French Gothic cathedral, the colossus of Morningside Heights, is indeed absurd.
Yet the century that has given us Camus, Genet and Steve Martin is one that has found in absurdity a redeeming spiritual grace.
In this sense, at least, St.
John's stained glass windows reflect our age as accurately as the glass curtain wall of an office tower designed by Mies van der Rohe.
To paraphrase Beckett, the cathedral can't go on.
It goes on.
It has been going on since Dec. 27, 1892, when the cornerstone was laid.
There have been interruptions.
Now and then, the cathedral has halted construction to re-examine its motives or rethink its design.
These ruminations have contributed to the impression that "St. John the Unfinished" is the existential cathedral, a building at once alienated and engaged.
The opposite of "Hamlet" in modern dress, St.
John's is the anxious modern hero in period costume.


Geoffrey Burgess and Kristin Breuss
Kristin Lynn Breuss, a daughter of James J. Breuss and Loretto B. Breuss of Nashville, was married there yesterday to Geoffrey Pritchard Burgess, a son of Dr.
W.
Patrick Burgess and Susan M. Burgess of Charlotte, N.C.
The Rev.
Scott Wallace, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at St.
Henry Church.
The Rev.
Jeffrey Kane, a Presbyterian minister, also took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Breuss Burgess, 24 years old, is a financial analyst at Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company, the investment bank, in New York.
She and her husband graduated from the University of North Carolina.
Her father is a co-owner of Breuss-Hardebeck Associates, an employee-benefits consulting company in Nashville.
Her mother is an administrative assistant in Nashville for Northern Telecom, a manufacturer of telecommunications equipment.


Deirdre Kane, Robert Kravitz
Deirdre Kane, a recruitment coordinator at the New York law firm of Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton &amp; Garrison, was married yesterday to Robert Kravitz, an associate at that firm.
The Rev.
Richard Leonard performed the Unitarian ceremony at the Lotos Club in New York.
Ms.
Kane, who is keeping her name, graduated from Mount Holyoke College.
She is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
James P. Kane of Packanack Lake, N.J.
The bride's father is the superintendent of the Hamburg, N.J., public schools.
Her mother, Maureen Kane, is a retired reading specialist for Wayne Valley High School in Wayne, N.J.


Somalia, We Are Here! (Now What Do We Do?)
LESS than two weeks into the American-led military operation to safeguard the feeding of Somalia, conflicting visions about what the troops will do and how they will do it are emerging.
The biggest question is: How much is the United States prepared to invest in restoring political sanity and economic equilibrium to a country that has been without a government for two years?
The Bush Administration successfully pushed the United Nations to lend its imprimatur to a novel and large-scale intervention to help the starving of Somalia, one that seemed to be largely devoid of ulterior political motives.
But now, with roughly 10,000 American and several thousand other troops on the ground here and 30,000 more expected to join them later, it is unclear whether they can or will perform all the tasks that the Secretary General of the United Nations, Boutros Boutros-Ghali, expects of them.


Talking: Disputes; Alternative Forums for Resolution
THE people in unit X play the drums late at night, keeping their neighbors awake.
The owner of a corner unit is furious because his parking space is being shortened and narrowed.
His neighbor down the street is withholding common charges, arguing that the lawn outside his unit is rarely mowed, and the board threatens to sue.


The Traditional Handsaw Still Proves Its Versatility
LOOKING at tool displays in stores and listening to sounds at construction sites can give an impression that ordinary handsaws have become relics.
But many carpenters still use them.
Of course, not all jobs are better suited for handsawing than power sawing.
But it is quicker and safer to use a handsaw, rather than set up a circular saw, to lop off the end of a single 2 X 4 or to trim a molding.
And there can be no doubt that the low-pitched noise of a handsaw is less disturbing than the high-pitched scream of a power saw.


President-Elect Pays Heed to His Health


Adorning Apartheid's Stage
It was Glitz, so there were Names -- Joan Collins, Jerry Hall and Ivana Trump, among them.
It was Africa, so there were elephants, in motif and on video, part of a show that was supposed to make the Miss World pageant, held Dec. 12, the most memorable in its 42-year history.
And of course, there were 84 women who had come to one of a continent's more curious resorts to pit sinuous sashays against dental-ad smiles for the prize that Miss Russia -- also known as Julia Kurochkina -- finally took home.
But most striking of all was the way the folderol of the setting and the hype of the contest seemed positively made for one another: neither has much to do with reality, both have a lot to do with escape, and both have flourished in the loam of criticism from those who avow far loftier ideals than swimsuits and slot machines.


Beth Kane, David Feldman
Beth Alison Kane, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Eric P. Kane of Bayport, L.I., was married last evening to David Michael Feldman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ronald Feldman of Dix Hills, L.I.
Rabbi Jeffrey Wartenberg performed the ceremony at Temple Israel in Lawrence, L.I.
Mrs.
Feldman, 24 years old, is the associate buyer at Playclothes, a children's-clothing catalog merchandiser in New York.
She and her husband graduated from Cornell University.
Her father is an orthopedic surgeon in Patchogue, L.I., and the chief of orthopedic surgery at Brookhaven Memorial Hospital there.
Her mother, Susan Kane, is a travel consultant at Bayberry Travel in Bellport, L.I.


Greens Pick an Enemy: Chlorine, the Everywhere Element
CHLORINE ranks number 17 on the periodic table of chemical elements, but it has recently become the No. 1 target of some environmentalists.
That's because a long list of organic compounds, from PCB's to dioxins, contain chlorine and they all pose health and environmental risks.
Chlorine has something of a checkered career, including use in World War I as a choking gas and as part of the more lethal mustard and phosgene gases.
Yet it is widely used to purify the water supply in many American cities.


Where the Elves Wear Yarmulkes
IT was a cold, dark afternoon in early December, and the jolly old man with the twinkling eyes was having a busy day.
In a few weeks, the children would be opening their presents, and there were still thousands of orders left to fill.
He pushed open the door to the enormous room where bustling workers were filling up boxes with toys and books.


Havana to Hialeah, an American Tale
"TRUTH is awful. Fantasy is better," Olga proclaims when her sulky 14-year-old daughter, Barbara, starts grumbling about how dark life is, about how she doesn't believe in happiness.
The fantasy Olga is clutching at is the family's once-upon-a-time elitism in Cuba.
Now it's 1960 and Fernando, Olga's husband, an accomplished mathematician, is lifting bricks, and they're subsisting on Spam, Velveeta and lima beans in Hialeah, "a dirty little town next to Miami." Fernando has $12 in his pocket and Olga has a box of jewels -- "our only mementos to save and cherish."


Man in the News; Korea's Pick: A Pragmatist Kim Young Sam
A decade ago, languishing under house arrest imposed by military leaders, Kim Young Sam was a potent symbol of the struggle for democracy in northeast Asia, which was just beginning to see the fruits of explosive economic growth.
He had already been expelled from the country's parliament and banned from all political activity, declaring to those who urged him to join the generals, "I will not take the road of eternal political death for a temporary extension of my political life."
By the time he emerged from his house at 5 A.M. today for a jog in the freezing temperatures, Mr.
Kim was not only the country's President-elect, but also a symbol of a very changed time.
After 30 years in the opposition, he joined the ruling party,once the party of the generals, two years ago, vowing that he could speed South Korea's transition to a democracy by reforming it from within.


Q and A
Cruising the Intracoastal
Q.
I am interested in traveling the Intracoastal Waterway to Florida.
Does anyone offer this itinerary? -- Pierce M. Kearney, Washington, Conn.


The Power Laugh
I have read and heard and repeated -- the now standard feminist explanation for the hysteria over Hillary Clinton.
It goes like this: The guardians of the rusting social order -- the pundits, the political hacks, the religious right -- have their shorts in a knot over Hillary Clinton because she's an independent woman.
They feel threatened by this emblem of the modern women's movement -- by her professionalism, her role in her husband's career, her feminist views, her failure to produce a brood of young 'uns and, last but not at all least, her financial independence.


Wall Street; The Weight of the Dow's Big Blue Anchor
A BELLWETHER it may no longer be, but I.B.M. can still give the Dow a wallop.
Last week, the Dow's 9.19-point gain, to 3,313.27, would have been a 33-point gain but for the $11 drop in I.B.M.'s stock.
But that's the least of it.
Because I.B.M.'s stock price was once so high, its fall has burdened the Dow Jones industrial average for years.


Caroline Coleman, Peter O'Neill
Caroline Virginia Coleman, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John H. Coleman of Locust Valley, L.I., was married there yesterday to Peter Meriwether O'Neill, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
George D. O'Neill of Oyster Bay, L.I.
The Rev.
Charles Newbery performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
John's of Lattingtown Church.
Mrs.
O'Neill, 28 years old, was until recently a law clerk for Judge Thomas P. Griesa of the Federal District Court for the Southern District of New York.
She is to become an associate at the New York law firm of Davis Polk &amp; Wardwell next month.
She graduated from Princeton and Oxford Universities and received a law degree from Columbia University.
Her father is the president of Plasma Physics Corporation, a semiconductor research company in Locust Valley.


Not All Music of the Disaffected Is Neo-Nazi
To the Editor:
"Music of Hate Raises the Volume in Germany" (front-page, Dec. 2), on the increasing popularity of neo-Nazi bands, conflates the despicable hate music of the far right with the now largely defunct form of music called "Oi," the anthemic pub rock of the British working class.
Most Oi bands were ideologically neutral, though some were openly Socialist (the Oppressed, the 4-Skins).
A couple were fascist.
Not derivative of punk rock, Oi predated it and considered itself distinct from that movement, which it viewed as arty and decadent.


Nets Are Second Best In Hustle Department
The Nets showed little life tonight against the Pacers.
They were outhustled and outmuscled.
New Jersey allowed Indiana too many shots inside, too many fast-break baskets and too many second chances on the offensive boards in a 124-110 defeat at Market Square Arena.


Denise Riordan, Andrew Larkin
Denise Riordan was married yesterday in New York to Andrew Larkin.
The Rev.
Dr.
Mark Anschutz performed the ceremony at St.
James' Episcopal Church.
Ms.
Riordan, 28, is a director in London of the Union Bank of Switzerland.
She is keeping her name.
She graduated from New York University, from which she also received an M.B.A.
She is a daughter of Marilyn Koehler of Los Angeles and the late Peter J. Riordan.


POSTINGS: Default Discussions; Tribeca Troubles In TriBeCa
Because it soars 52 stories over the small 19th-century mercantile lofts of lower Manhattan, Tribeca Tower cannot be missed.
For the same reason, there is no disguising its distress.
Hundreds of apartment windows are empty -- no curtains, lights, plants or other signs of occupancy.
The sign on the front door on Duane Street, between Broadway and Church Street, says: "The sales office is temporarily closed . . . As soon as the Attorney General extends our offering plan, we shall resume sales, which we hope will be in the near future." It is signed by the developer, the DeMatteis Organizations of Uniondale, L.I.


Ever See So Many Taxis All at One Time?
Nathan Willensky takes taxis almost everywhere he goes, whether working or vacationing in New York City, Los Angeles, Houston, London or Ocho Rios, Jamaica.
"I'd rather take a cab than rent a car any day," said the 43-year-old Mr.
Willensky, an independent food broker and wholesaler.
"My four-year-old Caddy has less than 20,000 miles on the speedometer. I've probably done twice that mileage in cabs between here and J.F.K. since I bought it."
Mr.
Willensky not only relishes riding in taxis but likes looking at them, too.
That's why he has amassed 10,000 pieces of taxi memorabilia, including 1,500 toy cabs.
Currently, 100 of his artifacts are part of "Great Stuff," an exhibition at the Children's Museum of Manhattan, 212 West 83d Street, through August.
The show includes 35 groupings, from Barbie dolls to toy trucks, that illustrate what children might or do collect.


No-Risk Venture
To the Editor:
Is it any wonder Time Warner has prospered by marketing the oeuvres of racists, trollops and paranoiacs?
It shouldn't be to anyone who merely remembers the dictum "Nobody ever went broke underestimating the taste of the American public." That is something Time Warner understands and understands well.
CHARLES V. BREMER Washington


SURFACING
TECHNOLOGY --
The vanishing receipt:
At some stores, credit card holders find that "just sign here" means here on an electronic screen, with a computer system that eliminates the much-dreaded carbon paper.
GAMES --
Pan
: The rage among women in southern Florida's retirement communities, this hybrid of gin rummy and poker is played with a minimum of six people and a maximum of schmooze.
DRINKS --
Cholesterol-free eggnog
: Warms the heart without putting it at risk.
One variation substitutes egg whites and steamed soy milk for whole eggs.


POSTINGS: A Manual for Property Owners; Sidewalk Advice by Experts
It's called "Cracks in the Pavement." The title makes it sound like a film noir thriller, a chillingly grim mystery by Raymond Chandler or Dashiell Hammett set on the seamy side of a city dank and dark.
But while it is most definitely not a mystery, its goal is to help solve what for many people has been one for years: how to fix all the cracked, buckled or broken pavements that cause pedestrian after pedestrian to trip the not-so-light fantastic on the sidewalks of New York.
Its subtitle is "A New York Property Owner's Guide to Sidewalk Repair," and it has been published by the Municipal Art Society, the New York City Department of Transportation, the Landmarks Preservation Commission and the City Council as a manual for city property owners, explaining their rights and responsibilities for maintaining the sidewalks that adjoin their buildings and lots.


Give the Sponsor A Bit of Credit
To the Sports Editor:
Robert Lipsyte's right to voice his opinion about Philip Morris and its sponsorship of Virginia Slims tennis tournaments ("Amid All the Smoke, the Ethics Are Indistinct," The Times, Nov. 20) is undeniable.
But his extreme view of the issue prompts him to cross the line from acceptable advocacy to unacceptable insult.


The Lore and Lure of Christmas Greenery
WREATHS, ribbons, lights, trees, presents and greenery abound during this season of the year.
So do the many legends that surround Christmas.
Although much of the holiday is now rank with commercialism, the spirit of the season lives in many hearts and the traditions, customs and stories of old come alive.


Sound Bytes; The Queen of Gaming Reigns at Sierra On-Line
Roberta Williams had never used a computer before, but she bluffed her way into a job ("We needed the money") tending mainframes in the early 1970's.
When personal computers arrived a few years later, she was hooked.
Working at her kitchen table with her husband, Ken Williams, she wrote "Mystery House," a role-playing computer game with pictures and text.
They formed a company, Sierra On-Line Inc., and Ms.
Williams became known as the queen of adventure gaming.
Today, Sierra On-Line, based in Oakhurst, Calif., employs more than 500 people, and had 1991 sales of $43 million on such titles as "King's Quest" and "Mixed Up Mother Goose." Ken runs the day-to-day business, freeing Roberta to write new stories using the latest technologies.
Question: Is it possible today to start a business at the kitchen table?


What the State Is Giving Olympus
"State Bypasses Town in Zoning Approval"  [ Dec. 6 ]  contains an important misstatement of fact and has failed to reveal several other important issues.
I am a partner in the firm that leases Olympus its current facility in Lake Success.
While it is true that their lease expires in 1994, we have offered them numerous opportunities to renew or renegotiate their lease at their present facility.
Our proposals were for a long-term lease and included extensive renovations to the premises.
As recently as this fall we had offered them a two-year extension.


Deer Hunting: More a Complex Ritual Than Just the Quest for a Meal
For most of us who set forth to hunt a deer, the quest is not for meat alone.
It is a complex ritual created out of the personal and social history that each hunter brings into the woods along with rifle, knife, map and compass and perhaps a fire-blackened can or pot in which he boils his midday tea.
If gathering venison had been our only desire, my sons Steve and Jeff and I and three other men would not have spent two days hunting in the Second College Grant in Wentworth Location in northeastern New Hampshire.
Deer are scarce in this wild, rugged country.
When we arrived at the Grant's gate camp a few days before the close of the state's deer season, we learned that only nine deer had been taken from the Grant, which covers more than 26,000 acres, this year.


Miss Karcher, Matthew Nelson
Kimberly Price Karcher, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John D. Karcher of Darien, Conn., was married yesterday to Matthew Robert Nelson, a son of Marion E. Nelson of Latham, N.Y., and Robert C. Nelson of Lake George, N.Y.
The Rev.
Charles C. Smith performed the ceremony at the Congregational Church in New Canaan, Conn.
Mrs.
Karcher-Nelson, 27 years old, graduated from Duke University.
She is a candidate for a master's degree in architecture at the University of California at Los Angeles.
Her father is the chairman and chief executive of P.L.
Industries, a maker of jeans in New York.
Her mother, Lois L. Karcher, is a lawyer in Darien.


William Watson, Eccentric Host of Classical Music, Is Dead at 77
William E. Watson, whose eccentric style as the host of a classical music program on WNCN radio drew a devoted audience in the 1960's, died Oct. 27 at a nursing home in Hawthorne, N.Y.
He was 77 and lived in Moonachie, N.J.
Relatives said that Mr.
Watson, whose death came to the attention of The New York Times only last week, died of brain cancer.


What Explains Shock Appeal?
To the Editor:
What we really need to know is not what led Time Warner to produce material that is inflammatory and controversial -- we all know that it was profit -- but rather, why is it that at this moment in our history the most shocking and controversial art forms are the most profitable?


Shay Humphrey and Jonathan Raskin
Shay Anne Humphrey, the daughter of Mrs.
Frank Crocitto of Lake George, N.Y., and Brian Humphrey of Diamond Point, N.Y., was married yesterday to Jonathan David Raskin, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Sherman Raskin of Lynbrook, L.I.
State Supreme Court Justice Judith Hillary officiated at the Vassar College Chapel in Poughkeepsie, N.Y.
Mrs.
Raskin, 23 years old, and her husband, 24, both graduated from Vassar and are both graduate students at the University of Florida, she a second-year law student, he a doctoral candidate in psychology.
He also received a master's degree from University of Florida.


Toasting Our Health
New York Hospital's cabaret evening at the Waldorf, Dec. 15.


Irish Sweaters With Designs on City Folk
LONG known for rugged wool sweaters in which you can comfortably split logs or put out to sea, Ireland today offers new choices to travelers who consider a vacation in Ireland incomplete without a few knitwear purchases.
The fisherman's sweater hasn't vanished -- in fact, it's been updated in lighter weights and in a range of colors beyond the classic off-white -- but young Irish designers are working with other yarns (cotton-linen mixes, mohair, alpaca, raw silk, rayon and viscose), other patterns, other concepts and other attitudes.
Instead of boat decks and north-woods cabins, their sweaters suggest cocktails on the terrace, catered picnics, disco dancing and autumn in the city.
Irish cultural traditions are an abiding inspiration, but new things are being done with them.
Although there are good knitwear shops in Kerry, Clare and other counties on the scenic route, the best selection of work by young Irish designers is to be found in and around Dublin.
A good place to start is the Powerscourt Townhouse Center, an 18th-century mansion about a block off Grafton Street, attractively remodeled into a shopping center.
Around a glass-roofed central courtyard are many antique, gift and clothing shops, as well as a number of places where shoppers can sip a cappuccino or a hot chocolate with pastry or a sandwich.
The Design Center here is a showcase for several up-and-coming Irish designers, most of whom concentrate at least some of their talents on knitwear.


New Israeli Park Is Roman Site
The excavations at Sepphoris, Israel, the Roman capital of Galilee and the seat of the Sanhedrin, the highest Jewish court, in the second century A.D., have been opened to the public for the first time.
They are part of Israel's newest national park three miles northwest of Nazareth and about 20 miles southeast of Haifa.
The site comprises a Crusader fortress, a 4,000-seat Roman amphitheater and many mosaics.
The 54-square-foot Sepphoris mosaic, known as the Mona Lisa of the Galilee, which had been on exhibit at the Israel Museum in Jerusalem, has been returned to its place in the mosaic floor.
Archeologists believe the mosaic dates from the third or early fourth century.
Sepphoris is believed to have been founded in the eighth or seventh century B.C.
The Mishnah, the first rabbinic text, was compiled in Sepphoris about A.D. 200, the Israel Ministry of Tourism says.


Robert Downey Jr. Is Chaplin (on Screen) and a Child (Off)
Dressed in a t-shirt, slacks and a letterman jacket the color of a cherry Life Saver, Robert Downey Jr. looks as if he's ready to join Archie and Veronica at the malt shop.
Instead, the 27-year-old actor is ensconced in the back room at Cicada, Hollywood's hangout du jour.
It's two days before Thanksgiving, and Mr.
Downey is worried about the 53 guests he and his wife, the actress Deborah Falconer, have invited for dinner.
"I hope we have enough food," he says.
"We have two turkeys and a 20-pound ham." A pause.
"How big is a pound of meat?" he asks, cupping his hands on the tablecloth.
"Is this a pound of meat?"
An adult who dresses like an adolescent and asks questions like a child, Mr.
Downey can, in one moment, embody nearly
all
the stages of man.
"His mind is capable of going into just about any channel at any minute," says James Toback, who directed Mr.
Downey in the 1987 film "The Pickup Artist." "Even Robert doesn't know who he's going to be from one moment to another."


The Stars Fly High
Planet Hollywood treats its celebrity investors like royalty.
For the opening on Dec. 3 of the restaurant chain's franchise in Cancun, Mexico, Sylvester Stallone was given an all-expenses paid, no-expense-spared trip.
A source who worked on organizing the opening said the round-trip fare for Mr.
Stallone's private plane flight from Los Angeles was $60,000. (Bruce Willis and Demi Moore were also flown in by the restaurant chain; their airfare from New York by way of Los Angeles was $80,000.)


Hot Airs


Live From D.C., It's the Georgia And Alfred Show
THE STORY IS ONE WORTHY OF opera.
On a wintry day in 1916 a rich and sophisticated New York art dealer is shown a roll of charcoal drawings by an unknown woman painter who teaches at a small college in South Carolina.
He is instantly taken with her work, and three months later he hangs her pictures in his gallery without her knowledge.
Meanwhile she has moved to New York, and when she finds out about this unauthorized showing she is furious, and storms down to the gallery to confront him.
They go out for lunch; she relents; and the rest, in its many subsequent tellings, is, if not always quite history, at least a great story.
In recent years the tumultuous relationship of Alfred Stieglitz and Georgia O'Keeffe, which lasted from that storied beginning until Stieglitz's death, in 1946, has spawned a flood of books as well as a drama on public television.
"Two Lives: A Conversation in Paintings and Photographs," an exhibition at the Phillips Collection in Washington, offers yet another opportunity to examine this partnership -- and another chance for its organizers to cash in on the legend that has sprung up around the two of them, and particularly O'Keeffe.


Mr. Rosenberg And Ms. Huet
Carol Huet, the daughter of Janet Huet of Maspeth, Queens, and John Huet of New Britain, Conn., was married last evening to Jonathan Rosenberg, a son of Marion and Seymour Rosenberg of Jackson Heights, Queens.
Rabbi Lawrence Sebert performed the ceremony at the Town and Village Synagogue in Manhattan.
Mrs.
Rosenberg, 33 years old, teaches history at Dickinson High School in Jersey City.
She graduated from Barnard College and received a master's degree in education from the University of Virginia.
Her father, who is retired, was a waiter at the Quo Vadis, then a restaurant in New York.
Her mother is the director of publications and printing at Columbia University.


In the Key of Mayhem
LEMPRIERE'S DICTIONARY
By Lawrence Norfolk. 422 pp. New York: Harmony Books. $22.


Bowe Pick For First Opponent Is Dokes
Michael Dokes, a one-time champion with a checkered recent career, has been selected as Riddick Bowe's opponent when the Brooklyn-born heavyweight stages his first title defense next Feb. 6.
The fight could be held at Madison Square Garden unless Bowe accepts a more lucrative offer to fight at the Atlantic City Convention Center.
The 34-year-old Dokes, who is ranked near the bottom of most Top 10 contender lists, emerged as the challenger of choice after sixth-ranked Alex Garcia rejected a $1 million offer from the Bowe camp.
Garcia demurred, in favor of a chance to make perhaps twice as much by fighting the No. 1 contender, Lennox Lewis.


The Needed Touch
Is there anything more astonishing in nature than a newborn baby?
Each new edition of miniature fingernails, tiny toes, feather-soft skin and luminous eyes is an exquisitely beautiful achievement.
Each new life brings with it the hope of a new beginning.
Each new child invites and needs the touch of love.
Yet every day in New York City, infants are born into painful poverty.
Not many blocks from richly appointed shops and gourmet restaurants there is sickening decay, where parents struggle to meet the barest needs of food, shelter, heat, diapers, bedding, clothing, soap and safety.
In these forsaken neighborhoods, a touch of kindness often seems too much to hope for.


Board Weighs Park In South of County
AT their meeting tomorrow, members of the County Board of Legislators are expected to confirm the first purchase of parkland for southern Westchester in a decade.
The 7.1-acre site, part of the former Revlon Health Care corporate campus straddling Yonkers and Tuckahoe across the Bronx River, is in the heart of one of the county's most densely populated areas.
The move follows last week's decision by two Board committees to give unanimous endorsement to the proposal by County Executive Andrew P. O'Rourke to spend $3.425 million to purchase the largely undeveloped site, actions that virtually guarantee approval by the full Board.


Sarah Kersh, Jonathan Veitch
Sarah Anne Baxter Kersh, the daughter of Lenore M. Mott of Riverdale, the Bronx, and DeWitte T. Kersh Jr. of Providence, R.I., was married yesterday to Jonathan Alan Veitch, the son of John and Carol Lee Veitch of Los Angeles.
The Rev.
Robert Burch performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
Paul's Chapel at Columbia University in New York.
Mrs.
Veitch, 31 years old, is the director of international licensing and distribution for Calvin Klein Inc. in New York.
She graduated from Brown University.
Her father is a partner in the Providence law firm of Tillinghast, Collins &amp; Graham.
Her mother is the dean of admission and financial aid at the College of Mount St.
Vincent in Riverdale.
The bride is a stepdaughter of Peter Mott of Riverdale and Sharon Kersh of Providence.


Father Is Held In Assaults On Family
The father of a 16-month-old boy who died on Friday after being taken to a Brooklyn hospital was arrested yesterday and charged with assaulting his six other children and his wife, apparently with a baseball bat and a belt, the police said.
The investigation into the baby's death continued last night as detectives awaited the results of an autopsy by the city Medical Examiner's office.


If You're Thinking of Living in: Pleasantville
IN the window of Phil Nisi's barber shop on Wheeler Avenue, faded photographs of the downtown carry the hand-lettered inscription, "Our Pleasantville, 1920-1980." Except for the cars in the later photos and on the streets today, the central business district looks much the way it did in 1920.
In Pleasantville, stability is a tradition, families measure residency in generations and, says Mayor M. Gail Grimaldi, "you know the names of the highway men who plow your driveway" in their spare time.


Bookshelf
Additional titles of interest:
AN ISLAND CHRISTMAS.
By Lynn Joseph.
Illustrated by Catherine Stock.
Clarion. $14.95. (Ages 5 to 9) Rosie describes the rituals of her family's Christmas celebration in Trinidad.
There are sorrel flowers to be gathered for a sweet drink, and currants for the cake.
There's music in the streets, a tree, soursop ice cream, presents and church.
She gets a steel drum.
Delightful.


Q and A
Noisy Elevator Question: I am a shareholder in a co-op in which the freight elevator and one of the three passenger elevators have been malfunctioning.
My apartment is adjacent to one of the elevators.
The clanging and scraping of the heavy machinery is loud enough to keep me awake.
Although the board has agreed to limit use of the broken elevators, the rule is frequently ignored.


Data Update
*4*INDEXES OF HOUSING COSTS
N.Y.-Northeast N.J. area*
% change from
% change from
Rents
178.2
-0.3
+4.0
Homeowner's costs
180.7
-0.3
+3.6
Fuel and utilities
108.3
+1.5
+3.0
*4*Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics
*4**Five counties of New York City plus Nassau, Suffolk, Westchester
*4*Rockland, Putnam, Bergen, Essex, Morris, Union, Hudson, Middlesex
Somerset and Passaic.
Indexes: 1982-84=100
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
8.44
8.57
8.74
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.49
5.53
6.31
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
8.28
8.40
8.65
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.35
5.33
6.24
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
8.34
8.47
8.63
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.11
5.20
6.22
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
8.44
8.58
8.90
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.96
5.93
6.86
*4*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
3.72
3.82
4.44
National Mortgage Contract Rate
7.40
7.40
8.78
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes. (Source: HSH Associates)


For Mara, a Reason to Smile
Wellington Mara, a co-owner of the Giants, had been aware all week of the possibility of an ugly crowd scene today if the Giants lost to Kansas City in their last home game of the season.
"They talked about it being ugly," Mara said after the Giants' 35-21 victory this afternoon, which improved their record to 6-9, "but I think it was beautiful."


Killington Offers Single-Skier Plan
Skiers who travel alone and have the flexibility to make last-minute arrangements can avoid costly double occupancy rates when reserving a room at Killington, Vt., this winter.
Calling the area's lodging bureau seven days or less before a trip, singles can book a room that may be as much as half off the double occupancy rates. (Prices of ski packages are usually based on two people sharing a room, so a single often has to pay the room rate for a couple.)
The number of rooms available at the 14 lodges and inns participating in the program will dictate the size of the discount.
The Killington-Pico Motor Inn, for example, which would charge two people $576 for five nights, daily breakfast and lift tickets, will charge singles $343 for the same package.
Normally a room at the inn costs $240 and a single would pay $240 and $168, the price of one lift ticket, for a total of $408.


Tech Notes; A Diagnostic Aid for Infertility
AMONG the 5 million American women affected by infertility, an estimated 40 percent suffer from blockage of the Fallopian tubes.
Yet until recently, methods for diagnosing this condition were both hazardous and inconclusive.
Now a new imaging technology, called transcervical falloposcopy, allows physicians to observe and document conditions within the tube.
Previous technologies for placing instruments inside the tube relied on guide wires, which could damage the walls of the tube.
Now a novel device, called the linear everting balloon catheter, developed by Imagyn Medical Inc., of Laguna Niguel, Calif., can penetrate the length of the tube without trauma, allowing doctors to see inside it.


Christa Heather, Glen Fortinberry
Christa Meighan Heather, until recently an account executive at Horizon Media, a broadcast-advertising buying service in New York, was married yesterday to Glen Wood Fortinberry, the chairman and chief executive of the Ross Roy Group, an advertising agency group in Bloomfield Hills, Mich.
The Rev.
Dr.
James F. Anderson performed the ceremony at Kirk in the Hills Presbyterian Church in Bloomfield Hills.
Mrs.
Fortinberry graduated from Albertus Magnus College.
She is the daughter of Mary-Louise Meighan of Forest Hills, Queens, and the late Augustine A. Meighan.
Her father was a sales executive with the J. P. Stevens &amp; Company in New York.
The bride's previous marriage ended in divorce, as did the bridegroom's.


Walker Was More Than a Coach
To the Sports Editor:
Al Walker, who died last Saturday, was more than just a sports person from the past.
He was something special.
Rube was the pitching coach for the New York Mets when I played on the team.
And while his job was basically taking care of the pitching staff, which included Tom Seaver, Jerry Koosman, Gary Gentry, Nolan Ryan and Tug McGraw, he was more than just a pitching coach.


When Hollywood Revisits Nashville
The Bluebird Cafe sits in a strip shopping center next to the Patio Hair Salon in the pricey Green Hills area of Nashville.
Its owner is a would-be gourmet chef turned country-music entrepreneur, and the help often turns out to be stray folkies from places like Boston or Astoria, Queens.
It is about as close to the hokey hustlers' Mecca immortalized in Robert Altman's brilliantly defamatory 1975 film "Nashville," as the two-step is to slam dancing.


Bloomingdale's Sheds Its Frantic Past, and Survives
AT first, it seems like just another Christmas season at Bloomingdale's.
Outside the store on the East Side of Manhattan, a Salvation Army worker smiles as she solicits donations to the sound of tinny Christmas carols.
A burly Santa defiantly shouts his season's greetings.
Sidewalk peddlers display watches and other wares.
And shoppers move briskly past the department store's animated holiday windows.


Karin Siegfried, D. R. Treadwell 3d
Karin Elisabeth Siegfried, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David C. Siegfried of Short Hills, N.J., was married yesterday to David Rogers Treadwell 3d, a son of Mr.
Treadwell Jr. of Boxboro, Mass., and Carol A. Ritter of Lutherville, Md.
The Rev.
Kenyon J. Wildrick performed the Congregational ceremony at the Princeton University Chapel in Princeton, N.J.
Mrs.
Treadwell, 23 years old, is an account coordinator for McKnight &amp; Company, a public relations agency in Seattle.
She graduated from Princeton, as did her husband, who graduated cum laude.
Her father is a partner of Milbank Tweed, Hadley &amp; McCloy, a law firm in New York.


DEC. 13-19: Kim Young-Sam Wins; Election Graduates Korea From Tear Gas and Clubs To Civilian Machine Politics
For decades they have been known simply as the two Kims, Korea's most prominent opposition leaders and, twice in the past five years, presidential contenders.
In 1987 they ruined each other's chances, splitting the votes of those opposed to 30 years of authoritarian rule and handing victory to a former general, Roh Tae-Woo.
But on Friday one of them, Kim Young-Sam, finally prevailed in the cleanest, most orderly election in South Korean history.
The 65-year-old Mr.
Kim's path to the top was not the one he imagined when he told grade-school friends that one day he would lead the nation: Two years ago he abandoned the opposition and joined Mr.
Roh's Democratic Liberal Party, putting him in alliance with many of the military elite he spent his life fighting.


Bruce D. Kaplan, 47; Led Record Company
Bruce D. Kaplan, who helped foster folk and ethnic music as the founder and president of Flying Fish Records, died Tuesday at Illinois Masonic Hospital in Chicago, where he lived.
He was 47.
He died of bacterial meningitis, his family said.


Technology; Improving Safety When Removing Lead-Based Paint
OFFICIALS charged with maintaining aging steel structures, like bridges and overpasses, are facing difficult choices.
At some point, the layers of deteriorating, lead-based paint become so thick that workers cannot just slap on another coat of paint to retard corrosion.
Instead, they must strip off the old paint and apply modern, multilayer protective coatings.
That presents the problem of how to get rid of the lead, for its buildup in the urban environment -- by no means all of it from paint -- is a major national health concern.


Susan L. Silberstein, Ari J. Spar
Susan Leigh Silberstein, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Charles Silberstein of St.
James, L.I., and Lugano, Switzerland, was married last evening to Ari Jordan Spar, a son of Rabbi Dr.
Elliott T. Spar of Smithtown, L.I. and the late Sondra L. Spar.
Rabbi Mark Loeb performed the ceremony at Temple Beth Sholom in Smithtown.
Mrs.
Spar, 23 years old, is a management trainee at the Peninsula Hotel in New York.
She graduated from l'Ecole les Roche in Bluche, Switzerland.
Her father is the president and chief executive of Nadent and Health Data Services, an insurance consulting firm in Islip, L.I.


A Lame-Duck Diplomat Wrestles With a World in Flux
LAWRENCE S. EAGLEBURGER doesn't look much like the Red Adair of foreign policy, flaunting his lame-duck status with a crippled bird pin stuck in his lapel.
Yet to be Secretary of State in the unwieldy new world of late 1992 means spending a lot of time putting out raging diplomatic fires rather than crafting Talleyrand-like strategies for the future.
In these final days of the Bush foreign policy, it is not a comfortable role.
The Secretary of State went to Stockholm, Geneva and Brussels last week, hoping to focus on three issues: cooperative security measures, a far-reaching nuclear arms agreement with the Russians and the war in the Balkans.
Along the way, he repeatedly got waylaid by the unpredictable.


In Hartford, the Latest Desert Boot Comes in Pairs of Four
FOR nearly 200 years, the Smith-Worthington Saddlery Company of Hartford has filled some unusual orders.
When explorer Richard E. Byrd went to Antarctica, his sled dogs were equipped with harnesses made by Smith-Worthington.
When the bobbies of England, who traditionally did not carry firearms, were issued revolvers during World War II, the Hartford company made the holsters.
In more recent years, it did some leather work on the prototype of a space suit and even produced a harness to hold a pacemaker on a pig for an experiment at Yale-New Haven Hospital.
And now, perhaps, it's racing shoes for camels.


Mutual Funds; A Stocking Full of Possible Gifts
MUTUAL fund fans searching for special investments or new toys as holiday gifts will find a shelf packed with possibilities this year.
For giving unto others, there is a new fund devised for charitable contributions and another for long-term gifts to family.
For the avid investor, there is a grab bag of software, newsletters and books.
Following are some of the 1992 standouts.
The $18 million Fidelity Charitable Gift Fund, introduced this summer, lets investors set up charitable trusts without paying lawyers' fees.
Donors invest a minimum of $10,000 of cash or securities, and deduct that amount on their tax return.
Money in the fund grows tax free -- and gifts, even of appreciated value, are not subject to capital gains tax.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
THUNDERBOLT General Creighton Abrams  and the Army of His Times.
By Lewis Sorley.
Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.


Tennessee Judge Convicted In Courthouse Sex Assaults
A county judge and former small-town Mayor was convicted Friday of violating the civil rights of five women by sexually assaulting them in his courthouse.
The defendant, Judge David W. Lanier of Chancery Court in Dyersburg, was convicted by a Federal District Court jury here on two felony and five misdemeanor counts of abusing the power of his office.


The Executive Computer; Is There a Sub-Subnotebook in Your Future?
THIS was written on a Macintosh Powerbook Duo 230, the most powerful computer that Apple Computer Inc. makes except for its Quadra server systems.
The Duo itself is not much larger than the manual for the Quadra; it is almost small enough to fit in the paper tray of the laser printer on the next desk.
But in the small world of subnotebook computers, the four-pound Duo defines the upper boundary.
Taking advantage of recent advances in miniaturization, computer makers are creating portable computation and communications devices that can easily be carried in one hand or tucked into a coat pocket.
But at some point the usefulness of small systems comes into question: Most information is still entered by typing, and no one has yet managed to miniaturize executive fingers.


Not All Music of the Disaffected Is Neo-Nazi; Disruptive Force
To the Editor:
In "Music of Hate Raises the Volume in Germany" (front page, Dec. 2), you translate the rock band Storkraft as Destructive Force.
It is more appropriately rendered Disruptive Force.
The German verb storen means to disturb or annoy.
To destroy is zerstoren.
CHARLES T. GRANT Minneapolis, Dec. 2, 1992


Corrections
A map last Sunday with an article discussing possibilites for Chelsea Clinton's schooling in Washington mislocated two schools that friends of her parents have urged them to consider.
The Maret School is at 3000 Cathedral Avenue, near Connecticut Avenue; the National Cathedral School for Girls is at 3609 Woodley Road, near the intersection of Wisconsin and Massachusetts Avenues.


Commerce Nominee's Lobbying Prompts Scrutiny
In a campaign year that saw the influence of lawyer-lobbyists become a bigger issue than ever before, no one typifies that style of business more than Ronald H. Brown, President-elect Bill Clinton's choice for Commerce Secretary.
Mr.
Brown's resume is fat with representation of foreign governments and interests, from Haiti to Japan.
He continued to lobby on behalf of his law firm, Patton, Boggs &amp; Blow, and his own businesses even after becoming chairman of the Democratic National Committee in 1989 and saying he would play no active role in the firm.


At Work; Here's a Switch -- Keep the Job
HERE'S a dog-bites-man workplace story: Employers usually hold the trump hand in dealings with employees.
Here's the man-bites-dog, holiday-appropriate version: Employer cedes right to fire employees Scrooge-style and gives them a contract that guarantees they will only be dismissed for a good business reason, or "just cause." Meet Tom Zito, the man who bites dogs.
Yes, Mr.
Zito, head of Digital Pictures Inc., a year-and-a-half-old Silicon Valley software company, is often asked if he has gone mental, giving away what most people wouldn't think to ask for.
And yes, he knows he is breaking ranks with generations of American employers who have long had the power to juggle their employees' destinies "at will," as the employment-law term of art goes.


The Traditional Handsaw Still Proves Its Versatility
LOOKING at tool displays in stores and listening to sounds at construction sites can give an impression that ordinary handsaws have become relics.
But many carpenters still use them.
Of course, not all jobs are better suited for handsawing than power sawing.
But it is quicker and safer to use a handsaw, rather than set up a circular saw, to lop off the end of a single 2 X 4 or to trim a molding.
And there can be no doubt that the low-pitched noise of a handsaw is less disturbing than the high-pitched scream of a power saw.


Don't Wax Nostalgic for Airline Regulation
To the Editor:
Donald L. Pevsner's commentary "When Airline Fares Are Hardly Fair" (Viewpoints, Dec. 6) presents a good case for reregulating airline fares -- but a better case for not doing so.


A Lonely View Without Mother Hale


Chinese Delights for the Budget-Minded
LIKE a shimmering Christmas star, Lung Hing is an island of warmth, quiet and good food for holiday shoppers in the Woodbury Common.
The attractive Chinese restaurant, where Homer's Mo-er once was, beckons with tiny white lights surrounding its multipaned windows.
Large stone Foo dogs flank its entrance.
Inside, skylights make for sunny lunches, and large crystal chandeliers catch the light at dinner.


Evolving in the Moment
Barbra Streisand, the political activist and singer, was quoted here as saying about her friend Andre Agassi, the tennis star, that he was "very
evolved
; more than his linear years . . . very
in the moment
."
I carefully -- perhaps linearly -- traced the evolution of
evolved
to mean "maturing in a way considered positive by the observer; advanced in social awareness." This definition triggered a refutation from people, mainly Californians, who have a more evolved understanding of new-age terminology.
Peter Norton, the computer utilitarian of Santa Monica, defines
evolved
as "not 'advanced in social awareness' but advanced in spiritual evolution, in the Buddhist and Hindu sense." My icon-happy correspondent adds drawings of a straight arrow to indicate
linear years
, and of an arrow with a loop in its shaft to denote
spiritual years
.


Marchibroda's Second About-Face
The word greatest has rarely (ever?) been applied to the Colts since their infamous 1984 getaway to Indianapolis.
But now they have their chance: to equal the greatest one-season turnaround in National Football League history.


Making Georgia Howl
SHERMAN
A Soldier's Passion for Order.
By John F. Marszalek.
Illustrated. 635 pp.
New York: The Free Press. $29.95.


On a Cold Night, Room for the Homeless
A COLD, bitter December wind lashed at their clothing as the five men and two women stepped from a van and entered the First Congregational Church here.
Somewhere in the building, radiators clanged and whistled a shrill song.
It was 7:30 P.M., and they had nowhere else to sleep.
There had been no room for them at the county center for the homeless in Hackensack, and a county van had brought them to the church.


Map Mania
To the Editor: I will beg some friends to save the entire cartophiliac section for me so I can offer copies to a few of the readers of my own publication, Cartomania, which is the newsletter of the Association of Map Memorabilia Collectors, who collect maps and map ephemera in a wide variety of formats.
Against all expectations, we near the end of our seventh year.


Appliances Need Genius More Than Labs Do
FOR the second straight year a computer program conversed last week with a group of judges, convincing some of them that they were chatting with a human rather than a machine.
For many computer industry executives the arrival of this latest generation of sophisticated software heralds the coming of the era of the ultrasmart gadget.
At the same time it raises new doubts -- particularly concerns that even the next generation of brainy electronic creations may be overpriced and underwhelming.
Even worse, some skeptics suggest that personal computer makers are chasing after the wrong pot of gold at the end of the rainbow.
Even the most brilliant new microelectronic consumer marvels, they argue, may find themselves back in their boxes and stored away soon after the holidays -- paradigms of user-churlish devices.


Mr. Broadway


Nanny Says, 'Happy Christmas!'
Nanny Night, an Edwardian Christmas celebration at Westbury House, Dec. 10.


Corrections
An article on July 5 characterized the olive oil of Nyons, France, incorrectly.
A letter from the commercial office of the Spanish Embassy, dated July 6, pointed out that such oil is not the only one that has a denomination of origin certifying that it is produced only in the area from which it takes its name; four olive oils in Spain are similarly certified.
They are Borjas Blancas and Siurana, in Catalonia, and Sierra del Segura and Baena, Andalusia.
This correction was delayed while confirmation was sought from the International Olive Oil Council.


DEC. 13-19: Master vs. Bigger Strategy; Fischer Indicted for Defying The Yugoslav Embargo
Ever since he was stripped of his title as world chess champion 17 years ago for refusing to defend it, Bobby Fischer had lived in virtual obscurity.
That changed this fall when he agreed to an exhibition rematch in Yugoslavia against Boris Spassky, a reprise of their celebrated 1972 contest.
He defeated Mr.
Spassky, again, and won the $3.3 million purse, but the price for the tournament may now be permanent exile from the United States.


A Turnaround Season for Anderson
His eyes, no longer troubled, can see clearly again.
So when Kenny Anderson handles a basketball the rules are simple: No blinking allowed.
Blink, and an Anderson no-look pass traveling at Mach speed will bounce off your head.
No defense is too tight, no passing lane too small for Anderson to squeeze the ball through a galaxy of legs and elbows.
His are the eyes the Nets envision someday leading the franchise to a National Basketball Association title.
Far-fetched?
Maybe, but Anderson is only a part of the Nets' talented youth movement, and title talk in New Jersey is not complete science fiction.
His at least are the eyes of someone who has an outside shot at playing with the likes of Jordan or Shaquille or Ewing in February's All-Star Game.


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ended Dec. 5  MANHATTAN  Greenwich Village  $280,000
29 King Street  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,000-sq.-ft. condo in a loft building; elevator, 16-ft. ceilings, exposed-brick walls, sleeping loft, 2 exposures, landmark building; common charge $342, taxes $2,400 (Broker: J.I. Sopher &amp; Co.)  Greenwich Village  $1.225 million
80 MacDougal Street  5-bedroom, 5-bath, one-family, 4-story, Greek Revival town house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, French doors, private and MacDougal-Sullivan common gardens, landmark district, 20- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $8,557 (Broker: Ambrose Mar-Elia)  TriBeCa  $415,000
178 Franklin Street  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 2,400-sq.-ft. co-op in a loft building; elevator, sauna, laundry room, 2 exposures; maintenance $1,230, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: Corcoran Group)  Upper East Side  $700,000
1035 Park Avenue (85th St.)  3-bedroom, 3-bath, 2,000-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, den, fireplace, western exposure; maintenance $1,847, 34% tax-deductible (Broker: Corcoran Group)  Upper West Side  $715,000
17 West 94th Street  5-family, 4-story town house; 3 bedrooms, 4 baths, library, dining room, fireplace in owner's triplex; two 1-bedroom, 1-bath and two studio rentals; finished basement, rear garden, 18- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $10,500 (Broker: Nancy Sweetser Historic Properties)  BRONX  Riverdale  $155,000
5739 Faraday Avenue  2-bedroom, 1 bath, one-family detached stucco-frame house; dining area, eat-in kitchen, finished basement, 1-car garage, 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,568 (Broker: Trebach Realty)  Wakefield  $224,000
4015 Duryea Avenue  2-family detached brick house; 2 bedrooms in primary unit, 1 bedroom in other; eat-in kitchen, 1 bath in each; semi-finished basement, 1-car garage, 75- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,500 (Broker: Cancro Realty)  BROOKLYN  Cobble Hill  $215,000
174 Pacific Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,000-sq.-ft duplex co-op in a former school; elevator, living room loft; fireplace, 300-sq.-ft terrace, parking space; maintenance $433, 45% tax-deductible (Broker: Harborview Realty)  Kensington  $220,000
243 East Second Street  2-family detached brick house; 3 bedrooms in primary unit; 2 bedrooms in other; eat-in kitchen, 1 bath in each; full basement, private driveway, 30- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,368 (Broker: Homes R' Beautiful)  Park Slope  $235,000
829 Union Street  4-family attached brownstone; 2 bedrooms, 1 bath, study in each unit; full celler, rear garden, 20- by 90-ft. lot; taxes $1,700 (Broker: F.J. Kazeroid Real Estate)  QUEENS  College Point  $150,000
25-49 125th Street  3-bedroom, 1-bath, one-family detached aluminum-sided bungalow; dining room, eat-in kitchen, full basement, private driveway, 30- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $700 (Broker: Century 21/Weber &amp; Rose)  Rego Park  $65,000
65-15 Alderton Street  2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 1,200-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; elevator, dining area, terrace, 3 exposures; maintenance $671, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: Glenjay Realty)  STATEN ISLAND  Castleton Corners  $155,000
116 Kemball Avenue  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, one-family detached Cape Cod; dining room, eat-in kitchen, enclosed, heated patio, 1-car garage, 40- by 101-ft. lot; taxes $1,731 (Broker: Salmon Real Estate)  Dongan Hills  $177,000
79 Zoe Street  2-family semi-attached frame house; 3 bedrooms, 2 baths in primary unit; 1 bedroom, 1 bath in other; dining area in each; full basement; taxes $1,500 (Broker: Century 21/Appleseed Agency)


Covering AIDS And Living It: A Reporter's Testimony
TWO years ago tomorrow, I collapsed at my desk in the newsroom of The New York Times, writhed on the floor in a seizure and entered the world of AIDS.
I had been, as far as I knew, absolutely healthy, and it took the doctors a few weeks to reach their diagnosis: full-blown AIDS, with a brain infection often fatal within four months.
That I have lived these two years is a miracle.
How long my luck will hold, no one knows.
But for now, I am back working, a reporter with AIDS who covers AIDS.


Growing Market For Gay Travel
IN the last 10 years suppliers and opportunities for travel by gay men and women have increased enormously.
Some travel experts describe the market as virtually recession-proof, pointing to the usual pattern among gay couples of two jobs and no children.
Luxurious ocean cruises are increasingly popular, providing what has been described as a private city for people who do not always find a welcoming environment for leisure.
This column touches on a few new offerings in a rapidly growing field.
A landmark event was scheduled for yesterday, when Seaspirit, a 207-foot cruise ship launched in 1983 by Clipper Lines of St.
Louis for the luxury trade, was to make her first sailing as a gay-owned, gay-operated vessel, under United States registry and the ownership of RSVP Travel Productions, a tour operator in Minneapolis.
Seaspirit was due to sail from St.
Thomas for a week's cruise in the Virgin Islands, including Jost Van Dyke, Salt Island, Tortola, Norman Island and St.
John.
Saturday sailings are scheduled until April 10 next year.
The per-person prices for a week, with two to a cabin, range from $995 to $1,795.


A Simple Menu and No Sign of Brando
THE Last Mango is in South Norwalk, not Paris, and Marlon Brando is nowhere in sight.
The playful name of this new (as of last August) restaurant is both a sendup of that once-notorious movie and a reminder that the proprietors also own The Lime, a long-running restaurant across town in Norwalk, and they wanted to continue the fruit theme with their new establishment.
There isn't anything about the decor of the long, narrow storefront dining room to evoke mangoes or a tropical clime.
The pale pink-beige, textured wall covering is paired with equally pale sea-green wainscoting, framed paintings (for sale) on the walls, floral-patterned table coverings under glass tops, a dark carpet, and well-spaced tables.
Nothing fancy, but clean and neat-looking.


U.S. Warns of 'Catastrophe' Facing Armenia
Continued fighting between Armenians and Azerbaijanis over the future of a disputed enclave in Azerbaijan has prompted the State Department to warn of a "national catastrophe" confronting largely isolated Armenia.
A department spokesman, Joseph Snyder, said this week that the United States was especially concerned that the fighting would prolong Azerbaijan's economic blockade of Armenia, which has been periodically tightened since ethnic disputes began in 1988.
That was the year in which the Armenian majority in the enclave, Nagorno-Karabakh, issued a demand for autonomy.
As a result of the blockade, Armenia declared a national emergency early this month, citing shortages of power, fuel and milk.


Nagle to Confront Coslet's 'Do-or-Be-Dumped' Edict
The clock starts ticking on quarterback Browning Nagle and a few other Jets players tonight at Joe Robbie Stadium as the Jets play the Dolphins in a nationally televised game on ESPN.
In two days last week, Jets Coach Bruce Coslet changed his mind about putting pressure on Nagle during the last two games of the season.


That Girl by the Stage, and Why She's There
Pamela Des Barres, rock's groupie supreme, unearthed an old snapshot for the jacket of her new book that captures the fantasy of rock's feminine muse.
In the photograph, Miss Pamela, as she was known to her famous lovers, plays on the beach in a see-through minidress.
Summer of Love flowers adorn her hair.
She is the dream, the prize in rock's boy game of musical prowess and sexual charisma.
Free and easy, she is pleasure without limit or possessiveness.
It's hard to see her face, but she is smiling.
The woman pictured here hides a tale rarely included in rock's official history.
It's the story of the shadowy corner occupied by women who have loved, slept with, supported and suffered at the hands of musicians, falling under the spell of the male rock star's search for satisfaction.


IN THE FIELDS OF KING COAL
I am a native of Eastern Kentucky, one who dreamed of going away to college and then returning, hopefully, to make a difference ("In the Fields of King Coal," by Fenton Johnson, Nov. 22).
But somewhere I lost that desire.
Perhaps it was the lure of the outside world or the fear of being dragged into the depths of a dying culture.
Whatever, I followed a path that led me out of the mountains and out of Kentucky.
Your article first stirred feelings of anger because I've read so many articles that attempt to explain a culture that, largely, no longer exists (or more accurately, never did).
Anger because most of these articles, describing my home as a third world entity, originate in the Northeastern press.


It's a Brave New World for Lucas and the N.B.A.
When he purchased the Miami Tropics of the United States Basketball League 16 months ago, John Lucas said he wanted to create a facsimile of conditions in the big time, the National Basketball Association, for recovering substance abusers.
He wanted to give them a place to put their learning experiences at his Houston clinic to the test of the temptation-laden N.B.A. night life.
"It's all about learning to live with the pressure of expectation, and the temptation to try to escape from it," said Lucas.
Now it is Professor Lucas who must balance the fragile equation of being a recovering substance abuser atop the high wire under the N.B.A. big top, where the pressure to soar is great and there is not much of a safety net.


On Sunday; Slain for Race: It's Now Official After 6 Years
On May 28, 1986, at 4 A.M. in Coney Island, four white men, using a knife and bat, killed Samuel Spencer 3d, an unarmed 19-year-old black man.
Two years later, the stabber pleaded guilty to murder and is serving 15 years to life; the bat attacker is doing 8 to 25.
Two others got short sentences.
In a city where any racial incident can set off a bonfire, this one barely got a mention.
Soon after, Howard Beach exploded onto the television screen, followed by Bensonhurst, but for some reason, Mr.
Spencer died brutally and inconspicuously.


Map Mania
To the Editor: It was fascinating to read in John Noble Wilford's "Tracking the Trackless Gobi Desert" about his use of the Global Positioning System.
We often compare the seas to deserts, but only at sea is the straight line the shortest distance between two points.
I can highly recommend the Magellan 5000 G.P.S. receiver being held by Malcolm C. McKenna in the picture.
When you walk with it, it tells you how fast and in which direction; when you turn, it turns; it computes how far preset waypoints are; it even gives you an estimated time of arrival at your present speed.


Turtle Bay Residents Take On OTB's Most Lucrative Parlor
Just the mention of Offtrack Betting is enough to furrow Bruce A. Silberblatt's brow and turn his mood prickly with indignation.
For more than two years, he and an increasingly restless group of residents of the East Side of midtown Manhattan have waged a war of wit and words to remove an OTB parlor from a block of Second Avenue that is dominated by brownstones, towering condominiums and alluring storefront shops, restaurants and taverns.


BEST SELLERS: December 20, 1992
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
3
DOLORES CLAIBORNE, by Stephen King. (Viking, $23.50.) After being accused of murdering her employer, a woman tells of killing her husband almost 30 years earlier and of her life ever since.
2
2
5
MIXED BLESSINGS, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.50.) Three couples' lives are strained by the problems of having children.
3
4
7
MEXICO, by James A. Michener. (Random House, $25.) While researching the lives of his ancestors, an American journalist learns about the history of the land south of the border. (LP)
4
3
9
THE TALE OF THE BODY THIEF, by Anne Rice. (Knopf, $24.) Lestat embarks on a dangerous enterprise; "The Vampire Chronicles," continued.
5
6
41
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $22.50.) A woman law student probes the murder of two Supreme Court justices.
6
9
16
GRIFFIN &amp; SABINE, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.) The romance of an artist and a secret admirer, told through cards and letters.
7
12
19
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $14.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.
8
7
10
THE STARS SHINE DOWN, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $23.) The fortunes of a businesswoman are imperiled by secrets from her past. (LP)
9
5
5
THE GENERAL'S DAUGHTER, by Nelson DeMille. (Warner, $21.95.) The investigation of the murder of a woman officer, a general's daughter, unearths scandals in the military.
10
8
8
MOSTLY HARMLESS, by Douglas Adams. (Harmony, $20.) In the fifth volume of the "Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy" series, a survivor tries to cope with new predicaments.
11
11
23
GERALD'S GAME, by Stephen King. (Viking, $23.50.) Twenty-eight hours of horror suffered by a woman handcuffed to a bedpost.
12
10
10
SABINE'S NOTEBOOK, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.) Continuing the epistolary romance begun in "Griffin &amp; Sabine."
13
13
8
DRIVING FORCE, by Dick Francis. (Putnam, $21.95.) An ex-jockey's horse-transport business is besieged by a series of mysterious deaths.
14
15
16
WHERE IS JOE MERCHANT? by Jimmy Buffett. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $19.95.) A couple on the trail of a dead rock star who has been sighted.
15
4
RED SQUARE, by Martin Cruz Smith. (Random House, $23.) Investigator Arkady Renko, returning to Moscow and Berlin after the collapse of Communism, still faces a perdurable mafia.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
14
THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush H. Limbaugh 3d. (Pocket, $22.) Anecdotes and opinions offered by the talk show host.
2
2
11
IT DOESN'T TAKE A HERO, by H. Norman Schwarzkopf with Peter Petre. (Linda Grey/ Bantam, $25.) The autobiography of the general who commanded the allied forces in the gulf war.
3
3
16
EVERY LIVING THING, by James Herriot. (St. Martin's, $22.95.) Continuing the memoirs of the Yorkshire veterinarian.
4
6
27
TRUMAN, by David McCullough. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) A biography of the 33d President.
5
5
9
I CAN'T BELIEVE I SAID THAT! by Kathie Lee Gifford with Jim Jerome. (Pocket, $22.) The autobiography of the co-host of the television show "Live With Regis and Kathie Lee."
6
4
7
SEX, by Madonna. (Warner, $49.95.) Erotic photographs of the pop star by Steven Meisel, and her reflections on them.
7
7
13
THE TE OF PIGLET, by Benjamin Hoff. (Dutton, $16.) Aspects of Taoist philosophy explained through the actions of an A. A. Milne character.
8
8
5
MY LIFE, by Earvin (Magic) Johnson with William Novak. (Random House, $22.) The autobiography of the retired Los Angeles Lakers basketball player.
9
9
19
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $20.) A Jungian analyst reinterprets myths and folk tales to enable women to understand their psyches.
10
13
7
GENIUS, by James Gleick. (Pantheon, $27.50.) The life and achievements of Richard Feynman, the Nobel Prize-winning physicist.
11
11
2
JFK: Reckless Youth, by Nigel Hamilton. (Random House, $30.) The first 29 years of the 35th President.
12
15
16
YOUNG MEN &amp; FIRE, by Norman Maclean. (University of Chicago, $19.95.) An account of a disastrous fire in a Montana forest in 1949.
13
10
8
BANKRUPTCY 1995, by Harry E. Figgie Jr. with Gerald J. Swanson. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) The authors predict the collapse of America under Government debt and suggest ways to cope with it.
14
12
28
EARTH IN THE BALANCE, by Al Gore. (Houghton Mifflin, $22.95.) The Vice President-elect discusses factors affecting the environment and what must be done to save the earth.
15
14
30
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Random House, $16.) The psychological and social significance of menopause for today's women.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
5
2
CREATING LOVE, by John Bradshaw. (Bantam, $23.) Ways to establish healthy relationships with other people.
2
1
23
HARVEY PENICK'S LITTLE RED BOOK, by Harvey Penick with Bud Shrake. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $19.) Anecdotes and tips about playing golf, by a legendary teacher.
3
4
13
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $12.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
4
2
12
THE AMERICAN HERITAGE DICTIONARY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE. (Houghton Mifflin, $39.95.) The third edition.
5
3
13
THE MEASURE OF OUR SUCCESS, by Marian Wright Edelman. (Beacon, $15.) The head of the Children's Defense Fund offers rules to live by for her own children and others'.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,050 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
And Bear in Mind
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
FRANK LLOYD WRIGHT: COLLECTED WRITINGS.
Volume One: 1894-1930.
Volume Two: 1930-1932, edited by Bruce Brooks Pfeiffer. (Rizzoli, $60 each; paper, $40 each.) The start of a projected six-volume edition of the architect's literary output; the collection's star so far is the 1932 version of "An Autobiography."
THE PORCUPINE, by Julian Barnes. (Knopf, $17.) A short, edgy, gloomy political novel in which a well-meaning Eastern European prosecutor learns that the fall of the old system has brought not energy and purpose but an ironically bourgeois alienation.
TITANIC: An Illustrated History, by Don Lynch; paintings by Ken Marschall. (Madison Press/Hyperion, $60.) A recap of a familiar but irresistible story; Mr.
Marschall's splendid paintings suggest that he might have been there, loaded with Kodachrome.
NEW AND SELECTED POEMS, by Mary Oliver. (Beacon, $20.) The winner of a National Book Award this year, Ms.
Oliver's volume offers the work of 30 years: precise poems, set mostly in the natural world but with nothing pretty or nice about them.
PUSH COMES TO SHOVE: An Autobiography, by Twyla Tharp. (Linda Grey/Bantam, $24.50.) A mix of the dead serious with deadpan farce, suffering with glory, much like her own dances.
THE DISCOVERY OF AMERICA, by Saul Steinberg. (Knopf, $50.) The first book-length collection in 14 years by a great and greatly intelligent artist, who came to this country in 1942 and whose vision of America has lately become tougher, grittier, darker.
MAZURKA FOR TWO DEAD MEN, by Camilo Jose Cela. (New Directions, $21.95.) Life in the early 20th century is nasty, brutish and scornful for the Galician peasants who inhabit this powerful, poetic novel by the 1989 Nobel laureate in literature.


At Elizabeth High School; She's Standing Tall As a Way of Life
Hadassah Freedman learned to dribble only two years ago, but she is 6 feet 2 inches tall, so she started at center for Elizabeth High School because Kim Jackson, who is 6-3 and vastly more experienced, had been out sick all week with chicken pox and pink eye.
Late in the season's opener against Newark's East Side High, the junior twin towers were actually under the basket together.
The shadow of their possibility was not the only one that loomed Friday night in the gym of this 4,300-student high school, the largest in New Jersey.
The fight that boiled out of the stands after the game was another reminder that teen-aged girls, as well as boys, have fierce energies that need outlet and direction.
The fight was brief and bloodless, but it upset the president of the Board of Education, Leila Poch.
She had stopped by to refute reports in this column that white male coaches get special deals at this predominately black and Hispanic school, and that girls are second-class athletes.


Garden Festival In New Zealand
Visitors to south FLORIDA have an opportunity to study the rebirth of Fairchild Tropical Garden, the largest tropical botanical garden in the continental United States.
According to officials at the 83-acre preserve,severely damaged by Hurricane Andrew last August, the area's tropical climate is rejuvenating it surprisingly quickly.
They say that some of the world's rarest palms, cycads and flowering plants are recovering as employees refurbish the garden and restore the classic landscape design of its original planner, William Lyman Phillips.
The garden was founded in 1938.
The garden, (305) 667-1651, lies between Old Cutler Road and Biscayne Bay in Coral Gables, about six miles south of Miami.
Open from 9:30 A.M. to 4:30 P.M. daily.
Admission is $7.


The Poet as Pitchman
NAME: Max Blagg.
IDENTITY: The 43-year-old English poet who extolled the virtues of blue jeans in a television commercial for the Gap.


The F.C.C. Says: Take That, Foulmouth!
Treating radio listeners to defiantly crude talk about sex and ethnicity, Howard Stern has made millions as the foremost shock jock on the airwaves.
Last week, the Federal Communications Commission struck back, deciding to fine his employer, Infinity Broadcasting Corporation, a record $600,000 for violating rules governing broadcast indecency with his material about everything from defecation to masturbation.
But will it curb Mr. Stern? And should it?


Results Plus
VOLLEYBALL Stanford Upsets U.C.L.A.
Stanford upset previously unbeaten U.C.L.A, the two-time defending champion, by 3-1 yesterday in Albuquerque, N.M., to win the women's volleyball championship of National Collegiate Athletic Association.
The second-ranked Cardinal (31-2) took the match by scores of 15-8, 15-9, 6-15 and 15-10.
U.C.L.A. (33-1), which had won 43 consecutive games dating back to last season, was stopped from becoming the first team to win three straight national titles.
The top-ranked Bruins had beaten Stanford twice during the regular season.
But U.C.L.A.'s poor passing and hitting, and the combination of 21 kills by Bev Oden, a four-time all-American, and 6 blocks by reserve Anne Wicks enabled the Cardinal to dominate.
The Bruins' Natalie Williams, the N.C.A.A. player of the year, had 21 kills. (AP) HORSE RACING Shots Are Ringing Sets Record Shots Are Ringing set a track record and won the $85,200 Queens County Handicap yesterday at Aqueduct.
Shots Are Ringing, coupled in the wagering with A Call to Rise, came from far back in a field of six older horses to win the one-mile-and-three-sixteenths Queens County Handicap in 1:544/5 , three-fifths of a second under the previous track record.
John Velazquez rode the winner to a head victory over A Call to Rise, with Rafael Mojica Jr. aboard.
The winning entry returned $6.40 to win. (AP) TRACK AND FIELD Dixon Wins 800 in Opener Diane Dixon, the two-time Olympian from Brooklyn, began her 1992-93 indoor season with an easy victory yesterday, running 800 meters in 2 minutes 15.30 seconds at West Point, N.Y.
Dixon competed in the Reebok Season Opener, one in a series of indoor meets this season staged by the Metropolitan Athletics Congress.


A Close Call in the Storm
The flooding of PATH tunnels under the Hudson River could have led to a catastrophe if things had been slightly different.
Article, page 44.


SIX PALESTINIANS KILLED BY TROOPS
Six Palestinians, including an 8-year-old girl, were shot to death by Israeli soldiers today in the Gaza Strip during street disturbances that erupted after the army briefly lifted a weeklong curfew to let residents buy food.
The death toll was one of the highest for a single day since the start of the Palestinian uprising five years ago, and it intensified already grave concern here that new waves of violence lie ahead after Israel's deportation of 415 Palestinians to Lebanon this week.


Streetscapes: St. Paul the Apostle; Renewal and Change, Esthetic and Liturgical
THE reforms of the Second Vatican Council in the 1960's brought a wave of change to the Roman Catholic Church.
Now this wave has reached the Church of St.
Paul the Apostle at 60th Street and Columbus Avenue, bringing major changes to one of the most surprising church interiors in the city.
The church was built by Isaac Hecker, who left his family's prosperous flour and baking business in 1842, converted to Catholicism and, in 1858, established the Paulist Fathers order.
Construction began in 1876 but was not completed until 1885.


But Wait, There's Some Life Yet in the 'Cheers' Gang
What a blow, and right before Christmas!
NBC announced this month that "Cheers" will call it quits at the end of this season, after 11 years, 26 Emmys and God knows how many beers on the eternally unpaid tab of the unemployed accountant Norm Peterson.
So America will no longer be able to follow the saga of Sam Malone, former baseball star and recovering alcoholic turned bar owner, and the memorable assortment of Bostonians who were his employees, customers and lovers.


Making It Safe to Drink: Use of Filtration Growing
Americans expect great water when they turn on the tap.
But growth, development and industrial technology make that tougher every year.
So the Environmental Protection Agency requires surface water serving major cities to be filtered unless a city can prove that filtration isn't needed.


Northern Airs


Did 'My Favorite Year' Get Lost in the 1950's?
What, I'd Like to know first of all, happened to the jokes?
Did someone make away with them during rehearsals or did they never get written to begin with?
I realize that "My Favorite Year" is described in the playbills and on subway posters as "a new musical" -- no mention of comedy.
But if ever a musical had an excuse, no, a duty, to be funny, this is the one.


Cynthia Oakes, Tarek Ben Halim
Cynthia Jane Oakes, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John B. Oakes of New York, was married on Friday to Tarek Mostafa Ben Halim, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Mostafa Ben Halim of London.
Norman Stephens, the registrar for the Royal Boroughs of Kensington and Chelsea, officiated in his office in London.
Ms.
Oakes, who is keeping her name, is the finance director of Victor Edelstein Ltd., a fashion designer in London.
Her father, now retired, was the editor of the editorial page and a senior editor of The New York Times.


Here's Looking at You, Abe
LINCOLN
An Illustrated Biography.
By Philip B. Kunhardt Jr., Philip B. Kunhardt 3d and Peter W. Kunhardt. 415 pp.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $50.


Shayna Hendel, Chaim Meiseles
SHAYNA HENDEL is writing a book about why a self-described "chicken-soup Jew" like herself -- a Sarah Lawrence graduate, feminist and former Greenwich Village habitue -- joined the Lubavitcher Hasidim in Crown Heights, Brooklyn.
Chaim Meiseles, an administrative law judge for the New York State Labor Department, could tell a similar story.
He also lived in the Village and enjoyed a life that was not exactly holy before becoming a Lubavitcher.


In a Glass by Itself
At a time of the year when overindulgence is as common as overspending, any sign of moderation is welcome.
Since most wine is drunk with food -- either at the dinner table or elsewhere with friends and family -- it's consumed slowly and moderately.
A civilized drink in a civilized setting.


That Was Close: St. John's Wins by 2
David Cain, a senior guard for St.
John's, delivered a gift to his team yesterday when he hit a jumper from the foul line with two seconds left to give the Redmen a 58-56 victory over Hofstra in Alumni Hall in Queens.
"It was a makable shot that I would take in the normal sequence of the game," Cain said.
"The play was not set up for anyone in particular, but I got by my man and took the shot."


Whoosh, Then Glide
Central Park Conservancy's ice-skating party, Dec. 13.


First You Slide, Then You Dance
The swing at the Roxy has nothing on the slide at USA, the nightclub that opened last week at 218 West 47th Street.
A 96-foot-long fiberglass tube with 50 strobe lights on the inside ceiling, the slide has already become a late-night hit.
At the slide's entrance on an upper balcony, club goers sit down on a burlap sack, push off and go down to the dance floor, a 25-foot drop -- in seven seconds flat.
"It's really crazy," said an avowed club kid from Washington who gave his name as Tendajii (at left, above).
"It reminds me of that Arnold Schwarzenegger movie, 'The Running Man,' where they go down that tube."


A Cheap Ride From La Guardia


Stars and Civilians Propel Bay St. Festival
EVENTUALLY, performances will extend into winter, said Emma Walton, co-artistic director of the Bay Street Theater Festival during the inaugural season last summer in Sag Harbor.
Given the company's zeal and hearty community support, Ms.
Walton might have said, "Eventually, if not sooner."


A Suggestion For Fighting Drugs
The Dec. 6 article on how to combat drugs ("Report Card on Pioneering Effort to Combat Inner-City Drug Trade") prompts these thoughts:


The Lore and Lure of Christmas Greenery
WREATHS, ribbons, lights, trees, presents and greenery abound during this season of the year.
So do the many legends that surround Christmas.
Although much of the holiday is now rank with commercialism, the spirit of the season lives in many hearts and the traditions, customs and stories of old come alive.


Brief Encounters, and Boxers, Too
MEN have more underwear options than ever, as revealed on a recent Sunday visit to Under Wares, on the Upper East Side, a store that sells nothing but men's undergarments.
The shop's offerings range from knee-length skivvies to something called the sock, which is no more than a pouch with a waistband.
But for most people, the choice boils down to this: boxers or briefs.
"The sexier the better," said Ron Lambert, a chiropractor, who quickly dropped $360 on an assortment of tank tops, underpants and Speedo bathing suits for a holiday trip to Puerto Rico.
He chose several Calvin Klein Sport Straps ($13 each), which are the smallest of seven Calvin Klein cotton/Lycra styles that range from cycle shorts to jockstraps.
"It gets hot in Puerto Rico," he said.


Campaign Money Talks, So Candidates Talk It Up
For politicians, being seen as having a healthy campaign chest is almost as important as having one.
But even in a world where bragging rights mean so much, the New York City mayoral candidates have described their latest fund-raising efforts in terms more glowing than the gold they actually have so far.
The City Council president, Andrew J. Stein, may have puffed the most.
He claimed to have raised $1 million at a fund-raising party at the Rainbow Room Dec. 7, but actually took in only about half that amount; he expects to raise the rest over the next several weeks by collecting outstanding pledges, his aides said last week.


Corrections
A listing of albums on Dec. 6 with an article about children's music misstated the location of the record distributor Silo-Alcazar.
It is in Waterbury, Vt.


Life in Brooklyn's Forgotten Section; In Red Hook, 3-Year-Olds Hear Gunfire and Duck for Cover
Carmen Cruz stood silently alongside the worn and windswept patch of dirt and grass that cut through the mall in the center of the Red Hook Houses, just steps from where Patrick Daly lay mortally wounded the day before.
Her friend Elizabeth Gonzalez crouched by a small wooden fence post, pounding a nail into an index card that would become part of the flower-strewn memorial to the grade school principal they and their children had known, loved and ultimately grieved for in the quarter-century he walked among them.
"You was an angel," the card read. "Now get your wings."


Dreamland
To the Editor:
President Eisenhower once said, "People who value their privileges above their principles soon lose both." I believe that the Time Warner people who value their profits above their principles won't lose anything because nobody gives a damn about principles anymore.


World Markets; Europe's Loss Is America's Gain
WITH the American recovery more conspicuous than any glimmer of European growth and most analysts expecting a substantial appreciation of the dollar against European currencies in the coming year, investing in Europe in 1993 does not look particularly attractive at present.
One estimate, from S. G. Warburg, is that the dollar will be at 1.85 marks by the end of 1993, up 19 percent from 1.56 marks today.
While some analysts are less bullish, there is a general feeling that stronger growth in the United States, the arrival in the White House of Bill Clinton and continuing instability in European currency markets will bolster the dollar.
Clearly, this tendency must be factored into any European investment.


No Headline
A PORTRAIT FOR CLINTON
A portrait of President-elect Bill Clinton, painted by a Connecticut artist, will no doubt be hung on a White House wall shortly after Jan. 20 when the new First Family settles in.


Pull Up a Couch And Watch Giants
To the Sports Editor:
By changing and tinkering with the Giants' lineup, Ray Handley is rearranging deck chairs on the Titanic.
The trouble with the Giants, in the au courant psychology phrase of the day, is that they are enablers, allowing the opponents to be winners.
Just when they need a support group, the fans are not there for them.
JOAN MARY MACEY Binghamton, N.Y.


The Lore and Lure of Christmas Greenery
WREATHS, ribbons, lights, trees, presents and greenery abound during this season of the year.
So do the many legends that surround Christmas.
Although much of the holiday is now rank with commercialism, the spirit of the season lives in many hearts and the traditions, customs and stories of old come alive.


Hostetler Does His Part, and More
Four weeks ago, a hit by Mike Golic of the Philadelphia Eagles gave Jeff Hostetler a concussion worse than most.
For the next three weeks, headaches and nausea would strike without warning.
Last weekend, the post-concussion syndrome went away, and on Tuesday Hostetler returned to practice as the Giants' quarterback after missing three games.
Today, he was in command as the Giants upset the Kansas City Chiefs, 35-21, and sounded proud.


Somalis Use Khat As a Pick-Me-Up
To the Editor:
Khat, the national drug of Somalia, is not a narcotic, as stated in the Dec. 7 front-page Reporter's Notebook from Mogadishu.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
123.07
123.87
127.53
per Dollar
German Mark
1.5641
1.5780
1.5365
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.2753
1.2741
1.1563
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.5660
1.5560
1.8580
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$337.00
$335.10
$358.50
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Eve Glasberg, Amyas Naegele
Eve Elizabeth Glasberg, a daughter of Oscar S. Glasberg of Weston, Conn. and the late Ida M. Glasberg, was married on Friday to Amyas Dominic Naegele, a son of Thomas and Rosemary Naegele of New York.
Justice Ward J. Greenfield of State Supreme Court in Manhattan officiated in his chambers.
Ms.
Glasberg, 32 years old, is keeping her name.
She is an associate editor at Travel and Leisure magazine in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from New York University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
Her father is the president of Interglassmetal Corporation, a trade-show organizer in Ossining, N.Y., and the vice president of the Ashlee Publishing Company in New York.
The bride is a stepdaughter of Marilyn C. Glasberg of Weston.


Clinton Plans to Spread the Wealth In Increased Public Works Spending
The transportation industry is gearing up a major lobbying campaign to grab a big share of the increased public works spending promised by the incoming Clinton Administration.
But the Clinton team, which has never spelled out how it would divide the $20 billion in additional money that Mr.
Clinton promised to spend each year, appears to be planning a much broader array of programs, spreading the wealth beyond traditional road and bridge projects.


Giant Menorah Heralds the Start of Hanukkah


Crossing the Line
The editors of the New York Times Magazine decided it would be a fine seasonal gift to ask some of America's most accomplished writers of fiction and essays to compose short stories of reminiscences about Christmas.
The initiative was an unconventional one for this magazine, which traditionally has published nonfiction.
The startlingly contemporary reference points the writers choose - malls, a precinct station house, broken homes - also seemed unconventional at first.
But reflecting on these settings appear to sustain old tradition.
Christmas is a holiday that encourages us to celebrate out shared experience.


'Betsey Brown,' Musical About a Time of Change
AS a character, the 13-year-old Betsey Brown comes home free, having sorted her way through racially charged confrontations, ideological differences, family crises, sexual awakenings, educational reactionism and misleading peer influences -- all that -- amid tension and change in St.
Louis in 1959.
As a musical, "Betsey Brown" is still wandering in search of form, focus and a reason for being.


Here's a Plan to Let You Afford a $250,000 College Education
To the Editor:
In a speech before the National Press Club, Neil L. Rudenstine, president of Harvard University, recognizes the growing crisis in the affordability of college because family incomes are growing at a slower rate than college costs (news article, Dec. 1).
Keeping colleges and universities open and affordable to students of all economic backgrounds raises serious issues, and it is clear that the costs of higher education are forcing schools to make difficult decisions about resource allocation and, in some cases, forcing substantial cutbacks in programs and services.


This Week's Numbers
Consensus
Last Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. Inc.)
Monday
November budget defict, billions
-$48.9
-$60
Tuesday
Nov. G.D.P., percent change
3.9
3.9
Nov. G.D.P. deflator, percent change
1.7
1.8
Wednesday
Nov. durable goods orders, percent change
4.1
0.8
Nov. personal income, percent change
1
0.8
Nov. personal spending, percent change
0.7
0.2
Mid. Dec. auto sales, millions annual rate
6.5
6
Tuesday: Federal Reserve Open Market Committee meets  Thursday: Minutes of November Open Market Committee released *
Canadian gross domestic product figures released  Friday: Holiday, markets closed


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-18  SOUTH AFRICA OUSTS GENERALS


Cutting Fiscal Corners in Trenton
For the last 11 months New Jersey's administration and lawmakers have been using a new and largely subterranean system of deficit financing to keep the government running, tapping into billions of dollars worth of bonding authority and pension funds -- all the while avoiding the dreaded word "taxes."
In the process, they have sidestepped both the requirement for a public vote for capital bond issues and prohibitions against unbalanced budgets and the use of bond money for general operations.


Holiday Travel Has Industry Smiling
Buoyed by the slowly improving economy, back-to-back long weekends and the growing popularity of winter vacations, more Americans are hitting the road this holiday season than any time since 1989.
And they are not only taking to the highways in large numbers, but also to the skies, rails and oceans.
In the two weeks through Jan. 4, an estimated 33.7 million Americans will have driven at least 100 miles from home, 23 million will have flown on scheduled airlines and millions more will have taken buses and trains.


How to Kill the Drama in Overtime
Maybe Brian Leetch turned the channel in the third period.
O.K., the Rangers-Whalers score was tied at that point, but that doesn't mean the game was exciting.
No way.
Leetch, who remained at home because of shoulder and neck injuries sustained in St.
Louis last Thusday, could not have been pleased with the performance the Rangers gave tonight at the Hartford Civic Center.
New York played its way to a lackluster 4-4 tie against a tired fifth-place team that had played on the road the night before.


Christine Krais, Steven Schott
Christine Lovell Krais, the daughter of Janet C. Krais of New York and Frederick V. Krais Jr. of Lighthouse Point, Fla., was married yesterday to Steven Gorin Schott, a son of Lewis M. Schott of Palm Beach, Fla., and the late Marcia W. Schott.
The Rev.
Dr.
David C. Read, a Presbyterian minister, performed the ceremony at the Stanhope Hotel in New York.
Mrs.
Schott, 28 years old, is the New England advertising manager at Mademoiselle magazine in New York.
She graduated from Salve Regina College.
Her father retired as president of Communications Publishers Inc., a former magazine publishing company in New York.


Starting Life Again; Comfort Near the End
After a 16-year odyssey of marriage, separation, drug addiction and homelessness, a 33-year-old woman is ending a six-month stay at a home for mentally disturbed women run by a charity assisted by The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
She is ready to begin a new life.
Another Neediest agency aided a woman who cared for her ill husband herself because she feared he would suffer in a nursing home.
Articles, page 48.


Rome With a View
On June 11, 1990 -- a lovely clear day in Rome, and probably a hot one -- from 10:58 A.M. to 11:53, a small twin-engined aircraft made ten parallel photographic passes over the
centro storico
, the historic center, which in the case of Rome is everything inside the third-century Aurelian Wall.
The God's-eye pictures are now available to the eye of flesh in the splendid ATLAS OF ROME: The Form of the City on a 1:1000 Scale Photomap and Line Map (Marsilio/Rizzoli, slipcased, $250).
The scale is such that not only every building but every automobile, tree, medium-size bush, row of vegetables (more of these than you might think) and almost every person, if standing in the sun, is represented on the 276 right-hand plates of the atlas; on the facing pages, the plan of every building at ground level is etched on a corresponding computer-prepared map, elevations are given, and most if not all streets are labeled.
Buildings are not identified by name or number, so you may require another map to read this one; but, with some exceptions, a code on the left-hand page tells us whether each building is privately owned or belongs to the Government, the state, the city or the church.
There are surprises here: the church does not own St.
Agnese, St.
Agostino or St.
Ivo della Sapienza, three of the most important ecclesiastical monuments in the Piazza Navona area; the state owns them.
The Pantheon is "Parliamentary and Presidential" property.
The tomb of Augustus, the Ara Pacis and the pyramid of Caius Cestius are identified as private property.
Here's food for wonder!
Who's buried in Augustus' tomb?
Who owns the pyramid of Caius Cestius, and
what does he do with it?


Yeltsin Is Back In Russia to Join In a New Battle
Cutting short a trip to China, President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia rushed back to Moscow today, adding new drama to a rapidly developing fight for influence over Russia's new Prime Minister, and the next stage of the country's economic reforms.
Speaking to reporters upon his arrival here this afternoon, Mr.
Yeltsin said his presence was necessary to "start the formation of a new government immediately." He said he planned to meet on Sunday with Viktor S. Chernomyrdin, the new Prime Minister.


Masters of Ceremonies
Cooking and entertaining while looking soigne are hard enough in the most relaxed of settings, never mind in the frenzy of this festive season.
Obviously, a good host wants to reflect a certain level of taste and style.
But keeping the comfort quotient high helps, especially when it's your party.
So what is the best way to stay calm, collected . . . and chic?
For some people, blue jeans and a simple T-shirt are the only way to dress -- especially for a casual dinner -- though others insist on decidedly more formal attire.
Take a tip or two from these four New York hosts, who were asked how they managed to dish it out without leaving their glamour and good cheer in the kitchen.


Dear Museumgoer: What Do You Think?
In a Malibu, Calif., conference room, eight people are giving their impressions of the J. Paul Getty Museum, a place they have never visited.
"I've been told there's heavy, very classic type of art, somewhat stuffy and stand-offish," says a middle-aged man in a brown suit.
"It's the kind of place you wouldn't want to take your kids and let them run around."


All the King's Women
THE WIVES OF HENRY VIII
By Antonia Fraser. Illustrated. 479 pp. New York:  Alfred A. Knopf. $25.


Japan's Nuclear Fiasco
IT STARTED as the ultimate Japanese dream: a technology that promised a virtually inexhaustible supply of electricity to power Japan's factories and houses, and a quick, neat way for Japan to convert its growing piles of nuclear waste into an energy source that could keep the country running through wars in the Persian Gulf, natural disasters or political upheavals.
Japan's bureaucrats, awash with success in autos and electronics, expected it to become another triumph for Japanese industrial policy.
Now, week by week, Japan's most ambitious nuclear project is falling apart, variously described as an environmental disaster waiting to happen, an invitation to terrorists looking for fuel for nuclear weapons, and a financial fiasco for the Japanese taxpayers and utility shareholders.
For the many admirers of Japanese industrial planning -- some of whom met in Little Rock, Ark., with President-elect Bill Clinton last week -- the experience is a cautionary tale.
Even the masters of merging the talents of Government and industry can blow it, especially if they ignore fundamental changes in a market or a changing political atmosphere.


Fatima L. Ezzat, John R. Penrose
Fatima Leilani Ezzat, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Aly Azzat of Holyoke, Mass., was married yesterday to John Rowan Penrose, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles Penrose Jr. of Darien, Conn.
The Rev.
Robert Berkey, a United Church of Christ minister, officiated at the Swift River Inn in Cummington, Mass.
Imam Mohammed El-Kharoub, a Sunni sheik, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Penrose is a human-resources manager at the Otis Elevator Company in Farmington, Conn.
She graduated from Mount Holyoke College and received a master's degree in management from Northwestern University.
Her father, who retired as director of speech and hearing at Baystate Medical Center in Springfield, Mass., is a consultant in speech pathology in Holyoke.
Her mother, Esmat Ezzat, is the director of speech and hearing at Holyoke (Mass.) Hospital.


RECORD BRIEF
' "The Bodyguard": Original Soundtrack Album'
Arista 18699; CD and cassette.


Rookie Goalie's First Victory a Big One
The Islanders' victory this afternoon, a 4-3 triumph over the Pittsburgh Penguins, was a confidence-builder on several levels.
The rookie goalie, Danny Lorenz, played his first game of the season and got his first big-league victory.
The veteran captain, Patrick Flatley, doubled his season goal total by scoring twice, both of them while short-handed.
Both came on feeds from Benoit Hogue, who also scored once and successfully checked Mario Lemieux, holding him to two shots and one assist.


Corrections
An article last Sunday about abortion policy in the Clinton Administration misstated the view of Lynn Paltrow of the Center for Reproductive Law and Policy.
In an interview, Ms.
Paltrow said there were so many Federal restrictions against abortion that it would be very hard to remove them all overnight; she did not say she doubted the new Administration's commitment to abortion rights.


RECORD BRIEFS
'Horowitz: Discovered Treasures'
Vladimir Horowitz, pianist. Sony Classical SK 48093; CD.


Police Seek 2 More Men In Shooting
Continuing an intensive investigation into the death of Patrick Daly, the grade-school principal slain in a crossfire in Brooklyn, the police said yesterday that they were searching for two youths, one with the street name "K."
One suspect, Shamel Burroughs, 17 years old, was arraigned late Friday night at Criminal Court in Brooklyn.


Mr. Lincoln Earns a Network Documentary
For decades, the networks shunned historical documentaries, but the attention given "The Civil War," Ken Burns's remarkable 1990 public television series, may have changed all that.
Next weekend, ABC will break from its recent offerings of mini-series murder and mayhem to present a mini-series about history -- four hours of images and words over a century old -- in a documentary called "Lincoln," which will be broadcast Saturday night at 8 and next Sunday at 7.


Corrections
Because of a transmission error, an article on Dec. 6 about holiday parties misstated the price of a New Year's Eve package at the Rye Town Hilton.
It is $350 a couple, not $35.


Southern Airs


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
MODEL TRAIN SHOW
One of the most delightful holiday displays for children and grownups can be seen at the New York Botanical Garden in the Bronx.
A model train exhibition is on display through Jan. 3, and Thomas the Tank Engine is on view today, Tuesday through Thursday, Saturday and next Sunday.


Chant of 'Ray Must Go' Draws Both a Yes and No
Considering all the people who have been calling for the scalp of Coach Ray Handley, there was relative calm among the tailgaters in the Giants Stadium parking lot today.
Or was it simply the calm before the storm?


One Step Back
Now that President Boris Yeltsin has picked Viktor Chernomyrdin to be his Prime Minister, many commentators have argued that this lifelong Soviet bureaucrat is likely to follow a "moderate path." The rumors yesterday that he plans to fire most leading aides to the ousted Yegor Gaidar may alter this initial optimism, but calling Mr.
Chernomyrdin a moderate is not entirely wrong.
Unfortunately, the kind of seemingly pragmatic reform he appears to favor is just the kind that could lead to catastrophe.


Dreaming of a Two-Tone Christmas
DEAR SANTA
I KNOW it's been two years since you heard from me, but I was waiting for my Elvis stamp.
Besides, you've been doing pretty well by us car folks.


Babel-on-Hudson: House of 100 Bands
THE sounds never stop at the scruffy building at 584 Eighth Avenue.
It must be the most efficient place in the city to hear music.
More than 100 bands play there, often set after set.
But since the bands are rehearsing, they perform simultaneously, one genre interlarded with another, sometimes producing a deafening, blood-quickening din that a musician from the Sunspots, a band that plays pop rock, describes as "animals and blenders going at it."
There is no telling what will bellow out of one of the studios.
Not long ago, Thomas Fiorini, napping in his sixth-floor rehearsal room, was jarred awake by an unfathomable noise from next door.
"It sounded like the Devil coming up from the floor," he said.
"I thought someone was being shot." It was nothing of the sort, just a hopeful vocalist still perfecting his tonality.
"This guy needed some serious work," Mr.
Fioriniadded.


Susan C. Anrig, Robert Lichten Jr.
Susan Charlotte Anrig, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Gregory R. Anrig of Princeton, N.J., was married yesterday to Robert Martin Lichten Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lichten of Port Washington, L.I.
Msgr.
Walter Simmons performed the ceremony at St.
Peter's of Alcantara Roman Catholic Church in Port Washington.
Mrs.
Lichten, 25 years old, teaches the second grade at the Bank Street School for Children in New York.
She graduated from Skidmore College and is a master's-degree candidate in education at Bank Street College.
Her father is the president of the Educational Testing Service, the college examination service in Princeton.
Her mother, Charlotte Anrig, is a retired kindergarten teacher for the Dover (Mass.) Elementary School.


Financial Lion Plans A Parlay in China
IT is not easy to combine the roles of bridge champion and Napoleon of finance, but Jim Cayne of Manhattan manages it neatly.
Most of his hours are devoted to Bear Stearns, the brokerage house, of which he is president, but he spends much of his free time at card tables.
Three weeks ago in Orlando, Fla., he led his team to victory in the Reisinger Board-a-Match Teams championship.
To fit in morning golf lessons, he said he was managing on four and a half hours of sleep nightly.


The Traditional Handsaw Still Proves Its Versatility
LOOKING at tool displays in stores and listening to sounds at construction sites can give an impression that ordinary handsaws have become relics.
But many carpenters still use them.
Of course, not all jobs are better suited for handsawing than power sawing.
But it is quicker and safer to use a handsaw, rather than set up a circular saw, to lop off the end of a single 2 X 4 or to trim a molding.
And there can be no doubt that the low-pitched noise of a handsaw is less disturbing than the high-pitched scream of a power saw.


New York City Feels Pressure to Protect Precious Watershed
After half a century in which it has possessed the purest and most bountiful supply of drinking water in America, New York City is facing intense new pressure to protect its reservoirs from pollution and development or spend billions of dollars on a mammoth plant to filter the water.
The Environmental Protection Agency plans to release a complex series of water quality standards this week that the city must meet in the next year.
To satisfy the Federal agency, New York will have to enforce a rigorous new plan to control development in the region that supplies its water, including buying ecologically sensitive land in the Catskills.
If it does not succeed, the city will almost certainly be ordered to begin constructing the plant.


Facing the Future Without Mother Hale
The room at Hale House in Harlem where Clara M. Hale slept for the last two decades with abandoned babies at her side was empty yesterday.
Since her death on Friday, no decision had been made on what the room will now be used for, but there was a pretty good guess that it would be converted to make space for more babies.


Sports of The Times; City Didn't Scare Lowe or Rivers
DOC RIVERS heard the song a thousand times before the lyrics actually meant something to him.
But just the other day, he said to himself: "You know, it's true. If you can make it here, you can make it anywhere."
So now he hums it inside his own active head, the words to "New York, New York." He's one of those athletes who thinks he can come to the big city and survive.


'New Peso' for Mexico on Jan. 1
The Mexican peso will lose three zeros on Jan. 1 as "new peso" coins and bills go into circulation.
A new peso will equal 1,000 current pesos.
The move, aimed at simplifying calculations, will not devalue the currency.
The current and new currencies will circulate together for at least a year, as old pesos are phased out.
Posters in Spanish that explain the nuevos pesos, as they are called, are on display in stores and public buildings throughout Mexico.
The Finance Ministry says English pamphlets about the new currency should be available at airports and border crossings by the beginning of the year.


The Sprucey Pond
The editors of the New York Times Magazine decided it would be a fine seasonal gift to ask some of America's most accomplished writers of fiction and essays to compose short stories of reminiscences about Christmas.
The initiative was an unconventional one for this magazine, which traditionally has published nonfiction.
The startlingly contemporary reference points the writers choose - malls, a precinct station house, broken homes - also seemed unconventional at first.
But reflecting on these settings appear to sustain old tradition.
Christmas is a holiday that encourages us to celebrate out shared experience.


Recent Sales
East Norwich  $210,000
30 Gilbert Court  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 33-year-old split level; dining room, eat-in kitchen, finished basement, 1-car attached garage; taxes $3,300.
Glen Cove  $345,000
12 Southland Drive  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 33-year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, fireplace, 2-car attached garage, water view; taxes $6,300.
Great Neck  $212,500
27 Valley View Road  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 60-year-old colonial; fireplace, finished basement, 2-car garage, water view; taxes $2,800.
Jericho  $302,000
3 Chemung Place  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 31-year-old split level; dining room, eat-in kitchen, basement, 2- car attached garage; taxes $6,000.
Muttontown  $370,000
Willis Lane  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 72-year-old colonial; fireplace, basement, 2-car garage, 1.97 acres; taxes $4,200.
Plainview  $177,000
75 Diamond Drive  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 35-year-old ranch; dining room, finished basement, 1-car attached garage; taxes $3,700.
OTHER AREAS Mount Kisco, N.Y.  $265,000
65 High Ridge Road  5-bedroom, 2 full- , 1 half-bath, 22-year-old colonial; family room, fireplace, laundry room, cul-de-sac; taxes $8,421.
Canton, Conn.  $277,000
14 Homestead Lane  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 5-year-old contemporary; passive solar heat, skylights, swimming pool, 2.3 acres; taxes $4,961.
Livingston, N.J.  $293,000
7 Rosedale Terrace  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 38-year-old split level; family room, 2-car garage, c/a, h/w floors; taxes$4,791.


Culture Shock and Synthesis In Works of Dominican Artists
SINCE the entrance to Hostos Community College is small and forever milling with students, the decibel count is high and the atmosphere charged.
Yet the visitor has only to cross the lobby to find peace -- in the Hostos Arts Gallery, which is featuring "500 Yolas" (a yola is a small boat), a display consisting of five Dominican artists.
In the words of its curator, German Perez, the show is a "reflection upon that most American of experiences: immigration." For many Caribbean people this has meant a journey in a gig or rowboat, a craft that has become a symbol of desperation.
Mr.
Perez, who is also the show's dominant artist, has stenciled a fleet of such boats on the windows of the gallery and on an interior wall painted blue.
This is part of an installation involving sand and withered palm fronds.


New &amp; Noteworthy
ALMANAC OF THE DEAD, by Leslie Marmon Silko. (Penguin, $13.) The collective memory of Native American peoples is embodied in their storytelling -- a kind of almanac that gives this novel's characters the power and the knowledge to begin to take back their land.
"This wild, jarring, graphic, mordant, prodigious book embodies the bold wish to encompass in a novel the cruelty of contemporary America," Elizabeth Tallent said here last year.
KEEPING A RENDEZVOUS, by John Berger. (Vintage International, $12.) John Berger is simultaneously a Renaissance man and a recluse -- an English fiction writer, poet, art critic and philosopher, he lives in a tiny French Alpine village in a house without indoor plumbing.
This collection of essays touches on both poles of his experience, from the meanings he finds in painting and photography to the metaphysical implications of cleaning his outhouse.
In January our reviewer, Alison Lurie, said that " 'Keeping a Rendezvous' should give only pleasure to its readers." Vintage International has also reissued LILAC AND FLAG: An Old Wives' Tale of a City ($11), the final novel in Mr.
Berger's "Into Their Labours" trilogy.
Although in 1990 our reviewer, Robert Boyers, felt the book's message was often simplistic, he admired the author's "characteristic eye for telling physical detail and his feeling for the poetry of everyday life."


Principal Dies Helping a Child
It was an all-too-familiar explosion of violence in a gun-plagued, drug-ridden urban neighborhood -- an innocent passerby slain in a crossfire of feuding criminals.
This time the victim was a man who had dedicated his life to keeping young people from pursuing the very path of those said to have killed him.
Patrick Daly, a 48-year-old Brooklyn school principal admired for his efforts to inspire his students to succeed despite the odds against them, was hit in the chest by a bullet as he walked through a housing project in the Red Hook section of the borough.
He had been searching for a 9-year-old pupil who had left the school in tears after a fight with another student -- a typical act of generosity by Mr.
Daly, parents and teachers at the school said.


Not All Music of the Disaffected Is Neo-Nazi; When Art Serves Hate
To the Editor:
Your Dec. 2 front-page article on neo-Nazi rock music quotes Tony Robson of Searchlight magazine as saying that the bands have "stripped rock-and-roll of all black or ethnic influences," that "most of the bands can barely play their instruments" and that the music's "purpose is to incite more than entertain."


Internet Is Encouraging Not-for-Profit Software
To the Editor:
Significant in its omission from "The Network of All Networks" (Technology, Dec. 6), the portability of software on the Internet could have an enormous impact on the commercial software industry.
There are gigabytes of Macintosh, DOS and Unix programs that are freely available to anyone with F.T.P. (file transfer protocol) access to the Internet.
It is an ideal environment for shareware (send $ if the program is useful) and freeware (no  ] , replete with user groups, documentation, useful tricks and F.A.O.'s (frequently asked questions).


A Populist Inauguration: Jackson, With Decorum
When President-elect Bill Clinton's big rock candy mountain moves from Little Rock to Washington, the contrast with previous inaugurations will be palpable, deliberate and historically aware.
While there will be entertainment, fireworks and a multicultural festival on the Mall, it is clearly designed to contrast with the plutocratic touches of the Reagan and Bush inaugurations.
Because a partially open house at the White House is on the schedule the day after the inauguration, there is talk of recapturing the spirit of Andrew Jackson's first inauguration, on March 4, 1829.
If so, the Clintons had better roll up the carpets and count the silver first.
Contemporary accounts of General Jackson's inauguration serve to caution the Democratic residents of the White House about the wisdom of letting the People join in the fun too democratically.


Corrections
The headline on the obituary of a writer and antiwar campaigner yesterday rendered her last name incorrectly in some copies.
She was Sybil Claiborne.


In Benin, a Mix of Magic and History
AFTER I had driven all day over the brutal washboard roads that cut through Benin's thinly wooded savanna, my back was so sore that walking was painful.
Visiting the open-air market of Bohicon, a small town at the juncture of the West African country's two major inland roads, I paused before a jumble of tables laid out with an array of animal parts and bottled potions.
While market women came scurrying forward at the sight of a potential customer, crying out their prices for armfuls of oranges, tomatoes and baguettes, the traditional healer at the outdoor apothecary studied me long enough to make a spot diagnosis.


Miss Attisani, Mr. Lyman Jr.
Susan Barbara Attisani, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Dominick J. Attisani of Brightwaters, L.I., was married yesterday to Huntington Lyman Jr., the son of Mr.
Lyman of New York and Rosemary Van Slyck of Niantic, Conn.
The Rev.
Scott A. Asalone performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Francis de Sales Church in Purcellville, Va.
Mrs.
Lyman, 30 years old, is a trainer of show horses in Middleburg, Va.
Her father is a professor of music at Dowling College in Oakdale, L.I.
Her mother is the chairman of business programs in the East Islip (L.I.) public schools.


Clinton Social Policy Camps: Bill's vs. Hillary's
The social policy of the Clinton Administration is being shaped by separate and in some ways conflicting camps, represented both literally and metaphorically by the occupants of two red brick buildings on Capitol Hill.
One houses the Children's Defense Fund, the child-advocacy group that has become a model of effective liberal lobbying.
The other is home to the Democratic Leadership Council, which was founded to criticize and change that same liberal tradition.


Data Bank/December 20, 1992


Cherry Blossoms, Plastics, Morality Plays
For the first time in its history, the Metropolitan Museum has mounted a one-person exhibition of a contemporary Japanese artist, and lo and behold, the artist is a photographer.
Thirty-five color photographs by Shomei Tomatsu -- "Photographs by Tomatsu: Sakura + Plastics" -- propose a complex opposition.
Rectangular, 35-millimeter pictures focus on pink cherry blossoms ("sakura"); they hang next to dark, nearly square photographs of plastics washed up on the beach.
Though both series appear to be chiefly about visual pleasure, Tomatsu's vision of flowers turns out to be as ambiguous as his orderly images of pollution.
The damaged environment beckons seductively; the prodigious displays of spring harbor hints of darkness.
His work, which in the late 1950's and 60's influenced such Japanese artists as the film maker Akira Kurosawa, has a certain authority and reserved elegance but breaks no new ground.
In the cherry-tree pictures, blossom and branch, seen close on, choke the surface with a vigorous, wiry calligraphy the Abstract Expressionists would have admired.
Lee Friedlander staked out this territory in black and white, in Japan, some dozen years ago, and long before, Japanese artists filled screens with snaking branches and soft explosions of blossom.


Marilyn Bergner, 59, Medical Researcher
Marilyn Neufeld Bergner, a professor and researcher who helped to develop a widely used system for evaluating the medical condition of patients, died Dec. 12 at her home in Silver Spring, Md..
She was 59.
She died of ovarian cancer, her family said.


'The American Way of Birth'
To the Editor:
In New York City in 1907, 40 percent of all deliveries were performed by midwives, and the death rate for infants was 17 percent.
With the introduction of antenatal care, that rate plummeted to 4.9 percent.


DEC. 13-19: Accused of Seduction; Death and the Psychiatrist: A $1 Million Settlement
Margaret Bean-Bayog, the Harvard psychiatrist accused of seducing a patient and leading him to commit suicide, paid $1 million last week to the patient's family in an out-of-court settlement.
The payment, covered by Ms.
Bean-Bayog's insurance company, brings an official end to a case that drew national publicity and raised troublesome questions about psychiatry.
Last September, Ms.
Bean-Bayog surrendered her medical license permanently rather than face a hearing by state authorities into her treatment of the patient, Paul Lozano, a Harvard medical student.


Wall Street; After I.B.M.'s Fall -- Microsoft?
For some portfolios, it will mean a slight dent.
For others, it will look more like a crater.
One way or another, though, the big bust of Big Blue means that other publicly traded companies must emerge to replace I.B.M. as the core holding of choice -- the stock you put away, cross your fingers and forget about.
Until the up-and-comer gets too big, too klutzy and too widely copied, of course.
But what about now?
Last week's news that the International Business Machines Corporation would slash an additional 25,000 jobs helped knock $10.875 off the stock, which closed at $51.50 on Friday.
The decline was abrupt, but hardly countertrend, for I.B.M.
Friday's close was down 49 percent from this year's high of $100.25 on July 16, and a 71 percent tumble from its all-time high of $175.875 in 1987.


Penguins, Owls and Condors, as Seen by Roger Tory Peterson
AT the Lyme Academy of Fine Arts, Roger Tory Peterson cast a critical eye over the exhibition, "The Art of Roger Tory Peterson." It features his paintings of parading penguins, Arctic owls, Andean condors, a regal ruffed grouse and other subjects that he clearly loves, including a small owl named after him.
But at 84, Mr.
Peterson is still working, still aiming.
"If I painted this today, I would do it differently," he said, eyeing his painting of Otus petersoni, a Peruvian screech owl.
"I would be a little more impressionistic."


Sadly, a Film Maker Recalls Red Hook and a Principal
Matty Rich, the 21-year-old film maker whose "Straight Out of Brooklyn" lent a harrowing portrayal of the the Red Hook Houses where he grew up, said he was stunned to learn that the cycle of violence there had taken his grade-school principal.
"You had a man with a kind heart; he extends himself and he dies by the hands of the kids he's trying to save," said Mr.
Rich, who was reached Friday in Los Angeles.


At Odds


Official Says an Increase In Empire Rates Is Likely
New York State's Insurance Superintendent said last night that he was likely to grant Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield the entire rate increase it had requested for Jan. 1, which would substantially raise the cost of health insurance for 1.4 million customers.
"At this point I can't see any more money that's available," the Superintendent, Salvatore R. Curiale, said in an interview.
"I really can't say what I'm going to do at this point, but we're getting close to the point where I'm going to have to grant the entire rate increase."


Retro Hunks: They're Tough, But Oh So Gentle
"You don't look like a bodyguard," Whitney Houston tells Kevin Costner when they meet in their new hit movie, giving the first hint that this film is seriously out of touch with reality.
He looks exactly like a bodyguard, trained in the Secret Service, which is probably where he picked up that conservative gray suit, white shirt and narrow black tie.
A laconic authority figure who would die to protect the woman he loves, the hero of "The Bodyguard" was conceived by Lawrence Kasdan 17 years ago with Steve McQueen in mind.
That -- along with the geekiest haircut this side of basic training -- helps explain why the character seems to have walked out of the past.
In "Forever Young," Mel Gibson
does
walk out of the past.
In 1939, he is a brave test pilot, so despondent when the woman he loves is hopelessly injured that he volunteers to be frozen as part of a top-secret experiment.
He is defrosted in 1992 without losing a trace of his boyish good looks and proves that a 30's man is perfect for the 90's -- protective of women but gentle enough to cry, an eternal romantic who is also handy at home repairs.


Hot Soup for Cold Weather
AS an antidote to cold weather, there is nothing like a bowl of hot soup.
At this time of year -- between rich holiday meals -- a substantial soup is the perfect main course for lunch or dinner, followed with a light salad.
Legumes like dried beans, peas and lentils make warming and filling dishes, which are especially good on cold days.
One of my favorites is black bean soup, flavored with rum and lemon and garnished with a dollop of sour cream and fresh coriander leaves.
Leftover slices of Christmas ham can be chopped and added.


Miss Southerland, Mr. Gilliam Jr.
Barbara Burke Southerland and James Daniel Gilliam Jr. were married yesterday in Wilmington, N.C.
The Rev.
Lawrence P. Houston Jr., an Episcopal priest, officiated at St.
Andrew's-on-the-Sound Church.
The Rev.
John R. McAlpine 3d, a Presbyterian minister, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Gilliam is the owner of Barbara Southerland Interior Decoration and Design Inc. in New York.
She graduated from the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
She is the daughter of the late Francis and Elizabeth Southerland.
The bride's father was the president of the Southerland Dying and Finishing Mills, a former hosiery manufacturer in Mebane, N.C.


Isuzu to Stop Manufacturing Passenger Cars
In a development that only a few years ago might have seemed unimaginable, one of Japan's automobile companies said today that it would give up production of passenger cars.
The announcement by Isuzu Motors Ltd., which once achieved popularity in the United States with commercials featuring a lying salesman, reflects the hard times that have befallen Japan's automobile industry.


MOST LIKELY TO SUCCEED
The profound psychological conflicts of the late 1960's are reflected in Frank Aller's legacy.
His suicide created a reference point against which some of our nation's leaders will measure the success of their lives.
Aller will keep his friends struggling to prove not only that their lives mean something but that his did, too.
VICTORIA F. REED GLESS
Chapel Hill, N.C.


Moral Values Need To Be Taught Early
As a senior at Westlake High School in Thornwood and one who has attended the Westchester County public school system half her life, I read your front page article "Reading, Writing and Arithmetic and, Now, Right and Wrong"  [ Nov. 29 ]  with great interest.
As pessimistic as this may sound, I feel that teaching young people moral values is a waste of the school system's time unless this education begins once a child enters kindergarten, or even earlier.
By the time a child reaches middle school, any value, if any, that he or she has learned, is already embedded in his or her mind and seldom can moral values in these youths be changed.
Looking at my own school, I see that there is not a lot of moral value in my classmates or even in myself.
This is not to say that my school is in moral decay, but it is typical of most schools these days.
Almost everyone uses foul language; teachers are often laughed at and not taken seriously, and classroom courtesy is at an all-time low when one person is constantly interrupting another person or shooting them down with some sarcastic statement.
There are those students who are obedient, respectful to their peers and teachers, but they are at a significantly lower number than those who don't.


Gravesend
To the Editor:
As a historical archeologist specializing in the early history of New York, I can tell you that what is now the Gravesend section of Brooklyn was not named for the hometown that Lady Deborah Moody and her followers left in England, as you stated in your article about the community on Oct. 18, but by the Dutch governor-general, William Kieft.


ISRAELI EXPULSIONS CONDEMNED BY U.N.
In a strongly worded rebuke backed by the United States, the Security Council voted unanimously on Friday night to condemn Israel for deporting about 400 Palestinians from the occupied territories.
The resolution approved by the 15-member Council "strongly condemns" the deportations and demands that those expelled be readmitted to the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip.
The Council was drawing on a phrase it first used to rebuke the country in January, when Israel ordered the deportation of 12 Palestinians accused of inciting terrorism.


Clara Hale, 87, Who Aided Addicts' Babies, Dies
Clara M. Hale, who nurtured hundreds of abandoned and orphaned babies, the most fragile victims of New York City's epidemics of drug abuse and AIDS, died on Friday at Mount Sinai Hospital.
She was 87 and lived in Manhattan.
She died of complications of a stroke, her family said.


Police Charge Man In Subway Slaying
A Brooklyn man who told the police that he shot and killed another man during a fight on a subway train was charged with second-degree murder yesterday, the Transit Police said.
The suspect, Jerry Robinson, 28, turned himself in to about a dozen officers at the Abyssinian Baptist Church in Harlem Friday night, after his lawyer, C. Vernon Mason, arranged for the surrender.


Overcoming the Holocaust With Success
THE other night William B. Helmreich finished a talk in Great Neck, fielded a few questions from the audience and then listened with pleasure as one man stood up and said, "I just want to express my deep appreciation for what you did. You gave us respect and dignity."
The man was not speaking for a special-interest group or a class of people who need to wrap themselves in images.
He was a survivor, a word in certain circles that takes on a particular and somber uniqueness: a survivor who lived through the specific and dreadful ministrations visited upon unfortunates in the grasp of the Nazi regime.


Corrections
An article last Sunday about the Alger Hiss case misidentified the organization underwriting John Lowenthal, a historian who is studying the case.
It is The Nation Institute.


Windsor Castle, Ruined by Fire, Plans Reopening
Some of the State Apartments at Windsor Castle that have been closed since the fire on Nov. 20 are expected to reopen in mid-January.
Initially visitors should be able to see 11 of the 16 rooms normally on view.
The others will remain closed for electrical rewiring that already had been scheduled to begin in late November and continue to the end of this year.
A spokesman for the castle said officials now hope the electrical work will be completed by Easter, when all but two fire-damaged rooms normally open to the public -- St.
George's Hall and the Grand Reception Room -- will be open.
Visitors will also be able to look into parts of the damaged area if engineers decide that they are safe, a spokesman for the castle said.
He added that few artifacts were lost in the blaze because many items had been removed for the rewiring.
Although a full inventory of damaged pieces has not been completed, it is known that only one painting -- a portrait of George III by Sir William Beechey -- was lost, from St.
George's Hall, along with an 1820's sideboard and some porcelain.
In the private chapel an organ was destroyed.


The Environmental Fix With a Legion of Doubters
FROM the high bluffs along the Ohio River, the nation's newest hazardous waste incinerator looks like a gleaming castle -- a beacon, its Swiss owners say, for the high technology, high wage environmental industries that President-elect Bill Clinton enthusiastically supports.
But to perhaps a third of the residents of East Liverpool, Ohio, an aging river town 30 miles downstream from Pittsburgh, the plant looks much more menacing -- a hulking industrial fortress constructed on a flood plain in a valley infamous for its stagnant air and much too close to hundreds of homes and an elementary school.


Giants Win One for . . . Well, They Win One
If you could explain why the Giants played like world-beaters today in whipping the Kansas City Chiefs, 35-21, you should be coaching these teams instead of watching them.
The game had all the potential for a rout.
The Chiefs were one victory away from making the National Football League playoffs.
The Giants had lost their last five games, they had long since lost any playoff hopes and their coach, Ray Handley, is seemingly about to lose his job.
The Chiefs were favored by 7 points on the road.


Holiday Travel Is Surging


Recent Sales
Bedford, N.Y.  $450,000
Pound Ridge Road  3-bedroom, 2 full- and 2 half-bath, 5-year-old frame; 2-story entry hall, family room, 3 fireplaces, wet bar, Jacuzzi; taxes $6,500.
Mount Kisco, N.Y.  $265,000
65 High Ridge Road  5-bedroom, 2 full- and 1 half-bath, 22-year-old colonial; family room, fireplace, laundry room, cul-de-sac; taxes $8,421.
Pound Ridge, N.Y.  $460,000
Siscowit Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 10-year-old frame; vaulted ceilings, family room, breakfast room, fireplace, loft, 2-car garage; taxes $6,300.
Canton, Conn.  $277,000
14 Homestead Lane  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 5-year-old contemporary; passive solar heat, skylights, swimming pool, 2.3 acres; taxes $4,961.
Enfield, Conn.  $930,000
85 Cottage Road  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 92-year-old bungalow; waterfront location, new deck and furnace, fireplace, 55- by 133-ft. lot; taxes $1,275.
Orange, Conn.  $184,500
520 Overlook Drive  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 40-year-old ranch; stone fireplace, large kitchen,  OTHER AREAS East Norwich, L.I.  $210,000
30 Gilbert Court  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 33-year-old split level; dining room, eat-in kitchen, finished basement, 1-car attached garage; taxes $3,300.
Fair Lawn, N.J.  $297,000
4-03 Fourth Street  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 30-year-old colonial; dining room, fireplace; taxes $5,119.
Livingston, N.J.  $293,000
7 Rosedale Terrace  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 38-year-old split level; family room, 2-car garage, c/a, h/w floors; $4,791.


Tiny Briga Lane Has a Big Impact On Holiday Spirits
BRIGA LANE is not a place that people in this city could readily tell someone how to find.
The tiny lane is so new it wasn't even on the map 13 years ago.
Tucked between Mamaroneck Avenue and Rose Way, snuggled in the decline of a hill, it eludes many residents and even some taxi drivers.
But each December, when this sleepy block is transformed into an enchanted wonderland of gingerbread houses and a combination of Bethlehem and the North Pole, visitors seem to have no trouble finding it.


Miss Whitehead, D. M. Stevenson
Gabrielle Anya Whitehead, the daughter of Allen and Rosemarie Whitehead of Rye, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Douglas Munro Stevenson, a son of John and Lee Stevenson of Darien, Conn.
The Rev.
Vance Polley performed the ceremony at the Rye Presbyterian Church.
Mrs.
Stevenson, 28 years old, is a freelance producer of radio and television commercials in Rye.
She graduated from Roanoke College.
Her father is the deputy chairman and a founder of Music Theater International Inc., a stage-production licensing concern in New York.


Corrections
The list of Paperback Best Sellers on page 24 of the Book Review today reverses the ranking of the two top fiction works.
"The Waste Lands" by Stephen King is the best seller; "Angel" by Johanna Lindsey ranks second.


Miss Cameron, W. D. Hoffman
Katherine Ruth Cameron, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ralph F. Cameron of Laguna Hills, Calif., was married yesterday to William Drew Hoffman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
S.
Joseph Hoffman of Andover, Mass.
The Rev.
Dr.
Calvin Mutti, a Congregational minister, officiated at Stillington Hall in Gloucester, Mass.
Mrs.
Cameron Hoffman, 26 years old, is a teacher at Hartwell Elementary School in Lincoln, Mass.
She graduated from the University of California at Los Angeles and received a master's degree in education from Lesley College.
Her father, now retired, was a corporate lawyer and the vice president of International Nickel Company of Canada, a mining and metals company in New York.


BENEFITS
Art for Children's Health
MONDAY -- The Second Exhibition of International Parallel Emotion, a multimedia art exhibition, will have an opening-night reception at ArteSpace La Rosa, 22 West 21st Street in Manhattan, at 8:30 P.M.
The evening will benefit the Children's Health Fund, which was founded by Paul Simon, the singer and composer, to provide free primary health care for children in the city's shelters.
Tickets, $15, at the door; (212) 873-4678.


Perspectives: Industrial Occupancy; A Blue-Collar Home Feels Recession's Grip
TIMES are turbulent in industrial real estate again, says Mathew R. Sassano, who is well placed to judge such matters.
He is the general manager of Atlas Terminals, a 25-acre industrial center in Glenwood, Queens, where 52 tenants operate in 38 buildings with a total of one million square feet of space.
Occupancy had reached 100 percent in the 80's after the dispiriting 70's, he said, but the vacancy rate climbed back to 25 percent over the last two and a half years.
About half the net loss was a result of bankruptcies of smaller mom-and-pop businesses, many of them newly formed in the 80's; the rest came when businesses left New York City for areas of lower operating costs.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  TEXAS RANGERS -- Agreed to terms with Rob Ducey, outfielder, on a minor-league contract.
Football National Football League  GREEN BAY PACKERS -- Placed Johnny Holland, linebacker, on injured reserve.
Activated Brett Collins, linebacker, from the practice squad.
Hockey National Hockey League  PHILADELPHIA FLYERS -- Traded Mark Pederson, left wing, to the San Jose Sharks for Dave Snuggerud, right wing.
Sent Len Barrie, center, to Hershey of the American Hockey League.
Football National Football League  CHICAGO BEARS -- Signed Bob Christian, running back, and Barry Wagner, wide receiver, from the practice squad.
Placed Glen Kozlowski, wide receiver, on injured reserve.
Waived Mark Rodenhauser, long snapper.
KANSAS CITY CHIEFS -- Placed Fred Jones, wide receiver, on injured reserve.
Signed Michael Smith, wide receiver.
SAN FRANCISCO 49ERS -- Activated Joe Montana, quarterback, from injured reserve.
Waived Sheldon Canley, running back.


Profile/Carol Nelson and Mary Ann Tighe; Two Movers in a Tough Market
CAROL NELSON and Mary Ann Tighe can't indulge in even the mildest self-deprecation when the other one's around.
Let Carol say she's squeamish around vermin, and Mary Ann will launch into a tale about how Carol chased down a mouse while the men in the room cried "Eeeek!" Let Mary Ann describe herself as more pragmatic than creative, and Carol will recite chapter and verse of the creative things Mary Ann brings to deals.
It's a mutual admiration society of the first order.
It had better be.
In the male-dominated and loner-driven world of New York commercial real estate, Ms.
Nelson and Ms.
Tighe have been virtually joined at the hip for more than four years.


Discovering a New Life, Aided by the Neediest Fund
Wanda Hooks remembers the beatings.
She recalls how her mother, enraged over something as simple as the squalor of their Crown Heights home, would move to hit her, sending the girl, bruised and crying, to retreat to a corner.
She remembers thinking that those beatings would never stop and that there was no way to escape.
"I was scared physically and mentally," she said, explaining that her brothers seldom received the same harsh treatment.
"I never talked about it."
When she was 16, Ms.
Hooks moved to strike her mother back.
Shortly after that, she moved out to the streets.
And so began a 16-year odyssey through marriage, separation, drug addiction, homelessness and frustration.


Storm-Tossed: Tales of a Nor'easter; Music Accompanied By the Sound of Water
THE storm that ravaged large areas of the state last weekend left behind it a trail of loss, personal and financial.
For many residents, the experiences of those days of rain, snow and high tide will not soon be forgotten.
There were moments on Friday when David Friedell and his wife, Carolyn, thought they would never get to the "Messiah" dress rehearsal the next day.
The snow clogging their long driveway in Newton had to be shoveled.
And they had to cope without electricity, heat or telephone service for 24 hours.


NOTES
An unlikely truck driver showed up on Tuesday night for the premiere of "Hoffa," the film about the legendary Teamsters boss Jimmy Hoffa.
"My husband and I just bought our first truck, a red Chevy with a stretch cab," said the socialite Blaine Trump, who keeps the vehicle in the barn of her new weekend home in Millbrook, N.Y.
"I drive all over New England and go antiquing. The last thing I bought was a pot rack. Trucks come in real handy when you have a big pot rack for the kitchen."
The promise of a free pair of eyeglasses lured Anna Wintour, Liz Tilberis, Tina Brown and Sandy Gallin to the Tony Shafrazi Gallery in SoHo on Monday night for Calvin Klein's introduction of his new line of eyewear.
"I love a party that legitimizes looking in the mirror," said Monica Lynch, the president of Tommy Boy Records.


Hardball Isn't New To Top Negotiator
Sonny Hall, the president of New York City's 37,000-member Transport Workers Union, does not profess to know about the inner workings of major league baseball's labor-management relations.
But Hall is not at all surprised that as new negotiations approach, some very new twists are about to be introduced to some age-old baseball arguments.
Revenue sharing. Revenue participation. Salary cap.


Storm-Tossed: Tales of a Nor'easter; A Feeling of Helplessness
THE storm that ravaged large areas of the state last weekend left behind it a trail of loss, personal and financial.
For many residents, the experiences of those days of rain, snow and high tide will not soon be forgotten.
John Giacchi was supposed to be home in bed in Ridgefield Park, recovering from back surgery just two weeks earlier.
Instead, he had driven to the waterlogged N.J.
Transit Hoboken Terminal and was desperately buttonholing police officers and N.J.
Transit employees, trying to find his wife, Amy.


Holiday Glow:


Architects Sheltering In Government Projects
FACED with a sharply reduced market for private construction brought about by the downturn in the New York metropolitan region's economy, more and more architectural firms, including some of the biggest and most prestigious, are turning increasingly to government for work.
Firms that in the mid-80's would have been busy planning 50-story office buildings, gigantic shopping malls or high-rise city-center hotels are instead trying to underbid one another for courthouses and public schools or engaging in expensive, winner-take-all competitions for ferry terminals and Federal office buildings.
A decade ago many of these firms would have counted on government contracts for as little as 10 percent of their business; now, they say, the figure often reaches 50 percent or more.


What Has the World Done for Bosnia?; A Diary of Disgrace
February 1992 -- Serbian forces opened a cam
paign of aggression against the former region of Yugoslavia called Bosnia and Herzegovina.
In short order they launched a relentless bombardment of Sarajevo, the historic city that gave living proof that many faiths can coexist.
This assault was only the most visible part of the Serbs' barbaric campaign of ethnic cleansing against the Muslim Slavs -- 44 percent of Bosnia's 4.4 million people.
What did the world do?
April 7
-- The U.S. recognized Bosnia.
Five days later the United Nations disclosed plans to send 100 observers to Bosnia, and the Security Council discussed dispatching 10,000 peacekeeping troops.
None of the troops were sent.


A Shady Militia Chief Arouses Serbs
Chanting their hero's name and lifting their children to catch a glimpse, Serbs in this gritty mining town cheered tonight as Zeljko Raznatovic, a reputed Belgrade underworld figure running for Serbia's Parliament, extolled the virtues of family, the Orthodox Church and patriotism at a campaign rally.
"I promise you nothing," Mr.
Raznatovic said.
"I don't promise you new telephone lines. I don't promise you new highways. But I pledge to defend you with the same fanaticism that I've used so far in defending the Serbian people."


Map Mania
To the Editor: The splendid, informative and empathetic articles on cartography (Nov. 15) prompt two observations.


The Traditional Handsaw Still Proves Its Versatility
LOOKING at tool displays in stores and listening to sounds at construction sites can give an impression that ordinary handsaws have become relics.
But many carpenters still use them.
Of course, not all jobs are better suited for handsawing than power sawing.
But it is quicker and safer to use a handsaw, rather than set up a circular saw, to lop off the end of a single 2 X 4 or to trim a molding.
And there can be no doubt that the low-pitched noise of a handsaw is less disturbing than the high-pitched scream of a power saw.


New York Region Keeps Congressional Influence
The New York region's Congressional delegation, which lost four seats and nearly three centuries of seniority in the last election, did better than many had feared in the post-election scramble for committee assignments, relieved members and lobbyists now say.
Over all, the delegations from New York, New Jersey and Connecticut lost, through retirement or electoral defeat, the chairmanship of one committee, six subcommittee chairman, two ranking minority slots on full committees, six ranking minority slots on subcommittees and two acting subcommittee chairmen.


Nealia Abello And Raul Anonas
Elisa Cornelia Abello, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Emilio Abello Jr. of Rockville, Md., and Manila, was married yesterday to Raul Maria Anonas, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Roberto D. Anonas Sr. of Manila.
The Rev.
Rafael Cortina performed the ceremony at Mary the Queen Roman Catholic Church in San Juan, the Philippines.
Mrs.
Anonas is 30 years old and is known as Nealia.
She is a project manager at Manhattan Concepts, an advertising and promotions company in New York.
She and her husband graduated from the Ateneo de Manila University in Manila.
Her father is an internist at the Makati Medical Center in Manila and is the medical director of the Manila Electric Company there.
The bride's late grandfather Emilio Abello Sr. was a Philippine Ambassador to the United States.


Clinton, Taking Over the Books, Asks the Shareholders' Patience
BILL CLINTON'S extraordinary 19-hour nationally televised teach-in on economics was more than just a novel attempt by the President-elect to play professor to the nation.
It was in some ways the opening chapter in an effort by Mr.
Clinton to rewrite the rules for how the public should judge a Presidency.
Some might call it Bill Clinton's quest for an eight-year honeymoon.
Good luck.


U.S. PENSION AGENCY IS IN DEEP TROUBLE, ECONOMISTS WARN
A growing chorus of economists and Government officials is warning that the Federal program that insures corporate pension plans is in deep financial trouble and might eventually require a costly bailout.
Coverage of private plans is just one part of the Government's large pension problem.
Because of past inattention, the pension plans for Federal employees -- paid out of separate accounts -- are now underfinanced by more than $1 trillion.


Windsor Castle, Ruined by Fire, Plans Reopening
Some of the State Apartments at Windsor Castle that have been closed since the fire on Nov. 20 are expected to reopen in mid-January.
Initially visitors should be able to see 11 of the 16 rooms normally on view.
The others will remain closed for electrical rewiring that already had been scheduled to begin in late November and continue to the end of this year.
A spokesman for the castle said officials now hope the electrical work will be completed by Easter, when all but two fire-damaged rooms normally open to the public -- St.
George's Hall and the Grand Reception Room -- will be open.
Visitors will also be able to look into parts of the damaged area if engineers decide that they are safe, a spokesman for the castle said.
He added that few artifacts were lost in the blaze because many items had been removed for the rewiring.
Although a full inventory of damaged pieces has not been completed, it is known that only one painting -- a portrait of George III by Sir William Beechey -- was lost, from St.
George's Hall, along with an 1820's sideboard and some porcelain.
In the private chapel an organ was destroyed.


POSTINGS: Fred Trump Donates a Complex in Flatbush; Kidney Fund a Landlord
After thinking long and hard about taking on the role of a landlord, the National Kidney Foundation of New York and New Jersey has accepted the deed for a 30-year-old, 500-unit apartment complex in the Flatbush section of Brooklyn from its developer, Fred C. Trump.
The complex, Patio Gardens, is at 580-590 Flatbush Avenue, east of Prospect Park.
The foundation president, Dr.
Ira Greifer, said the annual income from rent was estimated at $3.9 million.
After operating expenses and real-estate taxes of approximately $2.9 million and income taxes of $400,000, he said, the foundation expected to realize about $600,000 a year.


It Was Wild, Outside and In
DURING last Friday's hurricane-like weather, many of the most fashionable people in New York were not worrying about the destruction of their beach houses.
Their main concern was how to get from Manhattan to Brooklyn at rush hour.
At 7 P.M., 1,900 people were expected at the Brooklyn Academy of Music for the American premiere of Mark Morris's ballet "The Hard Nut," the iconoclastic choreographer's quirky version of Tchaikovsky's "The Nutcracker." It had been touch and go all day, as Anna Wintour, the editor of Vogue, and Patrick McCarthy, the executive vice president of Fairchild Publications, chairmen of the evening, were deciding whether the show really
had
to go on.
After all, they'd arranged with the Transit Authority for a special subway train to take the guests from Brooklyn to Grand Central Terminal for the post-performance party in the newly restored waiting room.
But by midafternoon, the subway system was still out of kilter.


Moral Values Need To Be Taught Early
As a senior at Westlake High School in Thornwood and one who has attended the Westchester County public school system half her life, I read your front page article "Reading, Writing and Arithmetic and, Now, Right and Wrong"  [ Nov. 29 ]  with great interest.
As pessimistic as this may sound, I feel that teaching young people moral values is a waste of the school system's time unless this education begins once a child enters kindergarten, or even earlier.
By the time a child reaches middle school, any value, if any, that he or she has learned, is already embedded in his or her mind and seldom can moral values in these youths be changed.
Looking at my own school, I see that there is not a lot of moral value in my classmates or even in myself.
This is not to say that my school is in moral decay, but it is typical of most schools these days.
Almost everyone uses foul language; teachers are often laughed at and not taken seriously, and classroom courtesy is at an all-time low when one person is constantly interrupting another person or shooting them down with some sarcastic statement.
There are those students who are obedient, respectful to their peers and teachers, but they are at a significantly lower number than those who don't.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
The Cuddly
IT hasn't been the easiest of holiday seasons for Ian McDermott.
"I had to send the rottweiler back to Korea," he said.
"Misplaced eyes." When you are the stuffed- animal buyer for F. A. O. Schwarz, a cross-eyed rottweiler can spell disaster.


Dressing Up, Uptown
IF there's ever a movie version -- the costumes! the sets! -- it could be titled "Onward and Upward With Richard and Harold."
After putting on more than 70 major and minor shows at the Fashion Institute of Technology over the last decade, Richard Martin and Harold Koda are heading north, to the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
Mr.
Martin, 46, will become the curator of the museum's Costume Institute on New Year's Day; Mr.
Koda, 42, will be associate curator.


Scrooge Musters the Courage to Change
DICKENS'S "Christmas Carol" has been turned into everything from music to cartoons to an apparently endless variety of film and stage versions.
Yet this story of the miserly Ebenezer Scrooge, young Tiny Tim and a variety of Christmas apparitions has survived each rendition, good or bad, and has continued to be as popular as ever.
Staging "A Christmas Carol" is an annual tradition at Theater Three in Port Jefferson, where every year it strives to bring forth a fresh adaptation of the Dickens story that is true to the original and yet has enough originality to lure the same audiences to return each season.
So far, the stage versions that have failed to fill even a critic's heart with good will have been few.
And this year's adaptation by Jeffrey Sanzel is the best ever.


Hot Soup for Cold Weather
AS an antidote to cold weather, there is nothing like a bowl of hot soup.
At this time of year -- between rich holiday meals -- a substantial soup is the perfect main course for lunch or dinner, followed with a light salad.
Legumes like dried beans, peas and lentils make warming and filling dishes, which are especially good on cold days.
One of my favorites is black bean soup, flavored with rum and lemon and garnished with a dollop of sour cream and fresh coriander leaves.
Leftover slices of Christmas ham can be chopped and added.


No Headline
"I'm going to go so far from here there ain't no coming back. I'm putting my mother on my back and taking her with me. This place is sinful. There's a lot of good people here. Tax-dollar-paying people. We deserve better." R. M. JONES, resident of the Red Hook Houses in Brooklyn.  [ 37:3. ]


Crime
In Joe Gores's freewheeling crime caper 32 CADILLACS (Mysterious Press/Warner, $18.95), the King of the Gypsies, who lies near death in a Midwestern town named Stupidville, expresses a last wish: to be buried in a 1958 pink Cadillac Eldorado convertible.
Putting their wits to the task, the
creme de la creme
of the Gypsy underworld converge on every Cadillac dealer in the San Francisco Bay area to execute a brilliant fraud that nets them 31 mint Caddys in a single day.
But before the spoils can be used to secure the King's Caddy-coffin, the brave band of repo men (and woman) at Daniel Kearny Associates (D.K.A.) lands the job of getting those babies back.
And before we can fasten our seat belts, the chase is on.
"32 Cadillacs," the fourth adventure in Mr.
Gores's priceless D.K.A. series, is a fall-down-funny account of how the Gypsies and the repo men lock wits and bump fenders over that fleet of hot cars.
In a plot that never stops for gas, the wily con artists and the sneaky bounty hunters race to a screeching showdown at Stupidville, where the new King (or Queen) of the Gypsies will be crowned.
For originality, ingenuity and moxie, the inimitable Mr.
Gores takes the Caddy.


RECORD BRIEFS
Stradella: 'San Giovanni Battista'
Soloists; Les Musiciens du Louvre conducted by Marc Minkowski. Erato 2292-45739-2; CD.


Was Jimmy Hoffa a Hood? Or Was He Robin Hood?
"Someday you're going to scratch yourself on your typewriter and you'll die of blood poisoning." Jimmy Hoffa didn't smile as he spat those words at me 35 years ago.
They were the windup to a diatribe over an article of mine about his seamier side.
Given Hoffa's reputation for rubbing out people who bothered him, I could only respond, "Jimmy, please don't hasten the day."
Hoffa's record of accomplishment in expanding the International Brotherhood of Teamsters in the face of intense public hostility convinced many who liked him least that he was a man of destiny in American labor.
At his peak, Hoffa blithely thumbed his nose at his detractors in the White House, Congress and the A.F.L.-C.I.O.
"Hoffa don't need nobody," he used to boast.
"Hoffa can do this alone."


Juliette Binoche Plays a Riddle Without a Solution
After meeting Juliette Binoche as the mysterious Anna Barton in Louis Malle's new film, "Damage," it comes as a surprise to discover she can laugh.
As Anna, she is beautiful, chilly, distant, dominating scenes with Gallic aloofness.
In person, she laughs loudly and often.
She bites heartily at a pastry and dishevels her short black hair with her hands.
"I am fed up with playing 'dark-eyed' roles," she proclaims.
"I want to explode in a film."
But in "Damage," starring opposite Jeremy Irons, she needs all her regards noirs.
As an almost-silent object of erotic obsession, she gives away her body while her eyes -- her mind -- remain in charge.
And it can be no other way.
If Anna were warm, fun-loving, even lusty, she would lose her powers of control.
She might break a heart or two, but she would drive no man to self-destruction.
She would not be dangerous.


Commercial Property: Broker Conflict; A Question of Working for Both Tenant and Landlord
For decades, tenant representation has been a substantial part of the brokerage business.
In theory, it levels the playing field between savvy landlords and naive tenants.
In practice, it opens a Pandora's box of potential conflicts.
Traditionally, landlords pay both brokers, a potential conflict for most people brought up to believe they work for the person who pays them.
And both brokers' commissions are calculated as a percentage of rent, meaning both do better when rents are high.


Foreign Affairs; Clinton's Security Trio
What do we know about President-elect Clinton's national security team?
What do these choices tell us about Clinton policies and how they will be made?
The short answer is that the expected appointees -- Warren Christopher for Secretary of State, Les Aspin for Defense Secretary and Anthony Lake for National Security Adviser -- are highly experienced problem solvers.
Like almost all their predecessors when they took office, these three are untested at the highest levels.


Arnold L. Bachman, Radiologist, 80
Dr.
Arnold L. Bachman, a New York City radiologist for many years, died on Thursday at Mount Sinai Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 80 and lived in Manhattan.
He died of lymphoma, his family said.


DEC. 13-19: Clinton's Passport Files; From a Political Stunt To a Criminal Case
Until now the furor over the search through Bill Clinton's passport files had been merely an embarrassment for the Bush Administration over a pre-election effort to unearth damaging information.
Last week the stakes were raised with the appointment of an independent prosecutor, raising the prospect that senior officials who knew of or took part in the passport search might be accused of crimes.
Exactly who is under scrutiny remains uncertain, but James A. Baker 3d, the White House chief of staff and former Secretary of State, and two chief aides, Margaret Tutwiler and Janet Mullins, have hired criminal lawyers.


Jean Huang and Charlie Tercek
Jean Huang, a daughter of Dr.
Chester C. Huang of Buffalo, and Lily C. Huang of Maplewood, N.J., was married yesterday to Charlie Joseph Tercek, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Albin J. Tercek of Hudson, Ohio.
Msgr.
Guy Vinci performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Patrick's Old Cathedral in New York.
Ms.
Huang is 30 years old and is keeping her name.
She is the assistant to the president at Angelika Films Inc., a film distributor and exhibitor in New York.
She graduated from Harvard University.
Her father is a cancer research scientist at Roswell Park Memorial Hospital in Buffalo.


Corrections
A caption in the Evening Hours column in Styles of The Times last Sunday, with a picture taken at the "Expedition, Exploration and Discovery" benefit held on Dec. 8 at the American Museum of Natural History, misidentified a co-chairwoman of the event, who was pictured with Robin Duke and Norma Dana.
She is Constance Spahn, not Cathy Eckstein.


Food Labels or No, Let Shoppers Beware; Extend It to Fast Food
To the Editor:
I applaud the new food labeling rules (front page, Dec. 3), which will for the first time standardize nutritional information on virtually all packaged goods.


In Ridgefield, Four Friends Celebrate Their Private Lives
ERIC FISCHL, April Gornik, Bryan Hunt and Ralph Gibson -- two painters, a sculptor and a photographer -- have assembled their work at the Aldrich Museum in Ridgefield under the title "Four Friends."
But it is not a show about mutual influence or a common philosophy of art.
Rather it is an expression of social solidarity among artists in their prime enjoying roughly the same degree of fame.


IN SHORT: FICTION
THE COCKROACH BASKETBALL LEAGUE By Charles Rosen. Donald I. Fine, $21.


Blacks and Jews on the Relationship: What's Special, What's Myth?
Sixteen months after racial unrest in Crown Heights, black and Jewish New Yorkers are discussing what brings them together and what pulls them apart.
Recently, a group of 14 people -- seven black and seven Jewish -- sat down at The New York Times and asked themselves some hard questions.
Is there a natural alliance between blacks and Jews and is that relationship in jeopardy?
Is there anti-Semitism among blacks and racism among Jews, and what can be done to heal it?


An American Legacy
To the Editor:
Richard M. Clurman's article about Time Warner, "Pushing All the Hot Buttons"  [ Nov. 29 ] , failed to recognize the social importance of Ice-T, Madonna, Spike Lee and Oliver Stone, and the importance of Time Warner's backing of these artists, all of whom are continuing the world-renowned legacy -- and right -- of the American individual.


Lost Banquet
To the Editor: I had a very disappointing experience on my recent trip to Ireland.
In late May, we had reserved and paid for two tickets for the DunGuaire Castle banquet in Galway, Ireland, for July 29.
My wife and I drove an hour and a half from Doolin to the castle to make the 8:45 P.M. banquet that day but found it closed.
In a town nearby we were told that the castle had closed that week due to lack of bookings.


Storm-Tossed: Tales of a Nor'easter; A Sometime Ferry Survives the Storm
THE storm that ravaged large areas of the state last weekend left behind it a trail of loss, personal and financial.
For many residents, the experiences of those days of rain, snow and high tide will not soon be forgotten.
Once a ferryboat that plied the Hudson River between Hoboken and lower Manhattan, the Binghamton Restaurant on River Road in Edgewater seemed like a strong candidate to survive the storm.
And it did, though the wooden boardwalks that connected the floating restaurant to the shore became so much flotsam in the churning waters.


A Pianist for the Centuries
Only lately did the pianist Mieczyslaw Horszow ski, who turned 100 years old in June, stop performing.
As recently as last year he produced a new recording of works by Bach, Schumann and Chopin for Nonesuch.
But in March he canceled a recital at Carnegie Hall, where he had played on and off since his New York debut in 1906, the same year Alexander Scriabin and Josef Lhevinne made their American debuts at Carnegie -- the same year Shostakovich was born.
One can never tell about Mr.
Horszowski, but it seems unlikely that he will perform again in public.
On the occasion of his centenary, Pearl is issuing a number of unpublished live recordings he made between 1958 and 1983 (GEMM CDS 9979; two CD's).
The performances took place in Florence and Rome, in Buffalo and in the reverberatory Hayden Planetarium in New York; the sound quality, although generally high, inevitably varies.
Some of the recordings are mono.


Caroline Aiken, James Koster
Caroline Howard Aiken, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William J. Aiken of Anchorage, Ky., was married there yesterday to James Robert Koster, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
William P. Koster of Cincinnati.
The Rev.
Dr.
John Turner Ames performed the ceremony at the Anchorage Presbyterian Church.


The Lore and Lure of Christmas Greenery
WREATHS, ribbons, lights, trees, presents and greenery abound during this season of the year.
So do the many legends that surround Christmas.
Although much of the holiday is now rank with commercialism, the spirit of the season lives in many hearts and the traditions, customs and stories of old come alive.


Oustings by Israel Raise Arab Militants' Esteem
A taxicab driver heading into this strike-bound town today whipped out a sign carrying an Islamic slogan and displayed it prominently behind the windshield of his car.
The sign was intended to ward off stonings by youths enforcing a protest strike, and was a nod to the public mood here.
Israel's expulsion of more than 400 suspected Islamic militants, including some from Ramallah, appears to have increased the popularity of the Islamic Resistance Movement, known as Hamas.


Rediscovering the Majesty of Ethiopia
FOR nearly two decades Ethiopia was virtually sealed off from Western visitors.
A few hardy travelers penetrated the anti-Western bureaucracy to visit the southern region, a land of rare wildlife, lakes and tropical ice-capped mountains.
But the northern highlands, with their rich history of Christianity, remote rock churches and a culture untouched by the outside world, remained out of bounds.
A devastating civil war that gathered steam after the coming to power of the Communist regime in 1974 and ended in May 1991, presented a practical obstacle.
Beyond that, the hunger, poverty and repression rendered tourism an inappropriate idea.
Yet those Americans who have experienced Ethiopia -- humanitarian workers, diplomats, writers and even businessmen -- have often developed a lasting affinity with a people and culture that unlike the rest of Africa refused to succumb to European colonialism.
The curtain lifted on Ethiopia when the Marxist regime collapsed and war between the Government and rebels based in Tigre province came to an end.
Since then a small trickle of visitors, which the Ethiopians hope will grow in numbers, have ventured through what the Ethiopians call the historic route.
It embraces the extraordinary collection of medieval rock-hewn churches at Lalibela; Aksum, the northern city where King Azane was converted to Christianity in 335; Gondar, the imperial town of castles, and Lake Tana, the source of the Blue Nile.


A Traveling Mr. Fixit Reveals Trade Secrets
THE faucet drips, the toilet overflows, the lamp wire is frayed and there's a hole in the checkbook.
Sol Berkowitz knows just how you feel.
He is the county's certified Mr.
Fixit, its No. 1 do-it-yourself consultant.
Why pay a plumber or electrician, he asks, when he can teach you to do the job for nothing?
Mr.
Berkowitz conducts Handivan home-repair workshops for the Cornell Cooperative Extension of Westchester here.
The workshops are offered at no cost, courtesy of a Federal grant administered by the county's Division of Housing and Community Development.
The Handivan is Mr.
Berkowitz's portable worktable and overhead projector, which accompany him on his teaching jaunts around the county.


Bigger Presence for Green Point Savings
SWIMMING against the tide of bank closings, the Green Point Savings Bank, with headquarters in Flushing, Queens, recently opened four branch offices in Westchester and Rockland Counties.
The offices -- in Ossining and White Plains in Westchester and Pomona and Chestnut Hill in Rockland -- were acquired from the Crossland Federal Savings Bank and bring the number of Green Point's branches to 25.
"This is the largest expansion in our history," said Michael J. Gagliardi, chairman and chief executive officer, in a recent interview at the Tarrytown Hilton here.
"We usually build new branch offices from scratch, but the Crossland offices were in locations that suited our marketing plan." Negotiations for the acquisitions were begun last June.


Banking On Artists
To the Editor:
Time Warner should be praised for giving us the opportunity to see and hear works from outside the mainstream.
If someone doesn't like a work, don't buy it, don't see it, don't pay for it.
Yes, criticize Ice-T and Madonna for presenting works that may be reprehensible.
But don't condemn Time Warner with boycotts for its courage in presenting alternative ideas.
That is censorship.


Together Again


Corrections
Other corrections appear today in these sections: Arts and Leisure, page 4; Westchester Weekly, page 3; Travel, page 19; The Week in Review, page 6.


First Step: Get It Home
It's a familiar picture-postcard sight in New York City at this time of year: residents struggling with a Christmas tree or holiday greens they've just bought.
Like London, Paris and Rome, New York is a city in which walking is the primary way of getting around.
So, while people in the rest of the United States tie their trees to the roof of the family car, city dwellers haul the tree or oversize wreath by slinging it onto their shoulders.
And they can juggle a tree, grocery bags and a pair of cocker spaniels with good humor.
It's clear that this holiday tradition lives on, even among the most sophisticated, as New Yorkers venture out to buy the perfect tree on a snowy day.


Priceless Sound Of Trees Falling
WHEN the northeaster blew through the New York Botanical Garden in the Bronx last weekend, it felled more than a dozen priceless trees, one of them an 80-foot black oak more than 200 years old.
At Old Westbury Gardens on Long Island, three 90-year-old beech trees and an oak of the same age crashed to the ground.
And down in Freeport, on the south shore, Sig Feile, the longtime owner of Atlantic Nursery, watched railroad ties, garden benches and timbers from wooden decks floating down city streets flooded with four feet of sea water.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: December 20, 1992
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
4
ANGEL, by Johanna Lindsey. (Avon, $5.99.) A young woman enjoys a torrid romance while visiting a Texas ranch in the late 19th century.
2
2
THE WASTE LANDS, by Stephen King. (Signet, $6.99.) The third volume of "The Dark Tower," a series about time travel and a heroic quest.
3
8
A RIVER RUNS THROUGH IT, by Norman Maclean. (Pocket, $4.99.) Three tales of the outdoors in western Montana.
4 *
5
THE DOOMSDAY CONSPIRACY, by Sidney Sheldon. (Warner, $5.99.) An American probes a mysterious balloon accident in the Alps.
5
7
HIDEAWAY, by Dean Koontz. (Berkley, $5.99.) A man miraculously resuscitated after he has technically died is haunted by visions of evil.
6
47
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
7
36
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) Racial tensions surface during the trial of a man charged with murder in rural Mississippi.
8
7
A RIVER RUNS THROUGH IT, by Norman Maclean. (University of Chicago, $9.95.) Three tales of the outdoors in western Montana.
9
9
MIDNIGHT WHISPERS, by V. C. Andrews. (Pocket, $5.99.) The travails of Christie Longchamp, haunted by her relatives' passions.
10 *
13
A THOUSAND ACRES, by Jane Smiley. (Fawcett, $12.) The fortunes of a family that operates a large industrialized farm in the Midwest.
11
2
SUCH DEVOTED SISTERS, by Eileen Goudge. (Signet, $5.99.) The rivalry of two sisters -- one a successful businesswoman, the other a noted illustrator -- for the love of the same man.
12
3
DRACULA, by Bram Stoker. (Signet, $3.99.) The 1897 novel about the exploits of a vampire-count.
13 *
4
ALL THE WEYRS OF PERN, by Anne McCaffrey. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $5.99.) The 11th volume in the science fiction series "The Dragonriders of Pern."
14
1
RUSSKA, by Edward Rutherfurd. (Ivy, $5.99.) Eighteen centuries in the lives of four families of different cultures residing in a Russian village.
15
11
SCARLETT, by Alexandra Ripley. (Warner, $6.99.) The sequel to Margaret Mitchell's "Gone With the Wind."
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
2
4
DIANA: Her True Story, by Andrew Morton. (Pocket, $5.99.) An updated biography of the Princess of Wales.
3
476
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist. (LP)
4
7
MOLLY IVINS CAN'T SAY THAT, CAN SHE? by Molly Ivins. (Vintage, $11.) Essays about the recent political and cultural scene.
5
10
BACKLASH, by Susan Faludi. (Anchor/ Doubleday, $12.50.) A journalist contends that the media and political groups are staging a war against women's rights.
6
83
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak and how the sexes can understand each other better.
7
7
WHEN YOU LOOK LIKE YOUR PASSPORT PHOTO, IT'S TIME TO GO HOME, by Erma Bombeck. (Harper Paperbacks, $5.99.) The tribulations of travel suffered in all parts of the world.
8
1
MEMORIES, by Ralph Emery with Tom Carter. (Pocket, $5.50.) The autobiography of a country-music broadcaster.
9 *
69
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France, as described by a British writer.
10
8
SEX, ART, AND AMERICAN CULTURE, by Camille Paglia. (Vintage, $13.) Twenty-one essays on contemporary subjects, ranging from Madonna to Anita Hill to date rape.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
71
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
2
13
THE INDISPENSABLE CALVIN AND HOBBES, by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) A collection of previously published cartoons.
3
6
COWS OF OUR PLANET, by Gary Larson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $8.95.) A new collection of "Far Side" cartoons.
4
2
THE WORLD ALMANAC AND BOOK OF FACTS 1993. (World Almanac/Pharos, $7.95.) The latest edition of a standard reference work.
5
2
WHEN FOOD IS LOVE, by Geneen Roth. (Plume, $10.) The connection between compulsive eating and intimacy in personal relationships.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
December 20, 1992, Sunday The list of Paperback Best Sellers on page 24 of the Book Review today reverses the ranking of the two top fiction works.
"The Waste Lands" by Stephen King is the best seller; "An gel" by Johanna Lindsey ranks sec ond.


Deals and Discounts
ACROSS THE ATLANTIC Among the trans-Atlantic air fare bargains this winter are those on Singapore Airlines from New York to Brussels and Frankfurt and on Icelandair from New York to Luxembourg and seven other European destinations.
Singapore's "no hassle" fare is $298 round trip from New York to Brussels, $328 from New York to Frankfurt.
Both flights operate three times a week.
There is a penalty of $150 for no-shows and canceled tickets; there are no other restrictions.
Tickets must be purchased by March 31 and travel completed by April 7.
There is a holiday surcharge of $75 for eastbound travel through Dec. 23 and westbound travel from Jan. 2 to 8.
Call (800) 742-3333.
Icelandair's fares from Kennedy International Airport in New York start at $338 to Luxembourg, $358 to London or Glasgow, and $398 to Amsterdam, Copenhagen, Stockholm, Oslo and Gothenburg.
The fares are good for travel Dec. 25 to March 31.
All trans-Atlantic flights make a stop in Reykjavik, Iceland.
If two people are flying together to Luxembourg, the airline will add a free rental car for one week; for travelers to the other destinations, a $45 bonus voucher can be applied to car rental or accommodations at some hotels in Iceland, shopping or a future Icelandair ticket on any route.
Tickets must be purchased within three days of making a reservation, at least seven days before departure and no later than Dec. 31.
Minimum stay is five days in Luxembourg and seven days at the other destinations.
Call Icelandair at (800) 223-5500.


RAGE IN A TENURED POSITION
In Jong's comments on sexism, her allusion to Hillary Clinton as First Spouse probably is politically correct, but perhaps a little dated.
For the President-elect's savvy wife, how about First Mate? ALICE POWERS MCELHONE
New Canaan, Conn.


Map Mania
To the Editor: Whenever I travel to a place for the first time, the first thing I do is get is a good map or two to properly orient myself and also to check on what may be of interest in the immediate area.
A good map like the Ordnance Survey in Britain's adds a whole new dimension to a trip.


A Majority of One
IZZY
A Biography of I. F. Stone.
By Robert C. Cottrell.
Illustrated. 388 pp.
New Brunswick, N.J.: Rutgers University Press. $25.95.


Faldo's 65 Has Field Fighting for Second
With the kind of golf that breaks par as well as men, Nick Faldo made a clean break from a mostly gasping field today as he threatened to turn the $2.7 million Johnnie Walker World Championship into another exhibition of his gathering supremacy.
Faldo shot a nearly flawless 65, the single-round record in this two-year-old event, for a three-round total of four-under-par 206.
With only Sunday's final round to go, Faldo is five strokes up on Greg Norman, seven ahead of Tom Kite and eight better than Fred Couples.


Malissa Greif, Charles Hewitt Jr.
Malissa Ashley Greif, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Norman G. Greif of Lloyd Harbor, L.I., was married yesterday to Charles Fowler Lindsay Hewitt Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Hewitt Sr. of Cold Spring Harbor, L.I.
The Rev.
Carleton Lee performed the ceremony at St.
John's Episcopal Church in Cold Spring Harbor.
Mrs.
Hewitt, 22 years old, teaches science and remedial math at the School of the Holy Child in Old Westbury, L.I.
She graduated magna cum laude from Adelphi University.
Her father is the founder and president of Randy International, a freight-forwarding company in Jamaica, Queens.


Castle Rock Raises the Stakes
The sleek offices of Castle Rock Entertainment were humming on Monday morning.
"We have our '92 Cadillac," said Alan F. Horn, managing partner of the five-year-old film and production company, as he examined the big weekend box-office receipts of Castle Rock's newest film, "A Few Good Men."
Of course, it is up to moviegoers to determine whether the slick, expensive courtroom drama turns out to be a Cadillac or something more modest.
But Mr.
Horn and his four partners, including Rob Reiner, the film's director, seem assured that their $40 million gamble, starring Tom Cruise, Jack Nicholson and Demi Moore, will hardly be an Edsel.


Hot Soup for Cold Weather
AS an antidote to cold weather, there is nothing like a bowl of hot soup.
At this time of year -- between rich holiday meals -- a substantial soup is the perfect main course for lunch or dinner, followed with a light salad.
Legumes like dried beans, peas and lentils make warming and filling dishes, which are especially good on cold days.
One of my favorites is black bean soup, flavored with rum and lemon and garnished with a dollop of sour cream and fresh coriander leaves.
Leftover slices of Christmas ham can be chopped and added.


Recent Sales
Fair Lawn  $297,000
4-03 Fourth Street  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 30-year-old colonial; dining room, fireplace; taxes $5,119.
Livingston  $293,000
7 Rosedale Terrace  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 38-year-old split level; family room, 2-car garage, c/a, h/w floors; $4,791.
Maplewood  $235,000
75 Kendal Avenue  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 47-year-old colonial; 2-car garage, fireplace in living room, porch; taxes $5,756.
Short Hills  $260,000
53 Meadowbrook Road  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 37-year-old colonial; fireplace, 2-car garage, h/w floors, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $4,573.
South Orange  $184,000
365 Prospect Street  5-bedroom, 2-full bath, 2-half bath, 34-year-old colonial; family room, fireplace, 2-car garage; taxes $3,905.
West Orange  $185,000
18 Gregory Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 45-year-old Tudor; h/w floors, den, fireplace in living room; taxes $4,246.
OTHER AREAS East Norwich, L.I.  $210,000
30 Gilbert Court  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 33-year-old split level; dining room, eat-in kitchen, finished basement, 1-car attached garage; taxes $3,300.
Mount Kisco, N.Y.  $265,000
65 High Ridge Road  5-bedroom, 2 full- and 1 half-bath, 22-year-old colonial; family room, fireplace, laundry room, cul-de-sac; taxes $8,421.
Canton, Conn.  $277,000
14 Homestead Lane  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 5-year-old contemporary; passive solar heat, skylights, swimming pool, 2.3 acres; taxes $4,961.


The Plea
The editors of the New York Times Magazine decided it would be a fine seasonal gift to ask some of America's most accomplished writers of fiction and essays to compose short stories of reminiscences about Christmas.
The initiative was an unconventional one for this magazine, which traditionally has published nonfiction.
The startlingly contemporary reference points the writers choose - malls, a precinct station house, broken homes - also seemed unconventional at first.
But reflecting on these settings appear to sustain old tradition.
Christmas is a holiday that encourages us to celebrate out shared experience.


Principal's Death and the Fate of a Brooklyn Neighborhood


POSTINGS: Free Guide to Institutions; Arts in Long Island City
"Before I moved to New York from Minnesota," said Steven Klindt, acting executive director of the Queens Council on the Arts, "I thought that Long Island City was somewhere out in the middle of Long Island." Mr.
Klindt soon found out otherwise, he said, and then realized "that it's one of those wonders of New York that this area of Queens has such a thriving arts community."
To help promote that wonder, and to make it easier for arts explorers to find their way around the area just across the East River from Manhattan, Mr.
Klindt and the council have come up with the "Long Island City Art Loop" map, a guide to its arts institutions and restaurants.


The Middle-Manager Bean Counters Deserve No Pity
To the Editor:
"Executives the Economy Left Behind" (Nov. 22) commiserates with out-of-work upper-middle managers.
Don't cry for them, America.
Together with their bean-counting bosses they got the economy into its present state.
I suggest they forget about polishing their resumes and either go into business or learn a useful trade.


Can the Joffrey Ever Go Home Again?
Out of sight but not out of mind: The other day, a reader called to ask if the Joffrey Ballet, which has been on tour, would ever perform in New York City again.
The answer at this point is yes.
The company is scheduled to appear at the City Center from March 29 through April 11.
Nonetheless, these dates also remind us that the Joffrey has not been able to afford a repertory season in New York City for two years.
That is a long time for a troupe that has generally been ranked, along with the New York City Ballet and American Ballet Theater, as one of the three top ballet companies in the United States.


Voters Might See They Can Oust Incumbents
As a former candidate in the 7th State Senate District, I am writing in response to "Clinton's Coattails Prove Elusive on the Island"  [ Nov. 8 ] .
Contrary to Mr.
Mondello's assertion that the elections demonstrated that the local Republican Party was not on the brink of "demise," there were numerous other factors at work in Nassau County.
Aside from the fact that Republicans won in districts where they had a clear registration edge such as the 7th State Senate, the recent elections demonstrate the amazing power of an incumbent to retain his or her office.
Thus, of 61 State Senate seats up for grabs this year, no incumbents who ran lost to a nonincumbent challenger!
In fact, the rate of return of New York State legislators was then 98.9 percent, the highest in the nation and no state is even a close second, prompting Julian Palmer, executive director for Common Cause, to state, on Sept. 27 in The Times, that "since 1986 state legislators have been more likely to be indicted than to lose a general election."


Corrections
A caption in Styles of The Times last Sunday with a picture of a chalk drawing on the sidewalk outside the Metropolitan Museum of Art rendered the artist's name incorrectly.
He is Hani Shihada.


Food Labels or No, Let Shoppers Beware
To the Editor:
I share your relief in "At Last, Honest Food Labels" (editorial, Dec. 4) that the debate over food labels is over and that we can look forward to seeing more useful information on the products we buy.
These new labels will not relieve consumers of the responsibility to make wise decisions.
But they will provide us with information in a form more understandable, consistent and straightforward.


Sports of The Times; The Giants Will Rehire Parcells
EVEN with only one tired chorus of "Ray Must Go" yesterday, the Giants were that much closer to singing the tune their fans are humming: rehiring Bill Parcells as coach.
Although the Giants' co-owners, Wellington Mara and Bob Tisch, and General Manager George Young keep saying that Ray Handley will be "evaluated" after the season ends next Sunday in Philadelphia, the evidence for that evaluation is clear: a sour situation despite the mirage of yesterday's 35-21 victory over the Kansas City Chiefs for a 6-9 record.


MISSION TO SOMALIA: U.S. and Belgian Forces Land Unopposed in Southern Somali Port; Envoy Visits Port
Robert B. Oakley, President Bush's special envoy to Somalia, visited Kismayu today to explain the troop movements to local leaders.
In the second prong of a thrust to bring aid to southern Somalia, an advance team of 26 Navy Seals and Marine reconnaissance forces went ashore today from the Dupliex, a French destroyer, to scout landing positions in this equatorial town 240 miles south of Mogadishu.


Indonesia Earthquake Toll Put at 2,500


DEC. 13-19: Abduction Gone Awry; Mexican Doctor Is Cleared In Killing of U.S. Drug Agent
The abduction of a Mexican doctor by American-paid bounty hunters and his delivery to the United States two years ago severely strained relations with Mexico, but it illustrated the resolve of law enforcement officials north of the border.
To them, such an extreme measure was justified to bring to account those responsible for the death of Enrique Camarena Salazar, the undercover United States drug agent tortured and slain in Mexico in 1985.
Last week, it turned out that the authorities may have been more than extreme -- they were wrong, a Federal judge in Los Angeles said.
Calling the prosecution's case the "wildest speculation," Judge Edward Rafeedie threw out torture and murder charges against Dr.
Humberto Alvarez Machain.


Santa Is Gonna Knock You Out
Santa Claus just might wear these striped candy-cane boxers below the belt, under his red and white suit.
Even if you're not driving reindeer or sliding down chimneys, these shorts will do for lounging around the house or for sleeping off a big dinner.
The all-over pattern of red and white candy canes is printed over green and white stripes.
The 100-percent-cotton shorts have a covered elastic waistband and button front.
Made in Canada by Prodige, they come in small, medium, large and extra large.
The price is $15, at Under Wares.


Deck the Hall
THE ROOM THAT ONCE EXTENDED THE MAJESTY OF WELCOME IS NOW MERELY A place to park wet umbrellas.
What a pity for the foyer, the one and only space for a home to make a first and last impression.
The Victorians knew the full value of the foyer.
Their entry halls were very grand, designed to communicate the occupant's social standing.
Since then, the foyer has suffered something of a shrinkage problem.
However, even in the smallest space (like the New York City apartment above) a curved wall can define an entry; and ceiling-high doors can make it appear larger.
More important still is the foyer's ceremonial potential.
Where better to offer the season's first greeting?
Be it minimally, with a few chic lights draped on a chair; or appropriately festive, and cluttered, with vintage Santa Clauses.


Making Up (No Kissing)
Two weeks ago when Barry Diller acquired a stake in the QVC Network, a shop-at-home cable channel, he made sure to place a call to Joan Rivers, who sells her own lines of jewelry and clothing on QVC.
"I thought it was appropriate," said Mr.
Diller, who, as the chairman of Fox Inc., canceled Ms.
Rivers's late-night talk show in 1987, after only seven months.


Getting Food to the Somalis Takes Civil-Military Fusion
Mike McDonagh, the head of an Irish relief agency and a veteran of African famines, entered the port here a few days after the American troops arrived.
He carried a pistol and an AK-47 to deter looters from attacking the food trucks he planned to load.
A few hours later, he emerged from the docks, heading for the agency's warehouse with his 30 tons of grain in trucks accompanied by seven American vehicles with marines aboard.


Bonnie Sebring, Halsey Frost
Bonnie Lynn Sebring, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James R. Sebring Sr. of Sparks, Md., was married yesterday to Frederick Halsey Frost, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
A.
Corwin Frost of Bronxville, N.Y.
The Rev.
Anne Reed performed the ceremony at Immanuel Episcopal Church in Glencoe, Md.
Mrs.
Frost, 26 years old, is a receptionist at the Cat Hospital at Towson, in Baltimore.
She graduated from Towson State University.
Her father is an electrical engineer at Tracor Inc., a defense electronics manufacturer in Crystal City, Va.


In Kurdistan, No End in Sight for This U.S. Relief Effort
WITH the Somalia relief operation under way and crises like Bosnia confronting the United States and its allies, the Kurdish region of northern Iraq offers a reminder of how a seemingly brief humanitarian mission can turn into a long and sometimes thankless task.
These photographs, taken in northern Iraq last month by Kevin McKiernan, who spent a month in the area, illustrate the growing tensions complicating the relief effort there.
In March 1991, after the Persian Gulf war, the American-led allies set up a security zone in northern Iraq to protect the Kurds from President Saddam Hussein, who was crushing rebellions that followed the war.


From Mind's Eye To Abstract Print
DURING this holiday season, give yourself a gift.
Let your imagination roam the wild side, and shoot the pictures that exist only in your mind.
Follow Norman Rothschild's example.
This is Mr.
Rothschild's favorite time of year; he photographs tree lights, candles, shiny ornaments, icicles and giant man-made blinking snowflakes, creating his own daring abstract photographic images.


Julia Corbett Zitz, James T. Ubertalli
Julia Corbett Zitz, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jay T. Zitz of Mendham, N.J., was married yesterday to Capt.
James Thomas Ubertalli of the Army, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
James A. Ubertalli of Holyoke, Mass.
The Rev.
G.
David White performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Church of the Holy Spirit in Orleans, Mass.
Mrs.
Ubertalli, 24 years old, graduated from Duke University.
She was until recently a cancer research technician at Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston.
Her father is an executive vice president of Dun &amp; Bradstreet, the credit rating and financial information agency, in Murray Hill, N.J.


Hot Soup for Cold Weather
AS an antidote to cold weather, there is nothing like a bowl of hot soup.
At this time of year -- between rich holiday meals -- a substantial soup is the perfect main course for lunch or dinner, followed with a light salad.
Legumes like dried beans, peas and lentils make warming and filling dishes, which are especially good on cold days.
One of my favorites is black bean soup, flavored with rum and lemon and garnished with a dollop of sour cream and fresh coriander leaves.
Leftover slices of Christmas ham can be chopped and added.


U.N. Furor: Harassment Is Investigated
An American who is an employee of the United Nations has ignited a furor by doggedly pursuing sexual harassment accusations against a top U.N. official.
The charges, filed by Catherine Claxton, 45 years old, against Luis Maria Gomez, a 58-year-old Argentine, are the basis for the first sexual harassment case to make its way through the United Nations system of internal justice.
It is being watched closely in light of new guidelines by the organization to try to prevent harassment and resolve accusations.


Familiar Debate
To the Editor:
The article about Time Warner's standards for product acceptability conjures up the debate I engaged in for 30 years pursuing program guidelines for the ABC television network.
The task of defining corporate responsibility in terms of integrity, decency, taste and enlightenment is in constant conflict with the forces of free-marketplace competition and profit motivation.


Stepping Out


'Messiahs' Plus Lessons and Carols
FOR those still trying to squeeze in more holiday listening before Christmas, there are enticing opportunities today and tomorrow.
At 4 P.M. today, Richard Vogt conducts the Christmas section of Handel's "Messiah" at the First Congregational Church of Old Greenwich.
The performance will include a 200-voice community chorus, solo vocalists Brenda Harris, Christina Wilcox, Daniel Burgin and Arthur Woodley, and a chamber orchestra with Dorothy Happel as concertmaster.
There is no admission charge, but an offering will be received (637-1791).


Election Afterglow for Stock Funds
INVESTORS pleased with the Clinton election helped give stock funds their biggest gains so far this year.
Capital-appreciation funds gained five times as much in the month after the election than in the 10 months before.
Small-company stock funds enjoyed a big jump, perhaps because of investors' belief that such businesses perform more strongly when a Democrat occupies the White House.


Conversations/Mechai Viravaidya; Brash and Unabashed, Mr. Condom Takes on Sex and Death in Thailand
AS the best-known anti-AIDS crusader in a country that is being ravaged by the disease, Mechai Viravaidya understands that in explaining the dangers and exploding the myths about AIDS, showing can be much more effective than telling.
So instead of simply talking about the importance of using condoms, he went to last year's annual meeting of the World Bank, which was held in Bangkok, and began distributing them by the fistful to wide-eyed bankers and finance ministers.


Gallagher to Step Up to Desk And Sign the Contract Again
Having botched the play on their first attempt, the Mets and Dave Gallagher are going to have a do-over.
On a day when Ruben Sierra drew closer to a five-year deal with the Oakland Athletics and other free agents accepted or rejected salary-arbitration offers by the midnight deadline last night, Gallagher and the Mets rendered their agreement null and void.


Public Peeks Into Subway Of the Future
Radhika Kapoor got a glimpse of the subway's future yesterday, and she was sorry to learn that it does not yet work.
"It looks so much better," 11-year-old Radhika said yesterday as she looked at one of the sleek and shiny subway cars on display at the 34th Street station downstairs from Macy's.
"Why can't we ride it now?"


Gems of the Desert
"Walk in beauty," the Navajo blessing says, and SOUTHWESTERN INDIAN JEWELRY (Abbeville, $49.95) shows how generations of American Indian artists have achieved the balance, order and symmetry that phrase implies.
Since ancient times, Indians have fashioned jewelry and religious artifacts from turquoise and shells, which signify sky and water, growth and renewal.
With the introduction of silversmithing, modern tools and a greater variety of materials, Dexter Cirillo writes, younger artists are going far beyond traditional designs and are creating works of singular beauty and technical sophistication.
Ms.
Cirillo, an independent curator and dealer, discusses such influential earlier figures as Kenneth Begay, a silversmith known as the father of modern Navajo jewelry, and Charles Loloma, a Hopi who perfected the sculptural inlay technique.
Each tribe has a distinctive style and preferred material for jewelry, Ms.
Cirillo writes; for example, the Santo Domingo Pueblo people are known for their beadwork, the Zuni for their fine stone-cutting work.
Ms.
Cirillo also includes a collector's guide, glossary and tips on avoiding the purchase of fraudulent pieces.
Stephen Northup provides excellent photographs of the artists, but Michel Monteaux's shots of the jewelry are the true glories of the book.
With his skilled use of lighting and background, Mr.
Monteaux manages to bring metal, wood, stone and shell to life.


'Christmas Carol' With Elegant Scrooge
THE McCarter Theater's production of "A Christmas Carol," new last year, is not one of those revisionist versions, even though David Thompson's adaptation begins with a dutiful modern-day father reading the story of Scrooge to his blase son, who asks, "Who's Scrooge?"
It is then that the old skinflint materializes, right through the bedroom door, and the traditional tale is told -- no, performed, without the customary narrator and this time with the pace and momentum of a seamless musical.
Only this "Christmas Carol" is not a musical, which hardly matters because Scott Ellis, the director, proves that a show doesn't have to be a musical to behave like one.


At Long Beach, the Beach Simply Disappeared
THERE was no beach left at the beach.
Two days after the nor'easter battered Long Beach the surf was where it did not belong.
At high tide waves lapped tauntingly at the base of the concrete supports of the Boardwalk, supports, submerging land that would have usually extended 100 to 200 feet out to the water line.


Map Mania
To the Editor: Writing about the headaches caused for map makers by today's dizzying boundary changes ("Keeping the World Up to Date"), Roger Cohen notes that no name has yet been settled on for the Czech republic that will emerge when Czechoslovakia splits on Jan. 1.
One obvious solution would be for Czechia to take its place alongside Slovakia, Serbia, Croatia and all the rest.
The Czech version would presumably be Cesako (chesh-sko), borrowing a suffix from Slovensko (Slovakia).
On the other hand, since Cechy is the local name for Bohemia, it might be advisable to placate Moravia, the other Czech-speaking region, by coining a new double-barreled appellation, Bohemomoravia (Cechomorava).


Two Women Slain On Upper West Side
Two women, both in their 20s, were found dead in their Upper West Side apartment yesterday afternoon, apparently strangled by a robber, the police said.
A police spokesman, Sgt.
Anthony Barlanti, said the women were found at 3:15 P.M. in their fifth-floor apartment at 211 West 109th Street by the building's superintendent.
The women's names were not disclosed.


Pumpkintown Journal; A 'Santa' Where He's Sorely Needed
Fourteen years ago, Buddy Cox moved to this mountain community seeking the quiet, country living he knew as a child.
He was not prepared for all that he found.


INSIDE
Landing at Somali Port
American and Belgian troops went ashore unopposed in the southern Somali port of Kisimayu. 14 Views of Crown Heights
Are the racial wounds in Brooklyn too deep?
Fourteen people discuss a neighborhood's troubles.
Page 40.
Empire Rate Increase Seen
New York State's insurance chief said he expected to give Empire Blue Cross a big rate increase.
Page 37.


The Knicks Are Too Hot For the Heat
With a Knicks victory on the verge of slipping away last night, Rolando Blackman and Anthony Mason did what they do best.
Blackman made a crucial jump shot.
Mason made a key defensive play.
And New York escaped with a 91-87 victory over the Miami Heat at Madison Square Garden, extending the Knicks' longest winning streak of the season to five games.
Several personal milestones were reached.
Pat Riley earned his 600th coaching victory in the National Basketball Association, becoming the 12th coach to achieve that mark.
Patrick Ewing had a career-high 26 rebounds, the most rebounds grabbed by any player in the league this season.
And Blackman had a season-high 23 points.


Motive Behind Software Piracy: Frustration
To the Editor:
Regarding "As Piracy Grows, the Software Industry Counterattacks" (Nov. 8), although I agree that software piracy is a crime, I believe it has escalated to such high levels mainly due to frustration and disappointment on the part of the users.


DE KLERK CONCEDES MILITARY HAD ROLE IN TOWNSHIP STRIFE
In a virtual admission that members of the South African military had sought to establish a covert "third force" to thwart racial conciliation, President F. W. de Klerk announced today that he had dismissed or suspended 23 officers, including six generals, suspected of activities including political assassination.
Mr. de Klerk distanced himself from what he called "illegal and/or unauthorized activities and malpractices," saying at a news conference in Cape Town that "political office-bearers were not fully informed or, very often, were misled."


Jay Murphy, Professor and Labor Expert, 81
Jay W. Murphy, a noted labor arbitrator, law professor and civil rights advocate, died Wednesday in Rockwood, Tenn., where he was hearing a labor dispute.
He was 81 and lived in Tuscaloosa, Ala.
The cause of death was apparently a heart attack, his family said.


Growing Dancers
School of American Ballet party, Dec. 12.


Anne Cochran, William Hamilton
Anne Wolf Cochran, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James A. Cochran of Falls Church, Va., was married yesterday to William Charles Hamilton, the son of Mrs.
Joseph S. Iseman of Rye, N.Y., and the late William H. Hamilton.
Judge John P. Carey of the Westchester County Court officiated at the home of the bridegroom's mother and stepfather.
Ms.
Cochran, who is keeping her name, is a sales representative in Saddle Brook, N.J., for the Digital Equipment Corporation, the computer company.
She graduated cum laude from William Smith College.
Her father is the business manager of the School for Advanced International Studies at Johns Hopkins University in Washington.


Tea Parties That Restore a Sense of Childhood
DESPITE the grim December chill and slippery roads that lurked outside, the 20 guests of the Lange family were in seasonally festive spirits as they gathered for an early Christmas celebration.
As quickly as the women could shed their coats, they eagerly dashed to a cozy dressing room, where they just as quickly shed any pretense of formality for frivolous play.
Friends helped each other make flattering selections from an array of elaborately decorated hats, dainty gloves, lacy fans and other accessories.
Once attired in their finery, the women went back to the dining room, complete with evergreen garlands and wooden nutcrackers on the mantelpiece, to decorate a table-top Christmas tree for an ill friend.


When Parents Refuse to Support Their Children
AFTER Pamela Groben and her husband were divorced more than three years ago, a judge ordered him to pay $200 a week in child support for their two sons, now 11 and 12.
She and her children, who live in Oakville, have not seen him since.
Nor have they seen any child support payments.
Ms.
Groben said that her former husband was in Florida and that he owed them $34,000.


Festival at Grace Church Is a Very British Affair
THIS is the first day of Hanukkah, the Jewish Festival of Lights, and the Rosenthal Y.M.-Y.M.H.A. in Pleasantville is celebrating with a community sing of excerpts from "Judas Maccabaeus," Handel's oratorio about the ancient hero whose exploits gave rise to the holiday.
Adults and teen-agers are invited to participate in the 4 P.M. program with Cantor Joshua Konigsberg taking the primary solo parts and Harold Rosenbaum conducting the audience.
"All that is required is a love of music and the desire to participate in the singing of a great choral masterpiece," Mr.
Rosenbaum said.
"You will find a friendly, informal atmosphere, and no singing experience is necessary." The number to call for more information is 741-0333.
The Westfair Chamber Singers are offering "Christmas by Candlelight" at Memorial United Methodist Church in White Plains at 2:30 P.M. today.


Unfamiliar Territory Fazes Even the Best
EVEN world-class competitors can be made to play second-class chess if they can be maneuvered into unfamiliar territory.
The Indian grandmaster Viswanathan Anand suffered such as fate at the hands of the world champion, Gary Kasparov of Russia, in the first game of his final series in the Trophee Immopar Quickplay Knockout Tournament in Paris in early November.
Anand aimed for his favorite Slav Defense, but Kasparov manipulated him into an Orthodox Defense, where he quickly went astray.


'The American Way of Birth'
To the Editor:
Edward Shorter's review of "The American Way of Birth," by Jessica Mitford (Nov. 8), prompts me to defend the record of 21 years of work at the Farm Midwifery Center as something more than the label Mr.
Shorter gives it: a "hippy-dippy experiment in alternative births."


PATH Takes Lesson From Storm's Close Calls
In the end, the flooding of the PATH tunnels under the Hudson River in the Dec. 11 storm produced nothing worse than a few close calls and an awful mess.
But if the 7 A.M. train from the World Trade Center had been a few hundred yards farther back in the Hoboken approach tunnel when water flooded the power supply, or if passengers had been waiting where a flooded elevator shaft suddenly disgorged a torrent onto the platform at Exchange Place, the Port Authority might be dealing today with the aftermath of a catastrophe.


People
*
Kirk T. Stewart, president and chief executive at Manning, Selvage &amp; Lee Inc., New York, was named chairman, succeeding Edward M. Stanton, who will retire.
Mr.
Stewart will retain the position of chief executive, and a successor as president will be announced next month. *
Victoria Lasdon was named advertising director at Vanity Fair magazine, New York, succeeding Frances Orner, who is leaving.
Ms.
Lasdon previously held the same position at Self magazine, New York.
Also, Annie Williams, beauty director at Vanity Fair, New York, was promoted to advertising manager, succeeding Stephen H. Westerberg, who left to become branch advertising manager at Bride's magazine, New York.


CHRONICLE
JOSEPH CICIPPIO , who spent almost five years as a hostage in Lebanon, said that after a year of freedom he is out of money and out of a job.
Mr.
Cicippio, 62, who was the financial officer for the American University of Beirut when he was abducted by Shiite Muslims on Sept. 12, 1986, said his contract with the school has not been renewed.
After his release last December, the school gave him severance pay but no job.
"They have totally cut me loose," The Associated Press quoted him as saying.


Johns Hopkins Receives $50 Million Endowment
A Baltimore philanthropist has given $50 million to the Johns Hopkins University School of Arts and Sciences, the largest monetary gift in the university's history and one of the largest in American higher education.
The benefactor, Zanvyl Krieger, a 1928 alumnus of the university in his hometown of Baltimore, said in an interview on Friday that he chose to give the gift to the arts and sciences school because that was an area that philanthropists had neglected in recent years.


Omaha Collects Toy Guns in Amnesty Drive


Marines and Somali Troops Meet Warily but Peacefully
Two dozen gunmen and six jeeps mounted with heavy machine guns and rocket launchers greeted Capt.
Brian Beaudreault and his two dozen marines this morning when they entered the walled, whitewashed compound of Col.
Omar Jess, the Somali strongman here.
Captain Beaudreault turned to one of his officers and said, "If these vehicles leave the compound and engage Marine positions, they will be destroyed."


Jay Murphy, Professor And Labor Expert, 81
Jay W. Murphy, a noted labor arbitrator, law professor and civil rights advocate, died Wednesday in Rockwood, Tenn., where he was hearing a labor dispute.
He was 81 and lived in Tuscaloosa, Ala.
The cause of death was apparently a heart attack, his family said.


Waiting for Lefty
To the Editor:
Re "In Searching for Scholarship Funds, the Advice Is: 'Do It Yourself' " (Education page, Dec. 2):


Host of Bowe's First Defense? It's the Garden by a Decision
Madison Square Garden has apparently prevailed over Atlantic City in the contest to stage Riddick Bowe's first defense of his heavyweight boxing championship.
Garden officials yesterday said they would hold a news conference tomorrow to announce details of the Brooklyn native's bout against Michael Dokes on Feb. 6.
A spokesman for the Garden would not confirm nor deny that the deal was done, but it was obvious that the Garden had won out in the bidding for the first fight in Bowe's six-bout, potential $100 million deal with Home Box Office.


Theater in Review
'The Idiot'  Bouwerie Lane 330 Bowery, at Second Avenue Lower East Side Through Feb. 12 By Fyodor Dostoyevsky; adaptation by David Fishelson; directed by Mr.
Fishelson; set by Robert Joel Schwartz; costumes by Susan Soetaert; lighting by Brian Aldous; sound and music by Ellen Mandel; production manager, Patrick Heydenburg; scenic artist, John Brown.
Presented by Jean Cocteau Repertory, Robert Hupp, artistic director; Mr.
Fishelson, associate artistic director; Scott Shattuck, managing director.
WITH: Harris Berlinsky, Christopher Black, Steve Chizmadia, Pat Kier Edwards, Robert English, John Lenartz, Joseph Menino, Moses Robinson, Craig Smith, Elise Stone, Angela Vitale, Monique Vukovic, Mark Waterman, Adrienne Williams and Kathleen Wilson.


Auctions Set by Treasury
Treasury financings set for this holiday-shortened week include bills and notes, beginning with today's regular auction of three- and six-month bills.
The Government will sell two-year notes tomorrow and five-year notes Wednesday; both continue to be sold through a Dutch auction system the Government began testing in September.


MISSION TO SOMALIA


Bills Surprise Saints With 2 Defenders Out
Bills 20, Saints 16
NEW ORLEANS, Dec. 20 (AP) -- The Buffalo Bills moved closer today to winning the home-field advantage for the American Football Conference playoffs, and they did so without some of their best defenders.
With defensive stars Bruce Smith and Cornelius Bennett injured, the Bills still managed to beat the New Orleans Saints, 20-16.
The Bills (11-4), trying to reach the Super Bowl for the third straight year, now need a victory at Houston next Sunday to guarantee that the A.F.C.'s road to the Super Bowl goes through Buffalo.


Essay;   How Clinton Is Doing
When Ed Koch was Mayor of New York, he would plunge into the subways to ask riders "How'm I doin'?" (His Beijing look-alike, Zhu Rongji, is doin' fine.)
How does Bill Clinton after two-thirds of the interregnum?
My criteria are his Cabinet choices, his economic outreach and last week's news conference.


The Neediest Helps Woman Rear 2 Grandchildren
When Alice Jones raised her two sons in the 1950's, she worried about their manners and appetites and schoolwork.
Now, at 73 years old, she is once again bringing up two boys, only this time, she worries about drugs and guns and Harlem streets that seem to consume teen-agers as if they were so much fodder.
Mrs.
Jones gained custody of her son's children after their mother committed suicide in 1989 and their father could not cope with the responsibilities.
Since the family unraveled, the boys, Guy, 13, and Raheem, 11, have often been depressed and withdrawn.


William Watson, Eccentric Host Of Classical Music, Is Dead at 77
William E. Watson, whose eccentric style as the host of a classical music program on WNCN radio drew a devoted audience in the 1960's, died Oct. 27 at a nursing home in Hawthorne, N.Y.
He was 77 and lived in Moonachie, N.J.
Relatives said that Mr.
Watson, whose death came to the attention of The New York Times only last week, died of brain cancer.


Carlesimo Trashes Pirates' Runaway
The trash-talking that took place during and after Seton Hall's sloppy 81-61 victory over Fairleigh Dickinson at the Byrne Meadowlands Arena this afternoon did not come from the players on either side.
Instead, it was P. J. Carlesimo, the coach of the Pirates, who did all the verbalizing.
He watched his team struggle at times against an inferior opponent and later called his team "the biggest fraud top-10 team in the country."


Loans Lay Behind Murder in Mexico
To the Editor:
"Blood and Ink in Mexico" (Op-Ed, Nov. 28) by Zachary Margulis, about the murder of a publisher from southeastern Mexico and of his own experience in a conflict with his editors at the The Mexico City News, are important to the perception readers may form about civil liberties, and freedom of expression, in Mexico.


Patents; Preserving Tissue in Deep Freeze
THE science of preserving human body parts in deep freeze took a modest step forward last week, when a small Georgia company patented a method for preparing tissue so that it has a better chance of surviving after being thawed.
The method of storing body parts for later use at about 200 degrees below zero Centigrade already constitutes a small business.
The technology is nowhere near advanced enough to preserve entire organs, much less to bring about the more lurid science-fiction schemes of storing terminally ill people until cures for their diseases are developed.


Dance in Review
'Manhattan Moves'  American Place Theater 111 West 46th Street Manhattan Through Jan. 24
"Manhattan Moves" is in perpetual motion.
Each episode in this all-dance revue about life in New York from dawn to dusk is a pretext for displays of pop and jazz dance, with some ballet thrown in as well.
The ballet dancing is good, the jazz dancing even better.
Yet, much of the time, the show is frivolous without being fun.


Books of The Times; How to Capitalize on the Politics of the Canon
Beyond the Culture Wars How Teaching the Conflicts Can Revitalize American Education  By Gerald Graff  214 pages.
W.
W.
Norton &amp; Company.
As the battle of the books rages on, and conservatives and innovators threaten to pound each other into a paper pulp, Gerald Graff, a professor of English and education at the University of Chicago, proposes an intriguing solution in his new book, "Beyond the Culture Wars: How Teaching the Conflicts Can Revitalize American Education."


Dance in Review
'The Christmas Revels' Symphony Space
Symphony Space must have been the merriest place in New York on Thursday night, for that was where the 14th annual "Christmas Revels" took place.
This entertainment, inspired by traditional English holiday customs, was as warm-hearted a tribute to peace, love and joy as one could hope to find.


Market Place; Benefits for Steel From Clinton Plan
WHILE many steel company executives have voiced doubts that they will soon be materially affected by the Clinton Administration's plans to increase spending to refurbish the nation's roads and bridges, investors apparently see things differently.
With the President-elect advocating spending at least $20 billion for each of the four years of his Administration on such projects, many on Wall Street say several steelmakers are bound to benefit.
But which?
The large, integrated steel companies, whose products are directed largely at the auto and appliance industries, seem less likely to benefit than several smaller mini-mill companies.
For one thing, mini-mill companies generally have the advantage of producing only a few products, compared with the integrated mills' supermarket approach.
For another, the mini-mills produce steel with lower-cost operations, using melted scrap, in less-populated areas, often with a lower-paid, nonunion work force.


Lebanese Are Forcing Deportees Back to Israeli Zone; Leftists Want Direct Talks
Left-wing coalition partners of Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin told him today that Israel had little alternative but to begin direct peace talks with the Palestine Liberation Organization, but Mr.
Rabin repeated his opposition to such contacts.
The disagreement over the P.L.O. is a symptom of the disarray that has started to beset the center-left coalition since its decision last week to deport 415 suspected Palestinian militants.


Some Voices Missing At Clinton's Conference
After nearly 20 hours of talk in Little Rock, Ark., last week about the economy, the intriguing question is, "What wasn't said?"
Plenty, if you ask some economists who did not attend President-elect Bill Clinton's economic conference.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  LEBANON RETURNS DEPORTEES
The Lebanese government announced that its army was returning the more than 400 Palestinians deported by Israel, pushing them back into Israel's self-styled security zone in southern Lebanon.
A1  IRAN'S HAND SEEN
Government leaders in the Mideast are gathering evidence that they say points to a widespread Iranian influence and money among militant Islamic fundamentalist groups in several countries in the region.
A10


Cuomo Asks Panel to Consider Privatizing Horse Racing in State
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo plans to instruct his study group on horse racing to focus on whether the New York State Racing Association and Offtrack Betting Corporations throughout the state could be transferred to private ownership, state officials said yesterday.
Mr.
Cuomo created the panel, the Commission on Racing in the 21st Century, in an attempt to recast the structure of racing in the state.
He has made a target of the nonprofit racing association, saying among other things that its management is overpaid.
The $261,000-a-year salary of its top official is twice the Governor's.


Classical Music in Review
Mendelssohn String Quartet Merkin Concert Hall
Concert halls are experimenting with new ways to attract audiences, and one currently fashionable approach is to begin the concerts early, shorten the programs by about half an hour, dispense with the intermissions and offer wine and cheese either before or after the performance.
A listener on the run can pop into the hall after work, catch a couple of certified masterpieces and high-tail it home in time to catch most of the prime-time lineup.


The Art of Black Printmakers: Making Life Real
In the 1940's, a young artist, Samella Sanders Lewis, traveled to the Bayou Teche region of Louisiana to document the life of black sugar workers.
"These were people trapped in a system that wasn't even a sharecropper system: it was beneath that," said Ms.
Lewis, now 68 years old and living in Los Angeles.
"I needed a voice and they needed a voice," she continued.
"I had things I needed to say about the social situation at that time. There was a hurt inside of me that I could not get rid of unless I understood it a little better."


Men Sought in Shooting of Principal Surrender in Brooklyn Church


About-Face By de Klerk
It has long been the accepted wisdom among many South African whites that an endemic "black-on-black" violence in the nation's townships reinforced the notion that blacks are unsuited for self-government and capable of expressing political dissent only through intimidation and force.
Yet now, in announcing a decision to dismiss or suspend 23 military officers accused of using assassination and other means to resist black power, President F. W. de Klerk has tacitly acknowledged that, particularly in the most hallowed of supposedly apolitical white institutions, officers pursuing their own political agendas had also resorted to murder to follow their vision of apartheid.


QUESTION BOX
Retiring 20-Game Winners
Q.
Bothered by a worsening arthritic left elbow condition, Sandy Koufax retired after the 1966 season, a year he went 27-9 for the Los Angeles Dodgers.
Is this the biggest victory total a pitcher has posted in his final year in the major leagues?
Has anyone else retired after a
20-victory season?
A.
As usual, Koufax is in a class of his own, this time as the only 20-game winner to decide to call it quits before the next season.
Two other pitchers -- Ed Cicotte and Lefty Williams, both of the Chicago White Sox -- also won 20 games in their final season in the majors, which was 1920 in both cases.
But both had quits called for them by Judge Kenesaw Mountain Landis, baseball's first commissioner.
Near the close of the 1920 season, Cicotte, Williams and six other White Sox players from the previous season were deemed by Landis to have had a role in fixing the 1919 World Series.
All eight were ejected for life.


The Play's the Thing, and It Does Jets In
The shame of it is that the New York Jets knew what was coming, defensive end Marvin Washington lamented.
Just as bad, he insisted, the officials knew that the Miami Dolphins were about to run an illegal play.
It was fourth down for the Dolphins at their 45-yard line with only 2 minutes 39 seconds left and the Jets on top, 17-10.


Job Growth in Region's Suburbs Outpaces Cities'
The dizzying boom of the 1980's dramatically and permanently shifted the economic geography of the New York region as the cities yielded to the outer suburbs their role as employment hubs, according to a new study by Rutgers economists and figures provided by state labor departments.
Not only have the suburbs outgrown the cities in absolute terms, they have also in most cases weathered the recession better.


Review/Opera; Passion, Crime and Retribution In a Not-So-Bucolic Village
The real name of Janacek's opera "Jenufa," which received its first performance of the season on Saturday night at the Metropolitan Opera, is "Her Stepdaughter." It is not a title likely to stir an audience's passions, but it properly shifts the emphasis from the young girl Jenufa to the imposing figure of Kostelnicka and to the troubled relations between the two characters.
At this particular performance, the original title seemed even more appropriate, for with the Czechoslovak soprano Gabriela Benackova singing Jenufa and Leonie Rysanek creating the role of her stepmother, the second act became a masterfully executed chamber opera, a psychological portrait of suffering and determination.
The daughter, disappointed in love, bears an illegitimate child; the stepmother, disappointed in life, thinks she is protecting the girl by killing the newborn baby.
The two singers had sung these roles together before in a New York concert performance in 1988 and had also appeared in the opposing female roles of "Katya Kabanova" in striking performances at the Met in 1991.
So they seemed closely attuned to each other's vastly different styles and characters.


RESULTS PLUS
SKIING  German Wins Super-G  Katja Seizinger of Germany beat the elements as well as the field yesterday, narrowly defeating Tatyana Lebedeva of Russia in a World Cup super-G race yesterday at Lake Louise, Alberta.
The race, held on an Olympic downhill course, was run under overcast skies with falling snow making visibility difficult.
Seizinger, second in Saturday's downhill race, had a time of 1 minute 10.93 seconds.
Lebedeva, one of six skiers sent down the course at the outset to prepare it for the better racers, was just eight-hundredths of a second behind.
Regina Haeusl of Germany, clocked in 1:11.20, finished third.
Seizinger, who wears a brace on her knee because of an injury six weeks ago training in Austria, finished 10th in last week's opening World Cup super-G at Vail, Colo.
Seizinger leads the World Cup super-G points standings, is tied for the downhill lead with teammate Katharina Gutensohn and is third in the overall standings. (AP) No. 2 Victory for Girardelli: Marc Girardelli of Luxembourg, a four-time World Cup champion, overcame a strong effort yesterday by Scandinavian skiers for his second giant-slalom victory this season.
The 29-year-old Austrian-born skier clocked a winning aggregate time of 1:57.48 in two runs down the icy Podkoren course in Kranjska Gora, Slovenia.
It was the 38th career victory for Girardelli, shooting for an unprecedented fifth overall title in his 12th season on the circuit. (AP)  HORSE RACING  Over the Brink Wins  Taking command in midstretch, Over the Brink scored a one-length victory over Classi Envoy in the $100,000 added Bertram F. Bongard Stakes for New York-breds yesterday at Aqueduct.
Rush Chairman Bill, the 1-5 favorite, was another two lengths back in third.
Ridden by Aaron Gryder, Over the Brink was timed in 1:45.2 for a mile and a sixteenth and earned $71,880 for owner Alfred G. Vanderbilt. (AP)


CHRONICLE
With controversy swirling about Aspen, Colo., like so many snowflakes, some people are looking beyond the holidays, wondering what will happen to Gay Ski Week, an annual event at the resort for about 18 years.
Will the boycott, advocated by some celebrities as retribution for Colorado's ban on laws barring discrimination against homosexuals, adversely affect the very people at the heart of the controversy?
Yes and no, said TERRY WHITE , chairman of the Aspen Gay and Lesbian Community, the host organization for Aspen's Gay Ski Week, scheduled this year for Jan. 23 through Jan. 29.


Future Isn't Decided for Packers
Packers 28, Rams 13
GREEN BAY, Wis., Dec. 20 (AP) -- What more can the Green Bay Packers do?
They have won six straight games, and they are still not in the playoffs.
After beating the cold and the Los Angeles Rams, 28-13, today, they will need another victory and help next week to qualify as a wild card.


Science Has Nothing to Add to Roe v. Wade; Any Real Issues?
To the Editor:
Harold J. Morowitz and James S. Trefil (Op-Ed, Nov. 25) may be obscuring the real issues when they say that a human egg that has been tampered with (to allow birth without conception) might be compared, in the abortion debate, with a human egg that is left undisturbed.


It Takes Oilers 3 Minutes To Turn It All Around
Oilers 17, Browns 14  CLEVELAND, Dec. 20 (AP) -- Once they had proved to themselves they could score, the Houston Oilers had no doubt they could do it again -- no matter how late it was.
"After we got the first one, the guys really started believing," Cody Carlson said today after he threw two touchdowns in the final three minutes to beat the Cleveland Browns, 17-14.


Abroad at Home;   How Terror Wins
The Palestinian Islamic movement Hamas had clear political objectives when its terrorists murdered four Israeli soldiers and a border policeman in recent days.
It aimed to disrupt the Middle East peace negotiations and to enhance its own standing among Palestinians in the occupied territories.
Hamas has achieved those objectives.
That is the bitter truth that has to be faced after the Israeli Government's decision to deport nearly 400 suspected Hamas members.
The politics of extremism has won a significant victory.


The 'Franc Fort' Comes Under Siege
French Socialists took power 11 years ago, announcing sweeping nationalizations of industry and an economic program that put jobs first.
But their revolution has been of a different kind.
The promised policies were quickly discarded and President Francois Mitterrand adopted, instead, a plan to eliminate inflation and create a franc strong enough to be the equal of the German mark.
He has largely succeeded.
The "franc fort," as President Mitterrand's monetary baby is known, has come into being in the last five years, buttressed by balanced budgets, newly competitive industry and an inflation rate that, at 2.1 percent last month, is 1.5 percentage points below Germany's rate.
Now, however, this unlikely achievement of French Socialism is threatened.


Actions of Off-Duty Officer in Shooting Are Defended
An off-duty transit police officer who shot and killed a man outside a Queens nightspot early Saturday fired his weapon in self-defense after the man, who was wielding a broken bottle, charged at the officer, the president of the transit officers' union said yesterday.
The union official, Ron Reale, who said that he had spoken with the officer, gave an account that differed sharply from the one given on Saturday by a transit police spokesman.
The spokesman, Albert W. O'Leary, said that investigators believed the victim, Victor Vays, was not involved in the episode.


No Headline
"The international community cannot let 500,000 people be wiped out while peace groups sit around and discuss it." ANNE MCCARTHY of Pax Christi, a Roman Catholic antiwar group.  [ A13:1. ]


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Television; NBC Is Pressed to Retain Letterman
Most of those involved agree: it is one of the highest-stakes games of television poker ever played.
And nobody yet knows who's bluffing.
The name of the game: $16 million David Letterman stud.
Two weeks ago, when CBS pushed that huge pile of chips on the table, in the form of an offer to NBC's longtime late-night star, NBC seemed certain to fold its hand quietly and conserve its money to fight another day.
But the pressure on NBC to stay in the game and keep Mr.
Letterman, no matter what the cost, seems to be increasing every day.


While Ideological Battles Rage, Our Schools Keep Crumbling
To the Editor:
I must take issue with "Chancellor Fernandez Stands Tall" (editorial, Dec. 3), which praises Joseph A. Fernandez, New York City's Schools Chancellor, on his Children of the Rainbow curriculum.
For more than a year, Mr.
Fernandez, the Board of Education and a number of local school districts have focused in an adversarial manner on issues like condoms and homosexual rights, while ignoring long-standing problems that affect the vast majority of students daily.


PRO FOOTBALL: Sports of The Times; The N.F.C. East Lives . . . Elsewhere


Theater in Review
'Wilder, Wilder, Wilder' 'Three by Thornton'  Harold Clurman Theater 412 West 42d Street Clinton Through next Monday Three short plays by Thornton Wilder: "The Long Christmas Dinner," "The Happy Journey to Trenton and Camden" and "Pullman Car Hiawatha." Directed by Edward Berkeley; set by Miguel Lopez-Castillo; costumes by Fiona Davis and Dede Pochos; lighting by Steven Rust.
Presented by the Willow Cabin Theater Company, Mr.
Berkeley, artistic director; Adam Oliensis and Maria Radman, managing directors.
WITH: Cynthia Besteman, Sarah Braun, Sabrina Boudot, Fiona Davis, David Folwell, Ken Forman, Laurence Gleason, Joel Goldes, David Goldman, Deborah Greene, Bjarne Hecht, Patrick Huey, Jon Kellam, Peter Killy, Rebecca Killy, Tasha Lawrence, Charmaine Lord, Tim McNamara, Jerry Mettner, Stephen Mora, Angela Nevard, Adam Oliensis, Dede Pochos, Linda Powell, Maria Radman, Michael Rispoli, Jayson Veduccio and Craig Zakarian.


Accompong Journal; British Repulsed, but Tourists Are Another Story
At the approach of outsiders, the gates of this farming village tucked amid the dense greenery of the Cockpit Mountains are swung open by a teen-ager who wears a Malcolm X T-shirt and matching cap.
Just inside the entrance, a mural on a whitewashed wall bears the likeness of Marcus Garvey, this country's own black nationalist hero.
The symbols are fitting.
For over three centuries, as this island has gone from Spanish supply base to English sugar plantation to international tourist playground, the Maroons of Accompong, fiercely independent descendants of runaway slaves, have resisted every incursion into their knockabout stronghold of steep hillocks, sinkholes and uncharted caves.


Cuban Pilot Who Defected Flies Back for Family
A former Cuban Air Force pilot who defected to the United States almost two years ago in his MIG jet flew back to Cuba on Saturday night, landing a small plane in traffic along a coastal highway and quickly picking up his wife and two sons from the roadside before turning back to Florida.
In an interview yesterday, the pilot, Orestes Lorenzo Perez, said he flew low over the roof of a car and landed the aging Cessna in the path of an oncoming truck.
The truck driver hit his brakes and managed to stop just 10 yards from his propeller blades.
Mr.
Lorenzo said he then turned his plane around, picked up his family and took off again for Florida in the rosy twilight of the Cuban sunset.


More Than One Week After the Storm, the Damage Tally
Damage figures were obtained from Federal, state and local agencies.
Some communities had not compiled estimates.
NEW YORK CITY Public: $129 million dollars overtime, equipment, damage to public buildings and vehicles.
New York City Parks Department estimates damage $61 million to trees, beaches, boaardwalks and sea walls.
Bronx Throgs Neck, City Island, Edgewater Park, Locust Point, Schuyler Hill had extensive damage.
Piers, boats and homes destroyed.
Brooklyn At Sea Gate, ocean destroyed seawalls and flood damage to several houses.
Manhattan Flooding on South Street, Front Street and Water Street.
Damage to South Street Seaport businesses and F.D.R.
Drive.
Queens Extensive damage along Broad Channel and the Rockaways, particularly Arverne and Edgemere.
Army Corps of Engineers estimates $40-$50 million to restore eroded beaches in the Rockaways alone.
Staten Island: Extensive damage in the communities of Oakwood Beach, Fox Beach, New Dorp Beach, Tottenville, Great Kills, Midland Beach.
An estimated 1,000 homes and business were damaged throughout the island.
CONNECTICUT 1.
Branford Public: $50,000 to $100,000 Private: No houses badly damaged.
Money needed to repair sea walls and for help during storm, plus costs of repairing motors at Shoreline Trolley Museum could cost at least $500,000. 2.
Bridgeport Public: $4 to $6 million.
Private: $5 to $15 million.
Beach erosion and damage to bridges, piers, seawalls.
Damage to at least 50 airplanes at Sikorsky Airport. 3.
Clinton 10 homes damaged. 4.
Darien Public and Private: $10,000 Damage to seawalls. 5.
East Haven Public: $85,000 Private: $2 million 50 homes damaged. 6.
Greenwich Public: $3 million.
Private: $60 million.
Major damage to 40 homes, considerable damage to offshore islands, erosion along shoreline, damaged sea walls. 7.
Guilford No major structural damage  8.
Madison Public: $75,000 Sand dune lost at town's main beach, 10 houses with major damage, 40 homes with minor damage. 9.
Norwalk Public: $2.4 million Housing project (Washington Village) flooded, causing extensive damage. 10.
Saybrook Point Damage to sea wall. 11.
Stratford Public: $100,000 Private: $1 million  Nine cottages in Lordship section damaged. 12.
Waterford Five homes badly damaged. 13.
Westbrook Minor damage, mainly to sea walls. 14.
West Haven Public: $2 million Several flooded homes, no structural damage.
Major erosion of shorelines, and storm drains were buried under sand.
LONG ISLAND 15.
Amityville Village Public: $500,000  Damage to about 35 to40 streets, and drains, signs and street lights damaged, flooded soccer field; jetty eaten away.
Minor damage to about 200 houses. 16.
Babylon Town Public: $12,650,000 Damage to beaches, boardwalks, docks, marina equipment, town-owned boats, buildings and bulkheads. 17.
Babylon Village Public and private: No estimate yet.
Portion of the municipal dock torn off.  18.
Brookhaven Town Public: $3,585,000  $1.5 million in damaged highways. 32 streets, pier and marina damaged. 19.
East Hampton Town Public and private: $50-$100,000 Severe beach erosion; damage to motel. 20.
Fire Island, Fair Harbor 12 homes destroyed. 21.
Fire Island, Ocean Beach Public: $2 million Private: $1 million Minor damage to at least 320 houses. 22.
Fire Island, Saltaire Public: $800,000 - 850,000  Two houses washed away.
Extensive dune and boardwalk damage. 23.
Hempstead Public: $15-17 million.
Extensive beach erosion drainage pipes and walkways damaged. 24.
Huntington Public: $7.9 million.
Flooding, breeches in costal roads, beach erosion, bulkhead repairs. 25.
Huntington Town Public: $8 million.
Water and sand damage to marinas, beach concession stands and local roads. 26.
Islip Town 24 homes washed to sea off their foundations, 20 more condemmed. 27.
Long Beach Public: Over $1 million. 20 percent of town street lights inoperable. 500 houses flooded. 28.
North Hempstead  Public: $350,000.
Trees and powerlines down. 29.
Oyster Bay Public: $10,540,650.
Parking lots and seawalls damaged; beach erosion. 30.
Patchogue Public: $12,000 Private: Minimal  Four houses with moderate damage. 31.
Port Jefferson Public: $300,000  Downed trees and power lines.
Three-fourths of a mile of beach front lost. 32.
Riverhead Public: $5 million Damage to roadways, beaches, municipal parking lots.
One house destroyed. 33.
Sag Harbor Public: $25,000 Erosion at beaches and parks.
Bulkhead near the sewage plant damaged. 34.
Shelter Island  Public: $330,000.
Second causeway from Ram Island washed away, moderate beach erosion. 35.
Smithtown Public: $241,444.
Private: $200,000  Beach erosion at Kings Park Bluff.
Docks, parking lots destroyed.
NEW JERSEY 36.
Asbury Park 37.
Atlantic City Public: $14.5 million Private: $14.5 million.
Balley's Grand and Trump Plaza hotel and casinos; 300 feet of boardwalk destroyed; damage to dunes. 38.
Avalon Private: 800,000 Public: $2,952,829, includes $1.9 million in beach loss. 39.
Avon by the Sea. 40.
Barnegut Light Mostly beach erosion 41.
Bayhead 150 homes and 40 businesses with minor damage. severe beach erosion. 42.
Bayonne 43.
Beach Haven 100 homes and 50 businesses with major damages; 200 homes and 35 businesses with minor damage; extensive beach erosion and damage to barrier islands. 44.
Beachwood  Boardwalk desacks damage, beach erosion. 45.
Belleville 46.
Belmar Severe damage to four-mile board walk; beach erosion. 47.
Berkley Township 22 houses and nine apartments with major damage, 900 homes and 20 businesses with minor damage. 48.
Bradley Beach Beach facing was destroyed along with the boardwalk and bulkhead; three buildings in danger of collapse. 49.
Brick Township 2.75 million One home destroyed, 20 with major damage. 1,530 with minor damage. 50.
Brigantine Public $350-400,000.
Private: $14.5 million. 300 homes damaged; municipal sewer storm sewer pumping station severely damaged; Dune erosion and severe beach loss; County bulkhead destroyed. 51.
Cape May City Private sector $104,000 Public sector $303,000 Severe beach erosion. 52.
Cape May Point Private: $40,000 Public sector: $183,075  Ocean broke through the dunes at two points. 53.
Carlstadt 54.
Kearney Six houses had major damage and 35 had minor damage; a postal facility was blocked off and at least 10 businesses were damaged. 55.
Dover Township Five homes and 30 apartment units destroyed; 100 houses, 90 apartments and three businesses with major damage. 1,400 houses, 300 apartments and 200 business with minor damage; Severe beach erosion. 56.
Edgewater Substantial damage to the piers 57.
Elizabeth One apartment building and several businesses damaged. 58.
Englewood Cliffs 51 houses and 15 businesses suffered minor damage 59.
Fort Lee Damage to sewer systems and power lines. 60.
Hoboken  Major damage to PATH rail lines. 100 houses and 200 apartments damaged. 61.
Island Heights Dock and boardwalk damage 62.
Jackson Tonwship 25 trailer-park units destroyed. 63.
Jersey City Damage to Liberty State Park and several homes. 64.
Keansburg Severe beach erosion. 65.
Lacey Township Three homes destroyed. 150 houses and four businesses with major damage; 300 houses with minor damage. 67.
Lakewood Township 8 apartment units damaged. 68.
Lavallette Burough 40 homes with minor damage; significant beach erosion 69.
Little Egg Harbor Township 40 percent of homes and several businesses damaged. 70.
Little Ferry As many as 300 homes and several businesses damaged; several roads damaged 71.
Linden Trees and several power lines damaged. 72.
Long Beach Island Private: $6.83 million Public: $850,000 One house destroyed, 1,000 houses and 20 business damaged; severe beach erosion. 73.
Longport Public: $180,000 Private $2 million. 74.
Lower Township Private: $10,000 Public sector: $476,000 75.
Manasquan 2 houses destroyed, 1,000 homes and 25 businesses damaged; paved beach access road destoryed; promenade along shorefront destoryed, all dunes lost to severe beach erosion, approximately 40 ocean front homes undermined. 76.
Mantoloking One home destroyed; 40 homes had minor damage; significant erosion 77.
Margate Jefferson Avenue bulkhead breached. 78.
Middle Township Private: $225,000 Public sector: $398,037 Major Dune replacement needed along Delaware Bay 79.
Milburn Extensive damage to roads. 80.
Moonachie 100 homes damaged. 81.
Neptune Township Public: $4,414,250 Private: $2,050,000 Six homes had major damage; 60 had minor damage; fishing club pier destroyed. 82.
Newark Trees damaged and major cleanup needed. 83.
North Bergen Palisades General Hospital had significant damage. 84.
North Wildwood Private: $260,000 Public: $143,000 Significant beach erosion. 85.
Ocean City Private: $3.209 million Public: $340,500. 1,749 homes and 39 businesses damaged; 30 percent of an Army Corps of Engineers beach replinishment project was destroyed. 86.
Ocean Gate 400 houses, 10 apartments and one bnusiness with minor damage. 90 percent of boardwalk and a fishing pier destroyed. 87.
Ocean Township 476 homes, 55 apartments, and 10 businesses with major damage 88.
Pine Beach Burough One home and one business with minor damage; some erosion 89.
Plainfield Several trees and sewers damaged 90.
Point Pleasant Beach Four businesses destroyed.
Minor damage to 400 homes, 30 apartment units, and 10 businesses. 91.
Sea Bright Sea wall have collapsed and portions of Ocean Avenue roadway destoryed. 92.
Sea Girt 12 homes damaged and 70 percent of boardwalk destoryed. 93.
Sea Isle City Private: $700,000 Public: $1,661,791 12 blocks of sand dunes destroyed. 94.
Seaside Heights 150 houses and 45 businesses with minor damage; beach erosion. 95.
Secaucus One house destroyed; four houses and three apartments with major damageone dest.
Five businesses destroyed and 16 had major damage. 96.
South Toms River 97.
Spring Lake Public $2 million.
Concrete seawall collapsed; significant beach erosion. 98.
Union Beach Major bulkhead damage; severe beach erosion. 99.
Union City Two houses and six apartments damaged. 100.
Upper Township Private: 175,000 Public: 1.152.920 Most of dunes washed away. 101.
Ventnor City Public: $4 million.
Private: $2 million.
At least half of the houses in town had some damage. 700 feet of boardwalk destoryed; severe erosion. 102.
Weehawken A new pier was bent; 25 homes and 10 apartments were damaged. 103.
West Wildwood Private: $810,00 104.
Wildwood  Private: 1.475 million Public: $265,000 105.
Wildwood Crest Private: $1.125 Public: $16,800 Several dozen motels damaged.
WESTCHESTER 106.
Larchmont Public: $500,000 Privtae: $5 million 200 homes received at least minor damage. 107.
Mamaroneck Public and Private: $117,000 108.
New Rochelle Public: $1.5 million Private: $10 million.
Major damage at Hudson Park, especially pier; marina bulkhead and sea wall damaged; 85 homes had some damage. 109.
Pelham Public and Private: $200,000 to $250,000 Downed trees and power lines. 110.
Rye Public and Private: $20 million Damage to sea walls; 20 to 30 homes damaged by flooding; significant beach erosion.
Playland Pier destroyed.


American Reporter Accused Of Accepting K.G.B. Money
Time Magazine and The Washington Post exchanged charges today over a report in Time asserting that a former Moscow bureau chief for The Post took $1,000 from the K.G.B. and may have been co-opted by Soviet agents.
The magazine published an article in this week's issue saying that the assertion about the correspondent originated in statements made by a Soviet intelligence agent, Col.
Vitaly Yurchenko, who apparently defected to the West in August 1985, then made statements to American intelligence officers that came under suspicion when he returned to the Soviet Union three months later.


More Than One Week After the Storm, the Damage Tally
Damage figures were obtained from Federal, state and local agencies.
Some communities had not compiled estimates.
NEW YORK CITY Public: $129 million dollars overtime, equipment, damage to public buildings and vehicles.
New York City Parks Department estimates damage $61 million to trees, beaches, boaardwalks and sea walls.
Bronx Throgs Neck, City Island, Edgewater Park, Locust Point, Schuyler Hill had extensive damage.
Piers, boats and homes destroyed.
Brooklyn At Sea Gate, ocean destroyed seawalls and flood damage to several houses.
Manhattan Flooding on South Street, Front Street and Water Street.
Damage to South Street Seaport businesses and F.D.R.
Drive.
Queens Extensive damage along Broad Channel and the Rockaways, particularly Arverne and Edgemere.
Army Corps of Engineers estimates $40-$50 million to restore eroded beaches in the Rockaways alone.
Staten Island: Extensive damage in the communities of Oakwood Beach, Fox Beach, New Dorp Beach, Tottenville, Great Kills, Midland Beach.
An estimated 1,000 homes and business were damaged throughout the island.
CONNECTICUT 1.
Branford Public: $50,000 to $100,000 Private: No houses badly damaged.
Money needed to repair sea walls and for help during storm, plus costs of repairing motors at Shoreline Trolley Museum could cost at least $500,000. 2.
Bridgeport Public: $4 to $6 million.
Private: $5 to $15 million.
Beach erosion and damage to bridges, piers, seawalls.
Damage to at least 50 airplanes at Sikorsky Airport. 3.
Clinton 10 homes damaged. 4.
Darien Public and Private: $10,000 Damage to seawalls. 5.
East Haven Public: $85,000 Private: $2 million 50 homes damaged. 6.
Greenwich Public: $3 million.
Private: $60 million.
Major damage to 40 homes, considerable damage to offshore islands, erosion along shoreline, damaged sea walls. 7.
Guilford No major structural damage  8.
Madison Public: $75,000 Sand dune lost at town's main beach, 10 houses with major damage, 40 homes with minor damage. 9.
Norwalk Public: $2.4 million Housing project (Washington Village) flooded, causing extensive damage. 10.
Saybrook Point Damage to sea wall. 11.
Stratford Public: $100,000 Private: $1 million  Nine cottages in Lordship section damaged. 12.
Waterford Five homes badly damaged. 13.
Westbrook Minor damage, mainly to sea walls. 14.
West Haven Public: $2 million Several flooded homes, no structural damage.
Major erosion of shorelines, and storm drains were buried under sand.
LONG ISLAND 15.
Amityville Village Public: $500,000  Damage to about 35 to40 streets, and drains, signs and street lights damaged, flooded soccer field; jetty eaten away.
Minor damage to about 200 houses. 16.
Babylon Town Public: $12,650,000 Damage to beaches, boardwalks, docks, marina equipment, town-owned boats, buildings and bulkheads. 17.
Babylon Village Public and private: No estimate yet.
Portion of the municipal dock torn off.  18.
Brookhaven Town Public: $3,585,000  $1.5 million in damaged highways. 32 streets, pier and marina damaged. 19.
East Hampton Town Public and private: $50-$100,000 Severe beach erosion; damage to motel. 20.
Fire Island, Fair Harbor 12 homes destroyed. 21.
Fire Island, Ocean Beach Public: $2 million Private: $1 million Minor damage to at least 320 houses. 22.
Fire Island, Saltaire Public: $800,000 - 850,000  Two houses washed away.
Extensive dune and boardwalk damage. 23.
Hempstead Public: $15-17 million.
Extensive beach erosion drainage pipes and walkways damaged. 24.
Huntington Public: $7.9 million.
Flooding, breeches in costal roads, beach erosion, bulkhead repairs. 25.
Huntington Town Public: $8 million.
Water and sand damage to marinas, beach concession stands and local roads. 26.
Islip Town 24 homes washed to sea off their foundations, 20 more condemmed. 27.
Long Beach Public: Over $1 million. 20 percent of town street lights inoperable. 500 houses flooded. 28.
North Hempstead  Public: $350,000.
Trees and powerlines down. 29.
Oyster Bay Public: $10,540,650.
Parking lots and seawalls damaged; beach erosion. 30.
Patchogue Public: $12,000 Private: Minimal  Four houses with moderate damage. 31.
Port Jefferson Public: $300,000  Downed trees and power lines.
Three-fourths of a mile of beach front lost. 32.
Riverhead Public: $5 million Damage to roadways, beaches, municipal parking lots.
One house destroyed. 33.
Sag Harbor Public: $25,000 Erosion at beaches and parks.
Bulkhead near the sewage plant damaged. 34.
Shelter Island  Public: $330,000.
Second causeway from Ram Island washed away, moderate beach erosion. 35.
Smithtown Public: $241,444.
Private: $200,000  Beach erosion at Kings Park Bluff.
Docks, parking lots destroyed.
NEW JERSEY 36.
Asbury Park 37.
Atlantic City Public: $14.5 million Private: $14.5 million.
Balley's Grand and Trump Plaza hotel and casinos; 300 feet of boardwalk destroyed; damage to dunes. 38.
Avalon Private: 800,000 Public: $2,952,829, includes $1.9 million in beach loss. 39.
Avon by the Sea. 40.
Barnegut Light Mostly beach erosion 41.
Bayhead 150 homes and 40 businesses with minor damage. severe beach erosion. 42.
Bayonne 43.
Beach Haven 100 homes and 50 businesses with major damages; 200 homes and 35 businesses with minor damage; extensive beach erosion and damage to barrier islands. 44.
Beachwood  Boardwalk desacks damage, beach erosion. 45.
Belleville 46.
Belmar Severe damage to four-mile board walk; beach erosion. 47.
Berkley Township 22 houses and nine apartments with major damage, 900 homes and 20 businesses with minor damage. 48.
Bradley Beach Beach facing was destroyed along with the boardwalk and bulkhead; three buildings in danger of collapse. 49.
Brick Township 2.75 million One home destroyed, 20 with major damage. 1,530 with minor damage. 50.
Brigantine Public $350-400,000.
Private: $14.5 million. 300 homes damaged; municipal sewer storm sewer pumping station severely damaged; Dune erosion and severe beach loss; County bulkhead destroyed. 51.
Cape May City Private sector $104,000 Public sector $303,000 Severe beach erosion. 52.
Cape May Point Private: $40,000 Public sector: $183,075  Ocean broke through the dunes at two points. 53.
Carlstadt 54.
Kearney Six houses had major damage and 35 had minor damage; a postal facility was blocked off and at least 10 businesses were damaged. 55.
Dover Township Five homes and 30 apartment units destroyed; 100 houses, 90 apartments and three businesses with major damage. 1,400 houses, 300 apartments and 200 business with minor damage; Severe beach erosion. 56.
Edgewater Substantial damage to the piers 57.
Elizabeth One apartment building and several businesses damaged. 58.
Englewood Cliffs 51 houses and 15 businesses suffered minor damage 59.
Fort Lee Damage to sewer systems and power lines. 60.
Hoboken  Major damage to PATH rail lines. 100 houses and 200 apartments damaged. 61.
Island Heights Dock and boardwalk damage 62.
Jackson Tonwship 25 trailer-park units destroyed. 63.
Jersey City Damage to Liberty State Park and several homes. 64.
Keansburg Severe beach erosion. 65.
Lacey Township Three homes destroyed. 150 houses and four businesses with major damage; 300 houses with minor damage. 67.
Lakewood Township 8 apartment units damaged. 68.
Lavallette Burough 40 homes with minor damage; significant beach erosion 69.
Little Egg Harbor Township 40 percent of homes and several businesses damaged. 70.
Little Ferry As many as 300 homes and several businesses damaged; several roads damaged 71.
Linden Trees and several power lines damaged. 72.
Long Beach Island Private: $6.83 million Public: $850,000 One house destroyed, 1,000 houses and 20 business damaged; severe beach erosion. 73.
Longport Public: $180,000 Private $2 million. 74.
Lower Township Private: $10,000 Public sector: $476,000 75.
Manasquan 2 houses destroyed, 1,000 homes and 25 businesses damaged; paved beach access road destoryed; promenade along shorefront destoryed, all dunes lost to severe beach erosion, approximately 40 ocean front homes undermined. 76.
Mantoloking One home destroyed; 40 homes had minor damage; significant erosion 77.
Margate Jefferson Avenue bulkhead breached. 78.
Middle Township Private: $225,000 Public sector: $398,037 Major Dune replacement needed along Delaware Bay 79.
Milburn Extensive damage to roads. 80.
Moonachie 100 homes damaged. 81.
Neptune Township Public: $4,414,250 Private: $2,050,000 Six homes had major damage; 60 had minor damage; fishing club pier destroyed. 82.
Newark Trees damaged and major cleanup needed. 83.
North Bergen Palisades General Hospital had significant damage. 84.
North Wildwood Private: $260,000 Public: $143,000 Significant beach erosion. 85.
Ocean City Private: $3.209 million Public: $340,500. 1,749 homes and 39 businesses damaged; 30 percent of an Army Corps of Engineers beach replinishment project was destroyed. 86.
Ocean Gate 400 houses, 10 apartments and one bnusiness with minor damage. 90 percent of boardwalk and a fishing pier destroyed. 87.
Ocean Township 476 homes, 55 apartments, and 10 businesses with major damage 88.
Pine Beach Burough One home and one business with minor damage; some erosion 89.
Plainfield Several trees and sewers damaged 90.
Point Pleasant Beach Four businesses destroyed.
Minor damage to 400 homes, 30 apartment units, and 10 businesses. 91.
Sea Bright Sea wall have collapsed and portions of Ocean Avenue roadway destoryed. 92.
Sea Girt 12 homes damaged and 70 percent of boardwalk destoryed. 93.
Sea Isle City Private: $700,000 Public: $1,661,791 12 blocks of sand dunes destroyed. 94.
Seaside Heights 150 houses and 45 businesses with minor damage; beach erosion. 95.
Secaucus One house destroyed; four houses and three apartments with major damageone dest.
Five businesses destroyed and 16 had major damage. 96.
South Toms River 97.
Spring Lake Public $2 million.
Concrete seawall collapsed; significant beach erosion. 98.
Union Beach Major bulkhead damage; severe beach erosion. 99.
Union City Two houses and six apartments damaged. 100.
Upper Township Private: 175,000 Public: 1.152.920 Most of dunes washed away. 101.
Ventnor City Public: $4 million.
Private: $2 million.
At least half of the houses in town had some damage. 700 feet of boardwalk destoryed; severe erosion. 102.
Weehawken A new pier was bent; 25 homes and 10 apartments were damaged. 103.
West Wildwood Private: $810,00 104.
Wildwood  Private: 1.475 million Public: $265,000 105.
Wildwood Crest Private: $1.125 Public: $16,800 Several dozen motels damaged.
WESTCHESTER 106.
Larchmont Public: $500,000 Privtae: $5 million 200 homes received at least minor damage. 107.
Mamaroneck Public and Private: $117,000 108.
New Rochelle Public: $1.5 million Private: $10 million.
Major damage at Hudson Park, especially pier; marina bulkhead and sea wall damaged; 85 homes had some damage. 109.
Pelham Public and Private: $200,000 to $250,000 Downed trees and power lines. 110.
Rye Public and Private: $20 million Damage to sea walls; 20 to 30 homes damaged by flooding; significant beach erosion.
Playland Pier destroyed.


Review/Rock; Music of the 1990's Served 60's-Style
Industrial music aspires to aid in rock's demise.
It combats rock's guitar worship by giving equal primacy to the bleeps and howls of synthesized noise, and replaces melodic song structure with a harsh ambiance.
The Pigface show at the Ritz on Friday night showed the power of industrial music's innovations.
Its method of destruction, however, lay in reshaping rock's basic elements to suit the dystopian visions of a new era.
Pigface is a supergroup with a revolving membership, assembled by Martin Atkins, a drummer who has worked with Public Image Limited and Killing Joke.
The players included Jim Marcus of Die Warsau and Mr.
Atkins on percussion; William Tucker of Thrill Kill Kult, Andrew Weiss of the Rollins Band and En Esch of KMFDM on guitar; Genesis P-Orridge of Psychic TV on tape effects; Matt Schults of Lab Report on a custom-design stringed-instrument, which resembled a giant dulcimer; Hope Nichols, formerly of Fetchin' Bones, and Ogre of Skinny Puppy on vocals, and Barbara Hunter on cello.
Clint Ruin, of Foetus, took a brief turn on vocals.
A spate of unidentified guests joined the chaos during the show's final encore, but by then the music had turned into an amorphous mess, and who was playing hardly mattered.


It Couldn't Be Done, But Faldo Knew Better
Nick Faldo ended his greatest year in golf today by standing tall against the irresistible force of Greg Norman's Sunday best to win the $2.7 million Johnnie Walker World Championship on the first hole of sudden death.
In a classic head-to-head shootout that saw a rejuvenated Norman fire a tournament-record 63 over the demanding par-70 Tryall Golf Club course, the commanding five-stroke lead that Faldo began the day with evaporated into a one-stroke deficit with only four holes to go.


Gartner Goes to Tape And Gets Untracked
Less than a week ago, Mike Gartner reached for a personal highlight film and plugged it into his video machine.
This was a sure sign that slump time had arrived.
Gartner does not watch this tape for his own pleasure.
No, it is kept on the shelf in case of an emergency, and, for Gartner, emergency seems to strike a couple of times a year.
A consistent 30-or-more goal-scorer the past 13 seasons, Gartner is also consistent in his own streakiness.
Each season, there are points when he goes weeks -- perhaps even a month -- and scores only a few goals.
These are the times when he turns to the tape for his guidance, to the rewind and freeze-frame buttons, in hopes of catching sight of something, anything, that will show him where his play has gone wrong.


Jets Only Spoil Things for Themselves
The Jets, a team with little to show for its efforts this season, met a Dolphins team tonight that needed a victory to clinch a playoff berth before the final game of the season.
And the Jets played the role of spoiler to the hilt -- tossing in some drama at the end -- before the Dolphins (10-5) brought them back to reality.
With seven seconds to play, Miami's Pete Stoyanovich kicked a 37-yard field goal to give the Dolphins a 19-17 victory and a spot in the American Conference playoffs.
The 68,275 fans at Joe Robbie Stadium, who had been lulled to sleep in the first half and shocked awake in the third quarter when the Jets scored two touchdowns to take the lead, were ecstatic at the way things turned out for the Dolphins.
Miami's players were also relieved.


Holding Together Ross's Legacy
It was Steven J. Ross who built Warner Communications into an entertainment powerhouse, and it was Mr.
Ross who cobbled together its blockbuster merger with Time Inc. in 1990.
With the death yesterday of Mr.
Ross, who was 65, the task of holding together two disparate corporate cultures at Time Warner Inc. falls to his successor, Gerald M. Levin.
"It was never a unified family," said Dennis Leibowitz, a media industry analyst for Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette.
"It was like stepsisters and stepbrothers. They never really fused together as one company. The question is whether or not Mr. Levin can pull it all together."


Reshaping Pacifism to Fight Anguish in Reshaped World
For decades, the Rev.
William Sloane Coffin Jr. was an outspoken critic of American military actions abroad.
As chaplain at Yale University, then as pastor of the Riverside Church in Manhattan and finally as the leader of a group promoting disarmament, he opposed the war in Vietnam, American support for the contras in Nicaragua, the invasions of Grenada and Panama, and the war in the Persian Gulf.
Today, despite misgivings, Dr.
Coffin backs the presence of American forces in Somalia, and he is at least willing to contemplate military measures against Serbian forces in Bosnia.


U.S. and British to Press U.N. Harder
Expressing alarm over Serbian attacks in Bosnia and Herzegovina, President Bush and Prime Minister John Major of Britain said today that they would ask the United Nations for new measures to end Serbian flights over Bosnia.
American officials said the steps would probably result in the use of force.
Administration officials said the two Governments would seek a Security Council resolution this week enforcing the ban on flights that was originally demanded in a Council resolution approved in October.
They said this enforcement could involve the bombing of airfields where Serbian planes take off or land, and that European members of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization were likely to play the leading role in carrying out the operation.


Anxious Arabs Accuse Iran
Officials throughout the Middle East say they have evidence that Iran is training, arming and financing Islamic militant groups.
Page A10.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity offerings are expected this week:
Dell Computer Corp., Austin, Tex., 4 million common shares. Goldman, Sachs.
Enzon Inc., South Plainfield, N.J., 1 million convertible preferred shares. Prudential.


Classical Music in Review
Chamber Music at the Y  92d Street Y
The sudden flowering of Brahms's chamber music in New York City continues with the two string sextets.
Isaac Stern and members of the New York Philharmonic played the Second last week, and Chamber Music at the Y offered both on Tuesday evening, performed by Jaime Laredo, Ida Kavafian, Michael Tree, Steven Tenenbom, Sharon Robinson and Peter Wiley.


Review/Dance; An Explorer Traverses Some Emotional Terrain
Living takes practice, Susan Marshall suggests repeatedly in the truly experimental dance works that make her one of the most significant choreographers today.
Her powerful imagery is concerned with process: Men and women continually fumbling towards human contact, learning hot to mitigate instinctive physicality into more tender fluency.
Sex and love do not come easily to the nameless characters in Miss Marshall's studies of relationships, as the second program this month by Susan Marshall and Company confirmed on Saturday night at the Kitchen.
Like her characters, a choreographer explores emotions with no fixed end in sight.


INSIDE
New Charge of Bias
A black man and a group of Hasidim are involved in a confrontation in Brooklyn -- and give vastly different accounts of what happened.
Page B1. 2 Held in Principal's Slaying
Two men sought in connection with the shooting death of a grade-school principal surrendered at a Brooklyn church.
Page B3.
Unusual Family Reunion
A pilot who had defected to the United States returned to Cuba to stage a daring rescue of his wife and children.
Page A14.
Pressure to Keep Letterman
NBC may decide to oust Jay Leno from the "Tonight" show to keep its other late-night star.
Page D1.


Presidency A La Cuomo Wouldn't Be So Different
ONE year ago yesterday, Gov. Mario M. Cuomo withdrew from the race for president.
By bowing out, Mr.
Cuomo spared fellow Democrats a fight between two governors that might have riven the party again along the fault line that had divided it 12 years earlier: a geographic demarcation that, to many politicians, also appeared to define a fundamental split between the politics of change (Senator Edward M. Kennedy in 1980 and Bill Clinton in 1992) and of tradition (Jimmy Carter in 1980 and Mr. Cuomo).


Dance in Review
The Bebe Miller Company Danspace Project St. Mark's Church East Village
Dance spun out of Bebe Miller in abrupt bursts in a program presented by the Bebe Miller Company on Thursday night.
Ms.
Miller is an intriguing performer who can command the stage whether she is at rest, strutting toughly or looping and delving in dance distinctive for its juicy exuberance.
Her dancers are exciting, too, as they leap, twist and skid unerringly through the surprising, highly physical and wry choreography.


Volkswagen Tries Again For a More Affluent Image
VOLKSWAGEN would like to welcome Americans to the "New World of Volkswagen," a broad and intensive effort to recast itself in a new image.
To breathe life into that new world, the auto maker is introducing six models within about a year to attract a wider range of customers, including the more affluent.
And it has worked up a new television and print advertising campaign, worth an estimated $50 million, with DDB Needham Worldwide, its agency for the 40 years Volkswagen has sold cars in the United States.


Forbes Wins Ad Battle, But Prize Is 'Tarnished'
Forbes magazine, finally winning a much-coveted crown, will end the year ahead of Business Week in advertising pages.
It will mark the first year since 1974 that Business Week has not beaten both Forbes and Fortune in the fiercely competitive field of business magazines.
But just how much of a distinction is being No. 1?


Classical Music in Review
New York Philharmonic  Avery Fisher Hall
With thematic concerts suddenly all the rage, Charles Dutoit's Philharmonic program over the weekend resembled a type of test.
Which doesn't belong, and why: 1.
Berlioz's "Beatrice and Benedict" Overture; 2.
Tchaikovsky's First Symphony; 3.
Prokofiev's Fifth Symphony?
The answer: No. 1, of course, because the overture is distinctively French, and the symphonies are both colorfully Russian.
Though Tchaikovsky met Berlioz in Moscow shortly after completing his First Symphony, his attitude toward the French composer's music was ambivalent at best; Prokofiev seems to have warmed to Berlioz even less.


East Rutherford Has It Over Florence
Near the beginning of this season, Nets forward Chucky Brown was in Italy playing basketball.
It was, let's say, different.
"It was no fun and I don't want to go back," he said.
Safe to say, he won't be eating Italian in Florence any time soon.
After Brown's performance last night against the Sacramento Kings, the Nets will view any attempt by him to leave the country as an act of treason.
New Jersey's 104-98 victory over the Kings tonight can only be seen as one of those do-what-you-can-to-win type of victories.
Ugly, yes.
Needed, absolutely.
A loss to the Kings, who came into the game 6-15 and had lost eight straight, would have set a Nets record for ugliness.
But thanks to a career-high 19 points by Brown, a free agent who was signed on Oct. 7, the Nets improved to 13-11 and escaped an embarrassing loss before 11,023 at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


TRANSACTIONS
Football  National Football League
GREEN BAY PACKERS -- Placed Johnny Holland, linebacker, on injured reserve.
Activated Brett Collins, linebacker, from the practice squad.
Hockey  National Hockey League
PHILADELPHIA FLYERS -- Traded Mark Pederson, left wing, to the San Jose Sharks for Dave Snuggerud, right wing.
Sent Len Barrie, center, to Hershey of the American Hockey League.
PITTSBURGH PENGUINS -- Recalled Martin Straka, center, from Cleveland of the International Hockey League.


Thomas Gallagher, 74; A Writer and Seaman
Thomas Gallagher, a writer whose painstaking research informed nonfiction on great disasters and military heroism and novels that probed the lost lives of bumbling, self-destructive people, died on Saturday at his apartment in Manhattan.
He was 74 years old.
He died of a heart attack, said his son, Michael.


Review/Pop; The Sounds of Today Through an Irish Mist
A veteran of the Dublin folk scene, Pat Kilbride recently settled on the Lower East Side of New York, and his songs tell the time-honored immigrant's tale from a modern perspective.
His music blends the legacies of his birthplace with rock, folk and new-age influences; as a soloist, he alternates between the cittern (a lutelike traditional instrument) and a custom acoustic-electric guitar.
He sings in the decorative style of Irish sean nos, while his lyrics address subjects ranging from war in Nicaragua to life in a Manhattan high-rise.
At Tramp's on Wednesday night, Mr.
Kilbride mixed a folk adept's skill at replicating ancient forms with a singer and songwriter's interpretive flair.
The concert celebrated the release of his fifth album, "Undocumented Dancing," on Green Linnett Records.
Beginning with a short solo performance Mr.
Kilbride then played a rousing set with an all-star band.
Tony De Marco, on fiddle, and John Whelan, on button accordian, were standouts.


Foreign Federations Open Their Doors to Bosnians
In an effort to preserve and nurture a generation of athletes, the Olympic Committee of Bosnia and Herzegovina has reached agreements with several national sports federations to transport more than 200 of its most talented young people out of danger to top training centers throughout the world.
Among the sports federations that have agreed to train the athletes is the United States Olympic Committee.
Harvey Schiller, the executive director of the U.S.O.C., has offered to play host to Bosnian lugers at Lake Placid, N.Y., perhaps within the next several months.


METRO DIGEST
BEACHES PRECARIOUS AFTER STORM
A week after the worst flooding in 30 years clawed the New Jersey and Long Island coasts and leveled sand dunes, experts assessing the damage agree that the already precarious barrier islands at many points are extremely vulnerable and exposed to dangerous new flooding from even average winter storms.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  SHOOTING CALLED SELF-DEFENSE
An off-duty transit police officer who shot and killed a man outside a Queens nightclub early Saturday fired his weapon in self-defense after the man, who was wielding a broken bottle, charged at the officer, the president of the transit officers' union said.
The account of the union official differed sharply from that given on Saturday by a transit police spokesman, who had said that investigators believed the victim was apparently a bystander.
B3.
CHURCH OF ST.
AGNES TO REBUILD
The Church of St.
Agnes in mid-Manhattan, where the Latin Mass still resonated among flickering candles and Gothic columns six-stories high, must suddenly bound from the 19th to the 21st century as the result of a disastrous fire earlier this month.
But St.
Agnes will remain, in one form or another, at 141 East 43d Street, where it has been since the foundations of the current church were laid in 1873.
B3.
VIDEO STORE PROTEST
Chanting "shame on you," Chelsea residents demonstrated in front of seven pornographic video stores that have opened recently in their neighborhood and urged the authorities to close them.
B5.
REGION  BLAME GAME OVER BLUE CROSS
With New York State's top insurance official threatening to approve a steep rate increase for 1.4 million customers of Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and Senate Republican leaders continue to accuse one other of sabotaging efforts to solve the company's financial problems.
B5.
INTEGRATING HARTFORD'S SCHOOLS
The first witnesses in a lawsuit seeking to integrate Hartford's public schools with those of its suburban neighbors have painted a grim picture of conditions in the schools of Connecticut's capital.
But what has also emerged are the contradictions in a trial in which the defendant, the state of Connecticut, supports its accusers' goals on integration and education and is fighting only to avoid having a judge order what the state believes it should do itself.
News analysis, B14.
LONG ISLAND SOUND STATUS REPORT
The Long Island Sound is a vital but ecologically troubled estuary, threatened by pollution that pours into it every day from sewage-treatment plants, according to a preliminary report of a seven-year study of the Sound.
The report recommends limiting the amount of nitrogen that flows from sewage plants into the Sound, a proposal that some say would stifle development in surrounding communities.
Up to $8.1 billion may have to be spent to limit the nitrogen releases, the report says.
B14.
A TOUGH LOOK AT HORSE RACING
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo plans to instruct his Commission on Racing in the 21st Century to focus on whether the New York State Racing Association and Off-Track Betting Corporations throughout the state could be transferred to private ownership, state officials said.
Mr.
Cuomo, who created the commission in an attempt to recast the structure of racing in the state, has made a target of the nonprofit racing association, saying, among other things, that the association's management is overpaid.
B2.
CLINTON, CUOMO AND MIRROR IMAGES
One year ago yesterday, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo withdrew from the race for president.
Judging by his tenure as President-elect, Bill Clinton, so far, is changing the Government largely the way that Mr.
Cuomo might have.
His choice of advisers and his economic and foreign policies are generally mirror images of Mr.
Cuomo's.
Metro Matters.
B3.
Neediest Cases B4  Chronicle B16


Campaigns For Poultry
Two poultry companies are introducing campaigns focusing on nutrition and ease of preparation.
Tyson Foods is introducing a print campaign for its frozen breaded boneless Holly Farms chicken products.
One ad, created by Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising in New York, features a cartoon character enjoying a bite of a chicken patty, accompanied by the copy, "We wouldn't put anything in our chicken you wouldn't want in your kid." The ad carries the tagline: "Tyson. Feeding you like family."


Los Angeles Times Pulls Back From San Diego
While other cities have seen competition among newspapers disappear, this city, the nation's sixth largest, has the distinction of going from three daily metropolitan papers to one in 10 months.
On Friday, the San Diego County edition of The Los Angeles Times, begun in 1978, closed after its last press run.
In February, two papers owned by Copley Press Inc. -- the morning San Diego Union and the afternoon Tribune -- were merged into The Union-Tribune.


Erin Bell, Michael Cohen
Erin Elizabeth Bell, an investment analyst in London, was married yesterday to Michael Cohen, an investment banker there.
Rabbi Jon Haddon officiated at the Manhattan Penthouse, a catering establishment in New York.
Ms.
Bell, who is 30 years old, is keeping her name.
She works for the Capital Group, a mutual fund company.
She graduated from the London School of Economics and received an M.B.A. from the London Business School, as did her husband.


Classical Music in Review
Musica Sacra  Carnegie Hall
It is good that Richard Westenburg continues to rethink "Messiah" for his annual outings, but not good that the cogitation sometimes weighs heavily on the performances.
Mr.
Westenburg's first presentation of the work this year, on Wednesday evening, was self-conscious in the extreme.
He kept a tight grip on the fine Musica Sacra Chorus, which minced repeatedly.
In "Glory to God," the multitude of heavenly hosts sounded downright wimpy.
When Mr.
Westenburg relaxed his grip and let things flow freely, as in "Hallelujah," the chorus responded lustily.


Talks Near Deadline On Nurses' Contract
Contract negotiations between a union representing 3,000 nurses and the administrations of five hospitals in Brooklyn, Queens and Long Island continued last night toward a deadline at 6 A.M. today.
The nurses and hospital officials have been negotiating for almost three months.
The main points of dispute are benefits and staffing levels.


Serbian Runoff Likely
A polltaker for Milan Panic, who has vowed to end the war in Bosnia, said Mr.
Panic and Slobodan Milosevic, Serbia's militant leader, ran so closely in balloting for a new president that they will have a runoff.
Article, page A10.


U.S. Is Said To Oppose USAir Deal
Despite a personal appeal by Prime Minister John Major of Britain to President Bush to approve a proposed alliance between British Airways and the USAir Group, both supporters and opponents of the deal said today that it was increasingly likely that the United States would block the transaction.
An aide to Mr.
Major, speaking on condition that he not be identified, said the disagreements had not been resolved.
"I still think one has to be downbeat about it," he added.


How a Whistle-Blower Found Blood-Test Fraud
Three years ago, C. Jack Dowden, a former sales manager for a large California blood-testing concern, was under the gun: he was rapidly losing business to his main competitor, National Health Laboratories, which was offering doctors what seemed an incredible bargain.
For the price of a basic blood screening, National Health, one of the nation's largest diagnostic testing companies, would at no extra charge perform tests for cholesterol and serum ferritin, or iron in the blood. 2-Year Inquiry
Puzzled as to how National Health could offer the additional tests without charge, Mr.
Dowden had a doctor take a sample of his own blood and send it to National Health.
Mr.
Dowden said that when he got the bill for his blood tests, National Health had charged him for one of the additional tests.
He said this confirmed his suspicions that unbeknownst to doctors, National Health was charging some private customers and Government health insurance programs about $18 for each of the tests it claimed to be conducting for free.


'And the Shoppers Rush Home With Their Treasures'


Integrating Hartford; State and Accusers Agree on the Goal For Schools, but Not on How to Get It
The first witnesses in a lawsuit seeking to integrate Hartford's public schools with those of its suburban neighbors began painting a grim picture of conditions in the schools of Connecticut's capital this week.
But what also began to emerge were the contradictions involved in a trial in which the defendant, the State of Connecticut, supports its accusers' goals on integration and improving education and is fighting only to avoid having a judge order what the state believes it should do itself.


Dance in Review
Terry Creach and Stephen Koester Danspace Project St. Mark's Church East Village
The title of Peter Anastos's new duet for Terry Creach and Stephen Koester was wrong by at least one year.


Review/Pop; Hard Rock Drives Forward, Casting Its Compulsive Spell
Glenn Danzig is an obsessed man.
He's driven to perfect his physique through bodybuilding; he's absorbed by the occult imagery that fills his songs, and he's magnetized by the brutal rhythms of heavy metal.
An intense pursuit of these preoccupations has caused Mr.
Danzig to create one of the strangest and most compelling bodies of work in contemporary hard rock, first with his groundbreaking band the Misfits and later with his metal projects Samhain and his current group, also called Danzig.
At one point it seemed inevitable that Mr.
Danzig, whose charisma and distinctive baritone croon set him apart as a performer, would be one of rock's great heroes.
Danzig has never acquired more than a respectable cult following, however, and the band's show at Roseland on Saturday night proved its determination to focus on its own goals rather than pleasing a larger audience.


Dance in Review
Rachel Lampert "Inventories: Stories Real and Imagined" Westbeth Theater Center West Village
Rachel Lampert, an experienced and versatile choreographer, assembled a fine cast of dancers for "Inventory: Stories Real and Imagined," which Cassandra Dance/Theater Corp. presented Monday night.
But speech proved more eloquent than dance.


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings this week: MONDAY  Eli Lilly NBD Bancorp Rochester Tel


It's 6 Straight Victories And In for San Diego
The San Gabriel Mountains in the distance were snow-capped, and it was so crisp here that players could see their breath in mid-afternoon.
But San Diego Coach Bobby Ross was so absorbed in putting his once-laughable Chargers in the playoffs, he never once put on a jacket.
Wearing a mere golf shirt, Ross finally pounded down his headset with two minutes to play and reveled in San Diego's first post-season berth in a decade.
The Chargers' 36-14 victory today over the Los Angeles Raiders certainly ordained them as the comeback team of the year, and perhaps of pro football history, because no team had ever before overcome an 0-4 start to reach the National Football League playoffs.
And, over the years, 132 teams had been 0-4 and failed to make such a rally.


Young President Clinton
Here are excerpts from Bill Clinton's campaign pamphlet in his 1967 race for Georgetown University student council president.
His expository bent concerning government was evident early -- as a 19-point platform in the pamphlet attests.
The agenda included adding pass-fail courses to the curriculum and beefing up club football.
Mr.
Clinton was defeated.
The club football schedule was expanded.
What direction is the government at Georgetown taking?
Is it the right path?
Is it moving, is it beginning to realize its potential?
Each year, Student Council election campaigns seem to engender the same promises to do more things better, and probably each year more things are done somewhat more ineffectively.
You might call that progress.
It is
motion, but the questions remain, "In what direction?" Is it the right path?
And is student government at Georgetown likely to realize its full potential?


Bridge
In duplicate, with scoring based on how other foursomes do, it can be right to play wrong.
When is it right to be wrong?
That question, a philosophical paradox, can be stated differently in bridge terms: When is it right to make a play that you know to be wrong, diminishing your chance of making your contract?


Harvard Business Review Cancels an Article on I.B.M.
The Harvard Business Review has abruptly canceled an article scheduled as its January cover story, "Why I.B.M. Failed," and the author said yesterday that the decision was out of fear of offending the giant computer maker.
The 10,000-word article, which is highly critical of the International Business Machines Corporation, was already typeset and had been announced in the November issue of the magazine.
The author is Mark Stahlman, a computer industry financial analyst at Alex.
Brown &amp; Sons and president of a New York City consulting firm, New Media Associates.


Relief Agencies Taking Donations
The following organizations collecting donations for aid to Somalia are members of InterAction, a coalition of American relief groups that requires its members to adhere to certain standards of integrity and accountability:
ADVENTIST AND DEVELOPMENT RELIEF AGENCY Box 4289, Silver Spring, Md. 20904.


Report Sees Sewer-Plant Threat to L.I. Sound
Long Island Sound is a vital but ecologically troubled estuary, threatened by pollution that pours into it every day from sewage-treatment plants, according to a preliminary report issued this week on a seven-year study of the Sound.
The report recommends limiting the amount of nitrogen that flows from sewage plants into the Sound, a proposal that some say would stifle development in surrounding communities.
Up to $8.1 billion may have to be spent to limit the nitrogen releases, the report says.


Knicks Put Up Feet and Rest for Bulls
The Knicks have the best record (16-7) in the Eastern Conference, they have a five-game winning streak and they have a chance to rest before Christmas night's tussle in Chicago against the Bulls (15-7).
That is enough to make a team, or a demanding coach, happy for the holidays.


Science Has Nothing to Add to Roe v. Wade; The Interrupted Process
To the Editor:
Harold J. Morowitz and James S. Trefil (Op-Ed, Nov. 25) proclaim that science has "confirmed" the Supreme Court's Roe v.
Wade decision to permit abortion.
In my view, the only thing these authors have confirmed is that scientists should stay away from matters requiring ethical and moral judgment.


Seeking a Moderate Image, Mormons Expel Extremists
In a move that underscores the desire of the Mormon Church to cultivate a more centrist image, the church has started to excommunicate many of its ultraconservative followers.
Some experts on the church describe the action as a purge, an effort to do away with extremists whose talk of conspiracies and impending world ruin do not square with a fast-growing faith eager to enhance its standing in the American mainstream.


Report of Koala's Decline Exaggerates
To the Editor:
The apocalyptic tone of your Dec. 6 Associated Press article about threats to the habitats of koalas in Australia is quite unjustified.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Media Business
Steven J. Ross died at age 65.
He created Time Warner, the world's largest media and entertainment company.  [ A1. ]  Mr.
Ross's successor is not inheriting a unified corporate family.  [ D1. ]
NBC is under pressure to drop Jay Leno to keep David Letterman from defecting to CBS.
Television: Bill Carter.  [ D1. ]


The Creator of Time Warner, Steven J. Ross, Is Dead at 65
Steven J. Ross, who built a family funeral parlor business into Time Warner Inc., the world's largest media and entertainment company, died yesterday in Los Angeles.
He was 65 years old.
His death was caused by complications arising from his prostate cancer, from which he had suffered for several years, a company spokesman said.


Nicholas Bonavita; Sergeant-at-Arms, 60
Nicholas Bonavita, a long-time presence at the New York City Council who most recently served as its chief sergeant-at-arms, died on Friday at Columbia Presbyterian Medical Center.
He was 60 years old and lived in Park Slope, Brooklyn.
He died after a five-year battle with heart disease, said his son Vincent.


The Case for the Colorado Boycott
Deciding where to go for a skiing vacation ordinarily poses no moral dilemma.
But this winter it surely does.
Colorado, site of some of the finest ski areas in the nation, adopted a bigoted anti-gay initiative last month, shattering the state's reputation for tolerance.
Gay groups and others are urging a boycott; their call deserves to be heeded.
Admittedly, an economic boycott is not a precision weapon.
Targeting Colorado's $5 billion tourist industry stands to hurt not just the unenlightened, but also the progressive towns of Denver, Aspen, and Boulder, where most voters opposed the anti-gay amendment.


Judge Protects Doctor In Nuclear Toxin Case
A doctor who says that toxins from Federal weapons plants here harmed his patients has won protection from job discrimination under the Federal whistle-blowers act.
The doctor, William K. Reid, an oncologist at Methodist Medical Center of Oak Ridge, says that 40 of his patients have high levels of toxic heavy metals that are used in nuclear weapons production, causing increased rates of auto-immune deficiencies and cancer.


A Very Short Leash in Cuban Local Elections
The struggle for power today at Voting Station No. 13 in the Havana district of Regla was an extremely polite affair.
Neither of the district's two candidates for a seat in the Municipal Assembly of People's Power campaigned.
Almost everyone voted early and it appeared that nobody voted more than once.
The lines were short, the ballots cast with dispatch.
There were no cries of fraud.


New Campaigns
*
The Sports Authority is introducing television commercials featuring the comedian Louie Anderson as spokesman for the sporting goods chain.
In the spots, by Ross Roy Retail, Bloomfield Hills, Mich., Mr.
Anderson tries his hand at a variety of activities from slam-dunking a basketball to passing under a limbo bar.


Kenya's Managed Election
On Dec. 29, if all goes well, Kenyans will vote in their first competitive elections in 26 years.
But both the timing and the rules have been manipulated to benefit Kenya's highhanded President, Daniel arap Moi.
The rules are loaded against opposition parties.
The timing -- in the midst of holidays and America's Presidential transition -- seems designed to minimize scrutiny and possible protests.


Dance in Review
New York City Ballet 'The Nutcracker' New York State Theater
Perfection can be entrancing, but imperfection tends to be a lot more interesting in a dance performance.
Unsurprisingly enough, young Yvonne Borree did not dance perfectly when she danced the Sugarplum Fairy in George Balanchine's production of "The Nutcracker" for the first time on Dec. 13.
But hers was a fascinating performance, made even more compelling by the dancing of her Cavalier, Arch Higgins, also new to his role.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  None  Tuesday  G.D.P. . . . 3d Qtr.
Wednesday  Durable Goods . . .
Nov.
Personal Income . . .
Nov.
Thursday  Weekly Jobless Claims  Friday  None


Radio Boss Is Undaunted By Big Fine
Talk about silver linings.
Mel A. Karmazin, the president and chief executive of the Infinity Broadcasting Corporation, is happy to stew in his car as he commutes from New Jersey to Manhattan, knowing many other drivers are tuned to one of his radio stations.
"I love traffic," he said.
Mr.
Karmazin also views optimistically the $600,000 fine that the Federal Communications Commission levied against Infinity on Friday because of its best-known radio personality, Howard Stern, whose continual references to sexual matters and bodily functions have heated up the debate about what constitutes indecent material on the air.


EXPERTS SAY STORM LEFT COASTAL AREA HIGHLY VULNERABLE
A week after the worst flooding in 30 years clawed the New Jersey and Long Island coasts and leveled sand dunes, experts say the already precarious beaches are extremely vulnerable at many points, exposed to dangerous new flooding from even average winter storms.
From the Hamptons on eastern Long Island to Sandy Hook and Long Beach Island on the New Jersey coast, the four-day storm swept away millions of cubic yards of sand from beaches that had already been considered alarmingly narrow and undernourished for a decade or more.


Chelsea Residents Demonstrate to Close Adult Video Stores
Chanting "shame on you," Chelsea residents demonstrated yesterday in front of seven pornographic video stores that have opened recently in their neighborhood and urged the authorities to close them.
"We don't want Chelsea to become another 42d Street," Susan Herman, a leader of the newly formed Chelsea Action Coalition, told the crowd of about 75 people assembled in front of three video shops on the Avenue of the Americas between 25th and 26th Streets.


Dance in Review
Nadine Helstroffer 'Migration' Merce Cunningham Studio West Village
Nadine Helstroffer's "Migration," presented on Friday night, sent white-clad dancers on a journey across a mysterious terrain.
Miss Helstroffer, a member of Sin Cha-Hong's Laughing Stone company, is a French choreographer who has worked in New York since 1981.
She has her own dreamlike way of creating atmosphere, and there was plenty of that in "Migration."


Review/Jazz; Filling Little Ears With Music, And the Love and Logic Behind It
Living takes practice, Susan Marshall suggests repeatedly in the truly experimental dance works that make her one of the most significant choreographers today.
Her powerful imagery is concerned with process: men and women continually fumbling toward human contact, learning how to mitigate instinctive physicality into more tender fluency.
Sex and love do not come easily to the nameless characters in Miss Marshall's studies of relationships, as the second program by Susan Marshall and Company confirmed on Saturday night at the Kitchen.
Like her characters, the choreographer explores emotions with no fixed end in sight.


Clinton's High-Stakes Shuffle To Get the Right Cabinet Mix
President-elect Bill Clinton's effort to fill his Cabinet has become a high-stakes game of mix and match as he struggles to create an inner circle that is diverse in race, sex and point of view.
Even some of his closest aides are unfamiliar with his thinking as he has continuously shuffled the personnel deck.
"Hiring" a Cabinet, to use Mr.
Clinton's word for the process, has become an unexpectedly complicated task of fulfilling his campaign pledge to create an administration that "looks like America." Puzzling for Nominees
Aides to the President-elect said that in some cases he had settled on some nominees, then changed his mind, holding a job up to each candidate like a suit of clothes that can be exchanged for a better fit.
Even today, aides said Mr.
Clinton had decided to pass over Senator Timothy E. Wirth, the early favorite for Energy Secretary, to select Hazel R. O'Leary, a Minnesota power company executive.  [ Page D11. ]


Cuomo and Republican Legislators Clash on Blue Cross Rates
With New York State's top insurance official threatening to approve a steep rate increase for 1.4 million customers of Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and Senate Republican leaders continued yesterday to accuse one other of sabotaging efforts to solve the company's severe financial problems.
On Saturday, the State Insurance Superintendent, Salvatore R. Curiale, said that unless the state was willing to provide Empire, the state's largest health insurer, with an infusion of cash, he was likely to grant the full rate increase the company has requested for Jan. 1.
And yesterday Mr.
Curiale sent a memorandum to the Governor's office outlining Empire's bleak outlook.
He said that unless he grants the increase, the company's cash reserves would probably dwindle to zero by the end of January.


Laurie Hess, Peter Mozarsky
Laurie Roberta Hess, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael D. Hess of New York, was married yesterday to Peter Jay Mozarsky, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gabriel Mozarsky of Brooklyn.
Rabbi William Berkowitz performed the ceremony at the Marriott Financial Center Hotel in New York.


Classical Music in Review
Duo Tedesco Weill Recital Hall
Performances on the thin-waisted, light-voiced guitars of the early 19th century are rare because the instruments are fragile and comparatively few have survived.
It was surprising, therefore, to hear the Duo Tedesco playing on two guitars made by the 19th-century French luthier Rene Lacote when the duo made its American debut on Wednesday.
It was even more surprising when, for a work that required an unusual tuning, one of the players brought out an instrument made by one of Lacote's contemporaries, Georg Staufer.
If nothing else, these musicians, Barbara and Eugene Holzer, are discerning collectors.


Dream Train to Airports Takes Step Nearer Reality
Ninety percent of the passengers using Kennedy International Airport get there like this: sweating and cursing and praying in a cab or car as they fight traffic and the clock.
By the end of the century, they may have another choice: entering an electric train in Manhattan and arriving at Kennedy 37 minutes later, after stops at La Guardia Airport and Shea Stadium and a smooth, silent ride over the rooftops of Queens and the jammed roadways they used to use.


Pro Bono Campaigns
*
The Coalition for the Homeless, New York, is introducing a print campaign intended to increase New Yorkers' sympathy and compassion for the homeless.
One ad, created by the Sawyer Miller Group, New York, features a young girl holding a doll, accompanied by the headline: "If you get your kids a really big present this year, save the box. She could use it to sleep in." Another ad, features a mechanic working on a car engine, with the head: "How can you be homeless if you have a decent job? In this town, anything is possible."


2 Surrender In Slaying Of Principal
Two men being sought by the police in connection with the shooting death of Patrick Daly, the grade-school principal slain at a Brooklyn housing project on Thursday, surrendered to ministers at the House of the Lord Pentecostal Church in downtown Brooklyn last night.
They were taken into custody by housing police officers about 11:30 P.M. and held last night at the 76th Precinct station house.
An official in the Brooklyn District Attorney's office said early this morning that the two could face murder charges.


In Embattled Serbia, a Fateful Election
Millions of Yugoslavs voted today in an election that could mean the difference between war and peace in the Balkans.
A polling firm working for one of the candidates for President of Serbia, Milan Panic, announced late today that its exit polls showed a dead heat between the militantly nationalistic Serbian President, Slobodan Milosevic, who is seeking re-election, and Mr.
Panic, his principal opponent, with neither winning a majority.
If borne out, the results would mean a runoff between the two top candidates.


New Math: 12 Minus 10 Leaves 4
For the underground army that tries to figure out the arcane world of the National Football League's playoffs, yesterday was the day of days.
This much was certain (or so it seemed) on the next-to-last weekend of the regular season: Minnesota (without Herschel Walker) clinched the National Conference Central Division title by defeating Pittsburgh.
Philadelphia (with Herschel Walker) guaranteed itself a wild-card playoff spot by defeating Washington.
And Miami guaranteed another Don Shula appearance in the playoffs last night by defeating the Jets.
These are solid, year-in, year-out playoff contenders.


Eagles See to It That Redskins Run Out of Time
All but two seconds were drained from the clock, and the players and the 65,841 fans at Veterans Stadium seemed frozen in a frenzy of anticipation.
The Washington Redskins trailed by 17-13 and had the ball at the Philadelphia Eagles' 5.
Something big was about to happen.
The winner would earn a National Conference playoff berth, and the loser would look to the final week of the regular season for a kinder finish and for a last-gasp playoff spot.
The Redskins broke their huddle and lined up.
Roy Green had read the signals coming from the Redskins' sideline.
He knew the Redskins' play simply from the formation he saw.


World Economies


Review/Rock; Ice-T as Macho Avenger, With Attitude to Spare
Judged solely on musicianship, Body Count is less than earthshaking.
Ice-T's thrash-metal band, which headlined a quadruple bill at the Academy on Friday night, plays on the melodic side of its chosen genre, leaping from slow riffs to fast ones while Ice-T jumps around the stage and shouts his lyrics.
But after releasing the song "Cop Killer" on its debut album, "Body Count" (Sire), the band found that musicianship wasn't the question: attitude was.
Protests from police organizations helped the album's sales and then prompted Ice-T to remove the song from the market.
Body Count is now notorious, and Ice-T strives to make persecution work for him.


Hail to the World's Largest Organism
What a relief!
The title of world's largest organism may no longer belong to that creepy giant fungus lying under the ground in northern Michigan.
A new, more comely candidate from Utah has been nominated.
It was a shock last April to learn that the dainty mushrooms found on the forest floor in Michigan's Upper Peninsula were but the visible manifestations of a single genetically uniform fungus.
It had been extending its tentacles beneath the ground for more than 1,500 years, maybe even 10,000 years, before butting into other underground giants.


Honors
*
John S. Bowen, chairman emeritus of D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles, was elected to the American Advertising Federation's Advertising Hall of Fame.
He will be inducted at a luncheon in New York on March 30.


Yeltsin Sees a New Cabinet Retaining Reformist 'Core'
President Boris N. Yeltsin, who rushed home from China to shore up his control over the formation of a new Government, agreed with his new Prime Minister today that the "core" of the last Cabinet of Westernized, free-market economists would remain in office, a spokesman for Mr.
Yeltsin said.
After several hours of talks today involving Mr.
Yeltsin, Prime Minister Viktor S. Chernomyrdin and Vladimir Shumeiko, the First Deputy Prime Minister, Mr.
Yeltsin's spokesman announced, "the basic current team will be preserved."


No Magic in Bank Deregulation
Apply for a loan now, and you'll automatically be entered in our FREE LOAN GIVEAWAY.
You could win a FREE LOAN -- borrow up to $15,000 and NEVER pay it back!
Dear Mr. Clinton:


Clinton to Select Woman as Energy Secretary, His Aides Say
President-elect Bill Clinton will name Hazel R. O'Leary, a Minnesota power company executive, as Energy Secretary, transitional officials confirmed tonight.
The choice of Ms.
O'Leary, first reported by The Associated Press tonight, and that of Richard W. Riley, the former Governor of South Carolina, as Education Secretary are expected to be announced Monday.
The announcements would be the first of a series of selections that are expected to complete the new Cabinet by the end of the week.


Gutted Church to Rebuild on Manhattan Site
The Church of St.
Agnes in mid-Manhattan, where the Latin Mass still resonated among flickering candles and Gothic columns six stories high, must suddenly bound from the 19th to the 21st century as the result of a disastrous fire earlier this month.
Perhaps there will be a new interior within the brick-and-stone Victorian shell.
Perhaps there will be a new church entirely.
Perhaps it will be linked to redevelopment of the block between East 43d and 44th Streets on the west side of Third Avenue.


Economic Pulse: California; California, Struggling in Slump, Faces High Hurdles to Recovery
Economists say salvation for California's staggering economy lies in small entrepreneurial companies like the Invitrogen Corporation here.
A maker of gene-isolation kits and other products for biomedical research, it has shrugged off recession, expanding from 20 employees in 1989 to 105 today in a 30,000 square-foot plant amid tall pines in the La Jolla area.
But now that Invitrogen stands ready to expand even further, its brash young leaders may move all or part of the company to Oregon or Washington State.
And therein lies the major question facing once-booming California -- home for one in eight Americans -- as it struggles through its longest economic slump since World War II: Is it too late to recapture the spirit that made California golden and prevent even the few bright spots like San Diego's thriving biotechnology industry from going dim too?


GLOOMY PROSPECTS SEEN FOR GROWTH WORLDWIDE IN '93
The world economy will grow far more sluggishly next year than was predicted just a few months ago, economists say, because of a surprisingly deep slump in Europe and Japan.
The economists say the situation will not only hurt American exports and make it harder for the American economy to pick up speed, but could also force President-elect Bill Clinton to concentrate more on short-term measures to stimulate the economy rather than on the long-term efforts he says are needed to put it back on track.
The sluggish growth, they add, may also compel him to push Japan and Germany to do more to promote growth.


New Bias Case Fuels Dispute With Dinkins
A 41-year-old black man told the police that he was severely beaten without provocation on a street in Williamsburg, Brooklyn, early yesterday by 10 to 20 Hasidic men, some shouting racial slurs.
The police listed it as a bias crime, and Mayor David N. Dinkins called it another case of racially motivated violence in a troubled city.
But later in the day the police said they were looking into reports by Hasidic community leaders that gave a different interpretation to the case.
These suggested that the attack had stemmed from an attempt by the black man, Robert Johnson, to steal a car and that a group of Hasidim had chased and caught him and that he had been injured in their efforts to subdue him.


Arabs Raise a Nervous Cry Over Iranian Militancy
Israel's expulsion of 400 adherents of Hamas, a Muslim fundamentalist movement, has focused attention on the growing challenge posed by Islamic militants throughout the Mideast and on the murky role that Iran plays in stoking the fires of extremism, officials in the region say.
In the past year, Algeria, Egypt, Tunisia and Jordan, as well as Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization, have battled militant fundamentalists in their midst in a struggle that has caused hundreds of deaths and led to the arrest of thousands of fundamentalists.


Worldwide Hanukkah Celebrations Linked by Satellite


Better Late Than Never, Aid Organizations Say
Moved by images of suffering in Somalia and confident that donations can make a difference now that United States troops are in the country, Americans are contributing generously to a blizzard of fund-raising appeals, relief officials say.
Yet with satisfaction has come soul-searching among relief officials about the tardy response to the crisis by some agencies, as well as ill feeling over the recent stampede into Somalia by groups that had no operations there until press attention made fund-raising lucrative.


Municipal Bond Issuers Are Learning to 'Detach'
Peter Coffin, the municipal-bond portfolio manager at Massachusetts Financial Services in Boston, has the "detachable calls" from millions of dollars of bonds in his portfolios.
And he would like to have millions more.
But the immediate future of this new financial product -- it is not a mobile phone -- seems to depend less on demand from him and other portfolio managers and more on the state, city and local government issuers of tax-exempt municipal bonds nationwide.


Raider Faithful Support Allen
Marcus Allen won the popular vote.
In his first Los Angeles Coliseum appearance since accusing Raiders owner Al Davis of trying "to ruin the latter part of my career" six days ago, Allen's every step today was cheered, while Raiders boosters held up a sign that said: "Trade Al Davis."


Science Has Nothing to Add to Roe v. Wade; What the Court Said
To the Editor:
In "Roe v. Wade Passes a Lab Test" (Op-Ed, Nov. 25), Harold J. Morowitz and James S. Trefil report that the Supreme Court decided in Roe v.
Wade "to allow abortion only before the start of the third trimester." The Court did no such thing.


For Handley and Giants, Satisfaction Still Relative
For Jeff Hostetler, playing again after missing three games with a concussion, it was immensely satisfying.
For his Giants teammates, reeling from a five-game losing streak and a season of controversy, it was certainly satisfying.
For Ray Handley, the Giants' embattled head coach and a man of controlled emotions, it was "relatively" satisfying.
Today, Handley watched tapes of Saturday's 35-21 victory here over the Kansas City Chiefs.
Later, at a news conference, he was asked if the victory satisfied him.


Science Has Nothing to Add to Roe v. Wade
To the Editor:
"Roe v. Wade Passes a Lab Test" (Op-Ed, Nov. 25) by Harold J. Morowitz and James S. Trefil, authors of "The Facts of Life: Science and the Abortion Controversy," is an embarrassment.
The authors argue that if human, not merely mammalian, parthenogenesis becomes possible, every human ovum will be "potential life," the question of the potential life of the fertilized ovum will then become moot, and the Roe decision will be scientifically vindicated.


Theodore Friedman, Judaic Scholar, 84
Rabbi Theodore Friedman, a scholar of Conservative Judaism and spiritual leader of Congregation Beth El of the Oranges and Maplewood, N.J., for many years, died on Thursday in the Hadassah Hospital Hospice in Jerusalem.
He was 84 years old and lived in Jerusalem since retiring in 1970.
He died of cancer, said Rabbi Jules Harlow, a friend of the family and director of publications at the Rabbinical Assembly in Manhattan.


To Protect Health
To the Editor:
You report that Vice President-elect Al Gore's first environmental policy move will be an attempt to block our long-delayed hazardous waste treatment facility from opening (news article, Dec. 7).


A Look at Life After Mass Marriage; For 2,075 Couples (Give or Take 200), 10 Years Together, Thanks to Sun Myung Moon
When Jonathan and Debby Gullery were married 10 years ago, in a mass wedding of 2,075 couples at Madison Square Garden, they were widely viewed as bit players in a bizarre show produced by the Rev.
Sun Myung Moon.
Strangers screamed at them as they sold flowers on the street, and Mrs.
Gullery's father said he thought seriously about having her kidnapped and brought home.
But over the last decade, the Gullerys say, both they and their church have grown up and settled down.
On a recent evening, amid the chaos of bedtime for their three young children, they took turns coaxing the 4-year-old back to her room while Mrs.
Gullery's father, who was visiting from Vermont, took refuge in the novel he was reading in the living room of their suburban home.


Toshiba to Work With Samsung on 'Flash' Chips
The Toshiba Corporation said today that it had formed a partnership with South Korea's leading semiconductor company, the Samsung Electronics Company, for the development of flash memories, a new type of chip that could one day replace the disk drives used for computer information storage.
Under the eight-year agreement, Toshiba will share specifications and technology with Samsung, which will make flash chips that are compatible with Toshiba's.


Creative Computer reports earnings for Year to Aug 31


David Platt, 89, Dies; Film and Music Critic
David Platt, a film and music critic, died on Thursday at his home in Long Beach, L.I.
He was 89 years old.
He died of complications from a stroke, said his son, David Jr.


Serbia's Enigma: An Aloof Leader Who Stoked Fires of Nationalist Passion
On the ruined walls of towns and villages across Bosnia and Herzegovina that have been devastated by "ethnic cleansing," one word, "Slobo," appears again and again, scrawled in spray paint by the Serbian fighters who have swept through, terrorizing inhabitants and razing homes.
For those who have made his name a totem of their cause, it seems no matter that "Slobo" -- Slobodan Milosevic, the President of Serbia -- has never visited the battle zone, nor even their wounded fighters.
As the political patron of Serbian nationalism, and as the head of the Serbian Government that has given the arms and money Bosnia's Serbs have needed to carry out their killings, Mr.
Milosevic is a hero above all others among the forces who have seized two-thirds of Bosnia as an exclusive Serbian domain.


S.&amp;L. Suit By California
A California official filed a lawsuit today seeking to recover an estimated $64 million in forgotten deposits that have been confiscated by the Federal agency that seizes insolvent savings and loans.
In the suit, the State Controller, Gray Davis, asked the Federal District Court here to order the Resolution Trust Corporation to return to state authorities the contents of an estimated 100,000 inactive accounts from 55 failed California institutions.


INSIDE
U.S. Sues Over Air Fares
The Government charged the eight largest American airlines with fixing air fares through use of a computerized reservation system.
Page D1.
Taking On Insurance Fraud
In an assault on New York region insurance fraud, 22 adjusters, salvagers and homeowners were charged with lying about claims.
Page B1.
Crash in Portugal Kills 54
A Dutch DC-10 charter slammed into a runway in Portugal, broke apart and burst into flames, killing at least 54.
But at least 282 survived.
Page A6. 2,075 'I Do's' Later
Ten years after a mass wedding by the Rev.
Sun Myung Moon, some couples say they and their church have grown up and settled down.
Page B1.


Miami Players Don't Fret About Coach
It's that time of year again, when Dennis Erickson seems to be rumored for every high-profile football coaching job in the country.
And why not?
The University of Miami is 11-0 this season and on the brink of being ranked tops in the nation for the third time in Erickson's four years here.
The Hurricanes already have lost their defensive coordinator, Sonny Lubick, for next season.
Lubick accepted the head coaching position at Colorado State today, replacing Earle Bruce.


Bridge
A strong claimant for the best defensive play of 1992 is Mike Passell of Dallas, who sat East on the diagramed deal in a regional Swiss team championship in Vancouver.
His opponents reached a normal three no-trump contract, and his partner led the club queen to dummy's king.
Since West has no side entry for his clubs, it is clear that South can make his contract.
He can work on spades and make two tricks in that suit, together with three diamonds, two hearts and two clubs.
But a funny thing happened.


Mating Among Orchids: Few Are Chosen
TAKE pity on the poor orchid.
It is a delectable symbol of human love and eroticism, yet its own sex life seems less than sizzling.
When it wants to mate, it cannot saunter off and cruise the forest but is stuck in one spot, dependent on an indifferent moth or bee to penetrate its private parts, incidentally pick up a packet of pollen and deliver that floral semen to another willing orchid.
Yet researchers have gathered tantalizing evidence that orchids do, in a sense, exert some degree of choice over their far-flung partners and that they tend to mate with orchids most closely resembling themselves.


At Sound of the Beep, Select a Dance Partner
The message on Renee Roca's answering machine was in broken English, from a Russian figure skater who had defected in New York without any real plan.
"I am interested to know if you look for partner," the male voice said.


Ditka Also Has Doubts
MIKE DITKA has raised doubts about remaining as the coach of the Chicago Bears.
Ditka said after Sunday's 16-3 loss to the Detroit Lions that the Bears' president, MICHAEL McCASKEY, isn't the only one evaluating Ditka's prospects for next season.


Falcon Oil &amp; Gas Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Patterns
Shoes on His Mind
When Diego Della Valle flew into New York from Italy last week, he had two things on his mind: results of a shoe design contest at the Fashion Institute of Technology and a new store he plans to open.
The store, which will be situated at 41 East 57th Street, in the same building as the Prada and Vuitton shops, will be his second in Manhattan.
His first store here opened five years ago at 462 West Broadway in SoHo.
He also has six stores in Italy, but the new store in Manhattan will be a pilot for global expansion.


Editor of Barron's Tells Staff He's Been Asked to Quit Post
Alan Abelson, the outspoken editor of Barron's, told a stunned staff yesterday that he had been asked to step down from his post, which he has held since 1981.
For 16 years before that, he served as managing editor of the national business and financial weekly.
In a meeting yesterday afternoon, the 67-year-old editor, who has written his well-known "Up and Down Wall Street" column for 27 years, said he had been asked by Dow Jones &amp; Company, the magazine's owner, to continue to write the column.
But he said he would do so only if Dow Jones agreed to name as editor a person Mr.
Abelson recommends.
Several staff members said they believed Mr.
Abelson would recommend the managing editor, James P. Meagher.


Accounts
*
Tourist Office of Spain, New York, to Marshall Jaccoma Mitchell, New York, to handle its American account, previously unassigned.
Billings were estimated at $2 million.


Raycomm Transworld Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Of Data Compression and Decompression
EVEN a couple of years ago, 40 megabytes of storage seemed like Santa's sack: a bottomless repository.
Today, thanks to color graphics, video, sound and byte-spewing engines like Windows and OS/2, some PC buyers consider 100 megabytes a bare minimum, and even 200MB does not seem greedy.
Hard disks are like attics or garages; regardless of size, they soon become cluttered.
The problem becomes more acute with notebook computers, which typically have smaller disk drive capacities than their desktop cousins.


JEWS OF NAZI ERA GET CLAIMS DETAILS
The Conference on Jewish Material Claims Against Germany has issued a statement detailing the criteria for eligibility of Jewish victims of Nazi persecution for German Government compensation under an agreement concluded in November.
The conference, based in New York, had previously announced the agreement, which it negotiated with the German Finance Ministry, in a brief statement.


22 Charged With Faking or Inflating Insurance Damage Claims
In what Federal prosecutors and investigators portrayed as the start of a broad assault on insurance fraud in the New York region, a total of 22 claims adjusters, salvage contractors and property owners were charged yesterday in Brooklyn with fabricating or inflating damage claims by millions of dollars.
In some cases, officials said, corrupt adjusters smashed walls and pipes to stage phony damage or sprayed tea on walls to create water stains for photographs.
One licensed adjuster regularly traveled with a hose in the trunk of his car to spray water around, they said.
And sometimes items were reported stolen by the same claimants more than once.
No Cases Related to Storm


Chess
When you have tramped over and over again the circuitous paths of analysis looking for a better move than anything yet seen, there is a real danger of losing your bearings and circling back on an alternative that you and everybody else had rejected long ago.
And, in a feverish state of overwork, you don't recognize it for the lemon that it is.
Disaster follows.
That seems to have been what happened to Ilya Gurevich, an international master from Worcester, Mass., in his game with Walter Browne, a Berkeley grandmaster, in the second round of the United States championship in Durango, Colo.
Gurevich, an acknowledged specialist in the strategic territory in which he found himself, left the main track to pick up a trail that had been abandoned three years ago.
And he paid dearly for it, because Browne produced a method against it more convincing than anything heretofore seen.
The action took place Dec. 3 at the Red Lion Inn.


Topics of The Times; An Urban Aviary
The most beautiful birds in New York are leaving town and won't be back for quite a while.
Many of the New-York Historical Society's collection of John James Audubon's watercolor paintings will be away on a long tour.
But some of the stay-at-homes remain on view through Jan. 3 at the society on Central Park West.
There is an exuberance in these watercolors that isn't caught in the more familiar engravings that were made from them.
The sandpiper snaps hungrily at a snail while a dovekie has trouble swallowing a shrimp.
A godwit balances steadily on a long leg while the purple gallinule strides by in feathered self-importance.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY
REDEFINING BIAS CRIMES
The New York City Police Department says it will be more cautious in attributing the motive of crimes to racial or ethnic bias, a move intended to head off the bitter reactions that followed the department's handling of recent attacks on Jews and blacks in Brooklyn.
Altering a decade-old policy, Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly ordered that crimes that had been labeled "bias incidents" will now be called only "possible bias incidents" until thorough investigations are completed.
Mayor David N. Dinkins became ensnared in a rancorous political fight in early December, when he labeled as "bias-related" the beating of a black man outside the Lubavitcher Jewish headquarters in Brooklyn.
A1.
MOB BOSS CONVICTED
Victor J. Orena, described as the acting boss of the Colombo crime family, was convicted of racketeering and murder charges that could keep him in prison for the rest of his life.
It was the third time this year that Federal prosecutors in Brooklyn obtained the conviction of a boss of one of New York City's five Mafia families.
B3.
GOODBYE TO SLAIN PRINCIPAL
They traveled from Brooklyn to Staten Island to stand quietly in the rear of the Catholic Church, brushing away their tears.
They touched the casket moving past.
And they said a final goodbye to their school principal, Patrick Daly.
B3.
REDUCING A LIFE SENTENCE
Leroy (Nicky) Barnes, one of the most deadly and powerful drug lords in New York City history, who became an undercover informer while serving a life sentence in prison without parole, is expected to be released from prison in six years at the request of Federal prosecutors.
B3.
EDUCATOR CHARGED WITH SEX ABUSE
The director of a Manhattan junior high school for children at risk of dropping out was arrested and charged with sexually abusing a 14-year-old boy who was a ninth grader at the school, officials said.
B4.
REGION
RESTORING WELFARE CUTS
In a vote that revived partisan debate over the state budget, the New Jersey Assembly has approved nearly $150 million in supplemental appropriations, including millions of dollars to restore welfare programs and human services that the Republican majority cut six months ago.
The bill, which passed 69 to 3, would divert money from the State Transportation Trust Fund to the budget for the 1993 fiscal year.
B6.
GIVING SANTA A HAND
Kapable Kids, a small mail-order company, shops North America and Europe for toys suitable for handicapped such youngsters.
Kapable Kids also buys standard toys and adapts them for its customers' special needs.
The company even builds special toys.
Our Towns.
B6.
NASSAU APPROVES BUDGET
The Nassau County Board of Supervisors approved a budget for 1993, ending a four-month deadlock between Republicans and Democrats that threatened to drop the county's credit rating to junk-bond status.
B6.
PATH SERVICE RESUMES
PATH service from Hoboken to the World Trade Center and 33d Street stations resumed after a 10-day suspension because of storm-flooded tunnels.
B7.
Neediest Cases B7
Chronicle B7


A Tax Cap for Health Reform
Tax cap
.
These two words could mean political dynamite.
They could mean successful health care reform.
They could mean both, which is why, by endorsing them, President-elect Clinton now sends such a positive message.
It suggests he has the policy sense -- and the political courage -- to push worthwhile reform through Congress.
The tax cap in question applies to health insurance premiums paid by employers.
Commonly, this form of compensation is not taxed, no matter how extravagant the coverage.
But unless unlimited coverage can be capped, runaway health care costs cannot be controlled.


Uncovered Short Sales Over 1 Billion on Big Board
For the first time, the number of shares sold short and not yet covered on the New York Stock Exchange surpassed the billion mark between mid-November and mid-December, the exchange reported yesterday.
At the end of the period on Dec. 15, the short positions stood at 1.01 billion shares, up 5.2 percent from the 960.5 million reported in the previous period.
The latest increase continued a string of records of short interest begun in March.


Gunfire Stops 415 Arab Deportees From Going Back to Israeli Zone
Ordered by Lebanese soldiers to leave their makeshift tent camp, 415 exiled Palestinians in southern Lebanon tried to march back into Israeli-controlled territory today but were stopped when Israel's client militia fired mortars and machine-gun rounds at them.
The shooting seemed intended more to frighten off the Palestinians than to hurt them, and it worked, because they headed back to their camp.
Nonetheless, two men were reportedly wounded, one in the hand and one in the jaw, by a piece of shrapnel.


Corrections
A chart yesterday with the continuation of a front-page obituary about Steven J. Ross, chairman of Time Warner Inc., misstated the ownership of Newsweek magazine.
It is owned by the Washington Post Company.


Militias in Mogadishu Begin Pullout of Armed Vehicles
A Somali faction began withdrawing its armed vehicles from the capital today, and similar moves planned by other clan militias would sharply reduce the firepower available to Somali forces here.
The action, by Gen.
Mohammed Farah Aidid, and plans for similar action by his rival, Mohammed Ali Mahdi, came 10 days after they had agreed to an American-mediated plan to impound the armed vehicles, which are known as technicals.
They carry anti-aircraft guns, recoilless rifles, rocket launchers or heavy machine guns, the heaviest weapons in general use in the Somali civil war.
First Convoy Leaves
A convoy of 30 to 40 of General Aidid's armed vehicles rolled out of southern Mogadishu this afternoon, and United States officials said they were driven to an undisclosed site on the outskirts.
The first vehicles belonging to Mr.
Mahdi's faction are to leave northern Mogadishu early Tuesday.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-16  HARD-LINE SERB LEADS VOTE
Slobodan Milosevic, a militant nationalist, claimed victory in his race for re-election as president of Serbia.
His main challenger, Prime Minister Milan Panic of Yugoslavia, who backs peace efforts, alleged fraud and demanded a new vote.
A1
To some, Mr.
Milosevic is a knight; to others, a deluded tyrant.
A16  U.S.
WARY OF ACTING IN BOSNIA
News analysis: Although Slobodan Milosevic's victory puts pressure on the West to live up to its warnings on Serbian aggression, the allies seem to have little taste for military action to stop the killing in Bosnia.
A1  SOMALI WOMEN TAKE CHARGE
Though they have suffered enormously from civil war and famine, women are redefining their role in Somalia.
They monopolize trade, run relief agencies and sometimes even gain renown as looters in a country dependent on food aid.
A1
The U.N. chief insisted again that Americans disarm Somalis.  A15
Gunmen started moving menacing vehicles out of Mogadishu.
A14  MILITIA FIRES ON PALESTINIANS
About 415 Palestinians exiled in southern Lebanon tried to march back into Israeli-controlled territory but were stopped when Israel's client militia fired at them.
Two were reported wounded.
A1
A look at Israel's perilous "security zone" in southern Lebanon.
A3  AIR CRASH KILLS 54 IN PORTUGAL
At least 54 people were dead and 4 were missing after a Dutch airliner slammed onto a runway and burst into flames in southern Portugal.
But 282 survived through a mixture of luck and safety measures.
A6  RUSSIA TRODS MARKET ROAD
Despite a series of recent setbacks for President Yeltsin's drive to establish a market economy, many Western economists say and that the move toward capitalism may be too far along to be reversed.
A8  CANADA'S DOOR IS CLOSING
Long considered a model of generosity in granting asylum to the world's persecuted, Canada is tightening its immigration rules.
A11  The Saudi King harshly and explicitly warned fundamentalists.
A10  Jamaica is luring tourists from as far away as Japan.
A12  A Colombian judge gives a drug cartel leader 17 years -- maybe 7.
A13  Taipei Journal: Democracy bears some bitter fruit for dissidents.
A4  National A18, B8-9  ACCUSATION IN PASSPORT CASE
The Justice Department said the White House political director may have helped direct the search of Bill Clinton's passport files during the Presidential election campaign, the first time Federal officials have suggested that the White House may have helped orchestrate the effort to find damaging information about the Democratic candidate.
A1  WOMEN'S GROUPS CRITICIZED
Clinton lashed out at groups who have been complaining about the pace of appointments of women to his Cabinet as he named a utility executive, Hazel O'Leary, as Secretary of Energy and former Gov.
Richard W. Riley of South Carolina as Secretary of Education.
A1  OUTSIDER FOR ENERGY . . .
Clinton's choice of Hazel O'Leary as Energy Secretary was bound to please groups who had been looking for the inclusion of more women and blacks in his Cabinet, but it may take longer for energy companies and environmental groups to see how they feel.
B9  . . .
AND REFORMER FOR EDUCATION
Richard Riley, Clinton's selection as Education Secretary, is a champion of education reform with a knack for getting the changes he wants.
B9  POOR TOWN'S LUCRATIVE BET
A riverboat casino opened two months ago has begun to transform the impoverished town of Tunica, Miss., into a gambling and tourist destination.
But some wonder if the attraction will remain once the novelty wears off.
A18  CONVICTION IN AGENT'S DEATH
The brother-in-law of a former president of Mexico is convicted of conspiracy in the 1985 killing of an American drug agent.
A18  The Klan erects a cross in Cincinnati, but it is soon pulled down.
B8  A Massachusetts town tries an unusual method to combat crime.
B8  Metro Digest B1  NEW CAUTION ON BIAS CRIMES
The New York City Police Department said that it would be more cautious in attributing the motive of crimes to racial or ethnic bias, a move intended to slow the angry reactions of politicians and the public that have helped turn recent attacks on Jews and blacks into citywide symbols of racial tension.
A1  Business Digest D1  Fashion B12  What's selling?
Anything new.
Patterns  By Design  Neediest Cases B7  Science Times C1-13  Scientists argue the Dead Sea scrolls anew.
C1  A gene for cell immortality may reshape cancer research.
C1  A bird's genetic roadmap is altered in a few decades.
C1  Science Watch C8  Peripherals C9  Pictures from the microscope: beauty and structural clues.
C10  Q&amp;A C11  Personal Computers C13  Arts/Entertainment C15-20  The Talk of Hollywood C15  How nonprofit theaters woo subscribers.
C15  A troupe of dancers over 40.
C15  Music: New York Composers Orchestra.
C15  Dance: Alvin Ailey troupe.
C16  Word and Image: "Audacious Kids," analyzing children's literature.
C19  "A Gang for Good." C20  "Nova" on alcoholism.
C20  Sports B13-19  Baseball: Boggs is trying to forget the Red Sox.
B16  Basketball: What happened to Tarkanian, or anatomy of a firing.
B13  Columns: Rhoden on Kentucky basketball.
B13  TV Sports B15  Football: Cowboys rout Falcons to win division.
B13  Playoff picture is still a puzzle.
B14  The well-armed Niners face decision time.
B15  Despite losses, the Jets don't feel completely down and out.
B15  Hockey: Rangers shut out Devils.
B13  Sports People B19  Obituaries B10-11  Stella Adler, acting teacher.
B10  Nathan Milstein, violinist.
B10  Editorials/Op-Ed A20-21  Editorials  A tax cap for health reform.
Use the "bias" label cautiously.
Mr.
Clinton's first China test.
Topics: An urban aviary.
Letters  A. M. Rosenthal: As you sow.
Tony Snow: The great giveaway game.
Flora Lewis: The time of the cuckoo.
Ralph Bradburd: A tax that rides the tides.


Brain and Marijuana
For the first time, researchers have identified a naturally occurring chemical in the body that binds to the same receptors on brain cells as do cannabinoids, the active ingredients of marijuana.
But they said the new knowledge does not necessarily mean that marijuana could immediately be modified for medicinal uses because the associated mechanisms in the brain have not been fully understood.
The findings are reported in the current issue of the journal Science.


CHRONICLE
"Chutzpah" is not a word normally used in connection with the recipient of an honorary degree.
But on Sunday, DR.
NORMAN LAMM, president of Yeshiva University presented a doctor of humane letters to Gen.
COLIN.
L.
POWELL, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, for demonstrating "distinct qualities that are inextricably associated with the New York persona: perseverance, ambition, competence and chutzpah, which we translate as disciplined audaciousness."
The translation was not necessary for General Powell, who received the degree at Yeshiva's 68th annual Hanukkah dinner and convocation at the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel.
As he explained in his acceptance speech for 700 supporters of the university, he has some familiarity with Yiddish, acquired during a job he had while he was growing up in the Bronx, "working at Sixer's baby-furniture store on Westchester Avenue, where it is reliably reported I learned a bissel Yiddish," which means a little Yiddish.


Books of The Times; In Classic Children's Books, Is a Witch Ever Just a Witch?
Audacious Kids  Coming of Age in America's Classic Children's Books  By Jerry Griswold  Illustrated. 285 pages.
Oxford University Press. $25.


Why the Shark Was Given the Shove
What was the point of the San Antonio Spurs' firing of Jerry Tarkanian late last week?
Specifically, it was a disagreement between Tarkanian and the Spurs' owner, Red McCombs, over how immediate the team's needs for an experienced point guard were.
Spiritually, it was a fatal miscalculation as to how far a coach in the National Basketball Association can push before the owner shoves him out the door.
It took years of politicking and legal wrangling for the University of Nevada-Las Vegas administration to wrest control of its basketball program from Tarkanian.
It took McCombs 20 games and one fateful meeting last Friday afternoon.


Hebert Is Threatened
BOBBY HEBERT received a telephoned death threat after the New Orleans Saints lost, 20-16, to the Buffalo Bills on Sunday.
The quarterback was later escorted from the Superdome to his car by police officers.
"There was a crank call at the stadium," Saints General Manager JIM FINKS said.
"That happens every place."


Manhattan Follows Boast With a Rout
During the shootaround before the game against Fordham last night, Manhattan College players wore T-shirts mimicking David Lettermen's Top 10 list with their own 10 reasons to watch Jasper basketball.
The first nine were forgettable, but embroidered on the back of the Jaspers' shirts was the No. 1 reason: "It's Not Fordham Basketball."


SAUDI DENOUNCES FUNDAMENTALISTS
King Fahd of Saudi Arabia has delivered his harshest and most explicit denunciation yet of Saudi Muslim fundamentalists.
He demanded in remarks made public today that the fundamentalists stop distributing anti-Government materials and stop using mosques to incite reactions against Government policies and the ruling family.
King Fahd said "foreign currents" stood behind a campaign to destabilize Saudi Arabia, making a scantly disguised reference to Iran and Sudan.


Review/Music; Big Band In Looks, Not Style
The New York Composers Orchestra looks like a big band and, sometimes, sounds like a big band.
But its program on Sunday night at the Knitting Factory invoked typical big-band methods only to twist and explode them, and some pieces jettisoned big-band style completely.
Its inventive and satisfying set swaggered through (slightly skewed) blues, flurried and squalled in free jazz and shared rich, reverent chorales.
The orchestra, which convenes occasionally as a repertory ensemble for composers who don't normally have big bands at their disposal, played material from its new album, "First Program in Standard Time" (New World), along with two pieces that it commissioned.


U.S. Sues 8 Airlines Over Fares
The Justice Department filed an antitrust suit today that accused the eight largest American airlines of using a computerized reservation system to fix air fares.
Without admitting or denying the accusation, two airlines, United and USAir, agreed to end the practice of communicating proposed future fare increases to each other through the computerized system.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
The Government sued the nation's eight largest airlines, accusing the companies of using a computerized reservation system to fix fares.
United and USAir, neither acknowledging nor denying the charges, agreed to end the practice of communicating proposed fare increases through the system.  [ D1. ]
Novell plans to buy A.T.&amp; T.'s Unix System Laboratories for more than $350 million in stock.  [ D1. ]


Isco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 30


Let the Refugee Children Out of Prison
To the Editor:
"Choice for Young Illegal Aliens: Long Detentions, or Deportation" (front page, Nov. 30), on the detention of Central American refugee children by the Immigration and Naturalization Service, calls attention to an abuse of governmental power that is too little known.


Review/Television; Treating Alcoholism: How to and How Not to
"Can You Stop People From Drinking?" The question is posed on tonight's offering from "Nova" by David Musto, who teaches the history of medicine at Yale University.
He begins his report on dire drinking in the United States and the former Soviet Union with an acknowledgement that prohibition has never worked.
The freshest elements of this underfocused, overly familiar documentary concern the desperate measures being tried by Russian authorities to reduce their country's one undisputed record: the world's highest rate of alcoholism.
As one man put it, vodka is the national religion.


Dow Plans Big Charge For Quarter
The Dow Chemical Company said today that it would take a $935 million charge in the fourth quarter to carry out a required accounting change for retiree health-care benefits.
The charge, equal to $3.44 a share, will be partly offset by a gain of more than $200 million, or 80 cents a share, for a change in the way the company accounts for income taxes and liabilities.


The Arts Lose 2 Masters: Stella Adler, Nathan Milstein
Stella Adler, the acting teacher who was a leading Method exponent, died at 91.
Nathan Milstein, the violin virtuoso, was 88.
Obituaries, page B10. (Photos)


Domestic Problems Should Come First
To the Editor:
Anna Quindlen urges that a Haitian woman, who is human immunodeficiency virus positive and has endured personal hardship and very real family tragedy, be allowed to enter the United States (column, Nov. 18).


Western Experts Feel Russia's Move to Free Market Will Continue
Despite a series of recent setbacks for President Boris N. Yeltsin's drive to establish a market economy in Russia, many Western economists and experts say that the transition is likely to continue, at a slower pace, and that the process may be too far along to be reversed.
In a dozen interviews, experts on Russia as well as officials who deal with Russia in the United States Government, the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank said they were disappointed that Mr.
Yeltsin had been thwarted in his efforts.
But they said they no longer feared that the Yeltsin reforms were in danger of being undone.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Named Jeff Overton vice president for marketing and communications.
OAKLAND ATHLETICS -- Signed Ruben Sierra, outfielder, to a five-year contract.


Cowboys Star In How the East Was Won
The Dallas Cowboys tonight showed why they are the National Conference East Division champions and why they will be a solid rock that will not easily be moved in the playoffs leading to Super Bowl XXVII.
The Atlanta Falcons showed why they are not a playoff team, why they are under .500 and why they will need a makeover -- especially on defense -- for 1993.


FRP Properties Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


The Time of the Cuckoo
Russia's Foreign Minister, Andrei Kozyrev, stuns the 50 other ministers at the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe by promising help for Serbia from "Greater Russia" and reviving the harshest cold war rhetoric.
Walter Russell Mead, a foreign policy expert, writes in the academic World Policy Journal that the U.S. can restore its own frontiersman vigor and solve Russia's dangerous economic and social distress by buying Siberia "at a fair price -- perhaps in the range of two or three trillion dollars." He acknowledges that is a lot more than the per acre price paid for Alaska but points out that "real estate, oil and gold are all up since 1867, and the dollar is down."


As Americans Stay Home, Japanese Discover Jamaica
After decades of heavy reliance on the winter cravings of Americans for sun and sand, Jamaica, pushed by the persistently weak American economy, has begun a major restructuring of its travel business that is drawing thousands of tourists from new markets.
Frequently scheduled flights now link the island to South America via Colombia, and there are jam-packed charters from Italy, Germany and even Scandinavia.
But nowhere have the efforts to diversify the country's pool of foreign guests paid off so well as with Japan.
Despite having to travel two days to cover 8,020 miles from Tokyo to Kingston, Japanese visitors are now flocking to many of this country's finest hotels.


Use the 'Bias' Label Cautiously
Recklessly employed, the phrase "bias crime" feeds divisiveness, especially in racially charged times.
That's why it comes as good news that the police and City Hall plan to be more cautious in the way they handle bias complaints.
The need for caution was demonstrated by last weekend's rancorous events in the Williamsburg section of Brooklyn.
A 41-year-old black man, Robert Johnson, told police that several Hasidic Jews attacked and beat him without provocation.


Paying a Visit to an Incarcerated Mom


22 Charged With Faking or Inflating Insurance Damage Claims
In what Federal prosecutors and investigators portrayed as the start of a broad assault on insurance fraud in the New York region, a total of 22 claims adjusters, salvage contractors and property owners were charged yesterday in Brooklyn with fabricating or inflating damage claims by millions of dollars.
In some cases, officials said, corrupt adjusters smashed walls and pipes to stage phony damage or sprayed tea on walls to create water stains for photographs.
One licensed adjuster regularly traveled with a hose in the trunk of his car to spray water around, they said.
And sometimes items were reported stolen by the same claimants more than once.
No Cases Related to Storm


Mr. Clinton's First China Test
Diplomats say Deng Xiaoping himself orchestrates China's bullying of Hong Kong, aimed at intimidating the colony's Governor, Christopher Patten, into dropping his proposals to broaden democracy.
Mr.
Patten could use America's help in this unequal struggle.
Ready or not, Bill Clinton now faces his first China test.
Supposedly Mr.
Deng wants to force Britain to kowtow to China on all decisions affecting the colony, even though British rule runs through July 1, 1997.
So when Governor Patten called for increasing the electorate for a number of legislative seats, China responded with escalating threats.


Business and Health; Medical Costs: The Beat Goes On
MEDICAL price inflation seems to be easing a bit, stirring hopes that the health-care monster may yet be tamed.
But the price numbers can be misleading and even irrelevant, economists say, because the amount spent on health care is still rising by 10 percent a year, swallowing more of the economy.
The Labor Department says that after climbing steadily since 1987, medical price inflation slid to a 6.7 percent annual rate for the first 11 months of 1992, down from 7.9 percent in 1991 and 9.6 percent in 1990.
But the slide probably will not be much help to President-elect Bill Clinton as he seeks a formula for affordable health care.


The Great Giveaway Game
It's official: The 90's is the Decade of Inclusion.
Bill Clinton has made "inclusion" a hallmark of his permanent campaign, offering balm, bucks and solemnities to all.
And some Republicans, eager to prove they are not Bible Belt Torquemadas, also pose as partisans of the open door.
The battle for inclusion represents the latest installment in both parties' struggle to seize the great American middle ground.
For them, "inclusion" provides a much-needed nonce word -- a cozy, empty, inviting euphemism for "pandering."


JEWS OF NAZI ERA GET CLAIMS DETAILS
The Conference on Jewish Material Claims Against Germany has issued a statement detailing the criteria for eligibility of Jewish victims of Nazi persecution for German Government compensation under an agreement concluded in November.
The conference, based in New York, had previously announced the agreement, which it negotiated with the German Finance Ministry, in a brief statement.


Glenn Rowen; Singer, 59
Glenn Rowen, a member of the New York City Opera chorus for 17 years, died on Sunday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 59 years old.
He died of AIDS, said Susan Woelzl, the opera's director of publicity.


Chief Quits Software Job
The chairman and co-founder of the Santa Cruz Operation Inc. resigned today, a week after he had been sued for sexual harassment by three of the company's former secretaries.
The executive, Larry Michels, said: "I am doing this because I believe it is vital that I place the interests of the company and its employees ahead of my own. I do not want the company to be affected by the allegations made recently against me, which I believe to be unfounded."


2 Retired Officers to Return to I.B.M.
I.B.M. said yesterday that it had recalled two senior executives from retirement to help run the giant computer maker less than a week after it announced a huge charge against earnings and another big round of job cutbacks.
The fact that one of the returning executives was once the chief rival of John F. Akers, the chairman, for the company's top job is a sign that the move is intended to give the board an independent "second opinion" on management issues, according to industry analysts and former executives of the International Business Machines Corporation.


Stocks Rise in Japan
Stocks closed higher today in thin trading.
At the end of the afternoon trading session, the Nikkei index of 225 issues was up 45.23 points, or 0.26 percent, at 17,690.67.
On Monday, the index closed 33.30 points lower.


Atrix Laboratories reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


Quiksilver Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


He Comes to Hustle. Letterman Can Wait.
Chucky Brown watched himself on ESPN's highlights Sunday night and couldn't help but smile.
Brown might have appeared on highlight tapes before, but probably never in a Nets uniform.
Much of his basketball life has been in transition -- too much movement for any camera to get a fix on -- but with the Nets he has found a resting place on the bench.
Not that he is given much chance to rest.


Onward Through N.F.L. Playoff Fog
Entering their final game of the regular season, the Houston Oilers find themselves in the position in which a victory at the Astrodome over the Buffalo Bills might not give them the most desirable matchup in the first round of the National Football League playoffs.
If the Oilers lose, the Bills will clinch the American Conference East title with a 12-4 record and gain a first-round bye in the playoffs.
That result would also preclude any chance of the Oilers' having to take on the Bills in the first round, and this time outdoors in Orchard Park, N.Y.


Munoz to Retire
ANTHONY MUNOZ, the Cincinnati Bengals' 11-time Pro-Bowl offensive tackle, will retire after Sunday's game against Indianapolis.
The 34-year-old Munoz, in his 13th season, has been hampered by injuries the last three seasons.
He has been on the disabled list twice this year: for chronic problems with both shoulders and for a torn knee ligament suffered in a Nov. 15 game against the Jets.


Equivest Finance reports earnings for Year to Aug 31


Geneticists' Target: Immortal Cells
BURIED in the heart of each of the body's cells is a powerful gene that can make a cell live forever.
The gene becomes active, of course, only under special circumstances, and molecular biologists are beginning to discover when and why.
The gene, in the laconic nomenclature of molecular geneticists, is known as bcl-2, after a kind of cancer cell known as B cell lymphoma in which it was first found.


Rockies Sign Boston
DARYL BOSTON, a free agent, signed a one-year contract with the Colorado Rockies yesterday for $550,000.
The 29-year-old outfielder, who earned $935,000 last season, hit .249 with 11 home runs and 35 runs batted in for the Mets.


COMPANY REPORTS
(N) Qtr to Oct 31 1992 1991 Sales 13,009,000 12,231,000 Net inc 1,004,000 1,348,000 Share earns .09 -- Yr sales 51,559,000 41,436,000 Net inc 4,663,000 4,116,000 Share earns .42 -- Year-ago share earnings for the quarter and year are not presented because prior to being spun off from Whittaker Corp. on Nov. 14, 1991, BioWhittaker did not have a meaningful capital structure for the purposes of computing share earnings.
If BioWhittaker had been an independent company during the fourth quarter and full year of 1991, and if the September 1991 acquisition of the assets and business of 3M Diagnostic Systems Inc. had occurred at the beginning of fiscal 1991, result of operations on a pro forma basis for the fourth quarter 1991 would have reflected net income of $1,268,000, or 12 cents a share, on sales of $13,143,000.


The Saga of the Lonetree Landfill
Had everything gone according to the plans of a Colorado entrepreneur named Hunter Swanson, the Burlington Northern Railroad the and waste-disposal giant Browning-Ferris Industries, a visitor heading south of town would see a stream of rail cars hauling bales of trash from around the nation to a modern, federally approved landfill.
Instead, where the arid rolling prairie drops away toward the rails and an abandoned Army munitions depot in the distance, one sees only subtle remnants of those plans.
There's some graded land where preparation of Lonetree, as the stalled disposal site here is known, had begun, a low berm intended to direct rainfall away from the fill and three mounds built four years ago to test water flow through the soil and hundreds of feet of dense shale below it.
A thin blanket of snow immobilizing the patches of sagebrush and native grass adds to the stillness.


Engineering Measurements reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Pet Products reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Novell to Buy A.T.&amp; T.'s Unix System Labs
The software maker Novell Inc. plans to purchase A.T.&amp; T.'s Unix System Laboratories for more than $350 million in stock, the two companies said today.
Unix System Laboratories produces one version of the Unix operating system, a software program that controls the basic functions of work stations and mini-computers and is popular among people who use computers for scientific and engineering purposes.
The operating system has long been synonymous with the so-called open systems movement in the computer industry and is popular with the nation's most sophisticated programmers.


Bethlehem Steel in Deal With E.D.S.
The Bethlehem Steel Company said yesterday that it had hired the Electronic Data Systems Corporation to provide information technology intended to improve the steel company's use of technology in everything from steelmaking to enhancing overseas sales.
The two companies would not divulge the price of the 10-year agreement, but analysts suggest that the dollar amount could be as high as $500 million.


Custom Chrome Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


METROPOLITAN COLLEGE REPORT
It's that time of the year: Schools will be closing for the holiday break, and college basketball's annual winter tournaments will be getting under way.
The Chemical Bank ECAC Holiday Festival begins Monday at Madison Square Garden with Kentucky playing Rutgers, followed by St.
John's against Manhattan.
The next day, Seton Hall kicks off the first Seton Hall-Meadowlands Tournament at the Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
The No. 7 Pirates play Cornell, and No. 21 California faces James Madison in the opening round.
It will be the first collegiate appearance in the New York City area for the Bears' heralded freshman, Jason Kidd.
Fordham travels to Honolulu for the Rainbow Classic and Marist is off to Hilo, Hawaii, for the Big Island Invitational.
Manhattan
Manhattan Coach Fran Fraschilla was as confused as his players after the Jaspers (6-1) traveled to Milwaukee to play Marquette in the Bradley Center, then went to play Bradley in Peoria, Ill., at the Target Center but stayed in the Marquette Hotel. (Traveler's advisory: Manhattan lost to Marquette, but beat Bradley.)
Besides some geography, Fraschilla learned that whatever venue the Jaspers play in, forward Keith Bullock has a good time.
Bullock, who is averaging 17.8 points and 7.8 rebounds, is currently fifth in the Metro Atlantic Athletic Conference in both categories.
But he's not the only threat on the Jaspers, who have three other players averaging double figures.
Carey Edwards (13.8), Jamal Marshall (10.3) and Brenton Birmingham (10.2) round out a balanced attack.
As for the game with St.
John's in the Holiday Festival, "it'll be a dream come true for me," Fraschilla said.
"I've been inside Madison Square Garden literally hundreds of times, yet this will be the first time I'm a head coach on that floor. It will definitely be special." Columbia
Buck Jenkins continues to climb the Lions' career-scoring list.
Jenkins (19.8 points per game) is currently third on the list with a career total of 1,308 points.
Jenkins is the first Columbia player to crack the school's top-five scoring list since Heyward Dotson did it in 1970.
Jenkins replaced him at No. 3 but still trails Jim McMillan (1,758) and Chet Forte (1,611).
The Lions are 4-2.
Their next game is Monday against Lafayette, followed by a game against Villanova in Philadelphia Dec. 30.
Fordham
Fordham (2-3) will be playing in a tough tournament when it competes in the Rainbow Classic.
It will have four Top 20 teams -- No. 2 Kansas, No. 5 North Carolina, No. 6 Michigan and No. 17 Nebraska -- for company, along with Hawaii, Southwest Louisiana and Jackson State.
The Rams play Hawaii Saturday in the first game, with the winner to take on the Kansas-Jackson State winner.
Siena
The Saints (2-3) are coming off a 70-58 loss to Massachusetts and a 74-70 overtime victory over Hartford.
Their leading scorer, Lee Matthews, was the M.A.A.C. player of the week after shooting 60 percent from the floor and averaging 17 points and 13 rebounds.
He leads the M.A.A.C. in scoring (19 points per game), rebounding (12) and field-goal percentage (65.6).
Marist
It's off to the Big Island tourney in Hawaii, where the Red Foxes (3-3) play Ball State on Monday.
Junior guard Izett Buchanan is off to a solid start for the Red Foxes.
Buchanan, a first-team all-Northeast Conference performer, is averaging 17 points and 8 rebounds.
He was named N.E.C. player of the week after averaging 24 points and 10 rebounds in the Pepsi-Marist Classic.
But the best news for the Red Foxes was provided by senior forward Fred Ingles.
Ingles, who missed all but four games last season with ankle-tendon injuries, scored 17 points in the Red Foxes' victory over Central Connecticut State.
He is the team's third-leading scorer, averaging 11 points a game.
Hofstra
The team without a conference gave St.
John's all it could handle last Saturday, losing, 58-56, on a last-second shot by the Redmen's David Cain.
The St.
John's game was the first of a five-game road trip for the Flying Dutchmen (2-5), who play 20 of their 27 games on the road this year.
Hofstra plays at Rutgers tonight, then has back-to-back road contests against No. 24 Tulane on Sunday and No. 19 U.N.L.V. on Dec. 30.
Hofstra is on the road so much because the East Coast Conference collapsed after two members, Towson State and Maryland-Baltimore County, joined the Big South, Rider went to the Northeast and Brooklyn dropped its program.
Hunter
Senior forward Jose Rodriquez leads three Hawks players who are at the top of Division III statistics.
Rodriguez is first in rebounding (15.5) and Demetrius Patterson and Robert Carter are tied at No. 1 in steals, averaging five a game.
Rodriguez started the season with a 25-rebound performance against York College, the highest individual single-game total in the country thus far.
He is also sixth in the nation in blocked shots (3.0).
The Hawks are 2-1.
Baruch
Gerald Thomas won rookie-of-the-week honors in the City University Athletic Conference for the second consecutive time.
Thomas, who never played in high school, is averaging 19 points and 3 rebounds.
Baruch is 5-4.
York
The Cardinals' record -- 3-6 -- doesn't say much, but Mike Nicholson's performance speaks loudly.
Nicholson was named player of the week after scoring 47 points and grabbing 23 rebounds in the RIT Brodie tournament.
Nicholson, a 6-5 sophomore, leads the conference in scoring with an average of 20 points per game, and in rebounding, with a 10.4 figure.


Falcon Products reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Riley Led Charge to Improve His State's Schools
Low-key and unprepossessing, Richard W. Riley, President-elect Bill Clinton's choice for Education Secretary, is a champion of education reform with a knack for getting the changes he wants.
As Governor of South Carolina in the mid-1980's Mr.
Riley built a consensus for sweeping changes in the state's elementary and secondary schools, including higher standards for promotion, for high school and college graduation and for college entrance.
His education package gave the state the authority to take over inferior school districts and it levied a penny increase in the state sales tax, raising $240 million a year to pay for the new programs.


New York's Storm-Rocked Areas Qualify for Disaster Assistance
President Bush yesterday declared New York City, Long Island, Rockland County and Westchester County eligible for Federal disaster relief to repair damage from the storm that flooded coastal regions 11 days ago.
The Federal Emergency Management Agency will begin accepting applications for low-interest loans and emergency grants today at eight relief offices around the metropolitan region, said George O. Thune, a spokesman for the agency.


Melville to Shut Many Stores As Part of Its Realignment
The Melville Corporation, which operates Marshalls, Thom McAn and several other retail chains, said yesterday that it would close, sell or reformat between 700 and 800 stores over the next three to five years and focus on its divisions that show the most promise.
"It reflects our belief that to thrive in today's highly competitive retail environment, we must continually reassess our investments and capitalize on our better-performing units," Stanley P. Goldstein, chairman and chief executive, said in a statement.


TOYOTA DENIES REPORT ON USE OF G.M. TRUCK PLANT
The Toyota Motor Corporation yesterday denied a published report that said the General Motors Corporation had asked the Japanese auto maker to use one of G.M.'s idle factories to build Toyota pickup trucks.
G.M. officials did not confirm or deny the report, which appeared yesterday in Nihon Keizai Shimbun, Japan's leading business newspaper.
"Certainly the utilization of idled facilities in the United States presents a potential area for discussion," John Mueller, a G.M. spokesman, said.


Why We Shouldn't Sell a License to Pollute
To the Editor:
The concept of taxation as a primary deterrent to polluters, as recommended in a report of the World Resources Institute (Science Times, Nov. 24) is fundamentally and dangerously flawed.


2 Suspects Charged in Slaying of Brooklyn School Principal
Two men were arraigned in Brooklyn early today and charged with second-degree murder in the killing of Patrick Daly, the public school principal caught in a crossfire at a Brooklyn housing project last week.
The two men, Jermaine Russell and Khary Bekka, both 18 years old, were arrested on Sunday.
They were arraigned this morning in before Judge Joseph F. Bruno, who denied their requests for bail.
During the 10-minute hearing, the two men said nothing and appeared solemn.


Review/Dance; A Retrospective of Ailey's Talent
One tends to think of Alvin Ailey as the founder of a first-rate company with an unpreachy humanist message, as the creator of the American classic "Revelations" and as an artist who believed that dance could and should be enjoyed not just by aficionados, but by everyone.
A performance of his "Pas de Duke," presented by the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater on Saturday afternoon at City Center (131 West 55th Street, Manhattan), suggested how underrated Ailey is as a choreographer.
Created in 1976, "Pas de Duke" celebrated the bicentennial, the music of Duke Ellington, and the dancing of Mikhail Baryshnikov, a guest artist, and Judith Jamison, the Ailey star.
But the dance is far more than the occasion piece it first seems.
Ailey created a modern-dance version of a classical pas de deux, emphasizing its buried element of sexual teasing.
He also captured the sassy exuberance of Ellington's music, as well as its fleeting undertone of melancholy and its melodic lushness, in five pieces that suggest Ellington's range and, physicalized onstage, the complexity of his music.


Solectron Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 27


A.&amp; P. POSTS 89% DROP IN EARNINGS FOR THIRD QUARTER
The Great Atlantic and Pacific Tea Company yesterday reported an 89 percent drop in third-quarter earnings because of currency fluctuations and a decline in revenues caused by the lingering economic slump in the United States.


Here's to a Prosperous, Profitable Solstice
To the Editor:
Twenty-five major Christian leaders have issued a warning against the commercialization of Christmas, which "devours some, leaves others in ruinous debt and punishes the poor," and they castigate the "advertising lords" of Madison Avenue for encouraging such profligacy (news article, Nov. 29).


Nonprofit Theaters Turn to Gimmicks To Lure Subscribers
Here are a few ideas for selling theater subscriptions:
*Mail your brochures to Lands' End catalogue regulars.


By Design; A Cashmere Christmas
It's normal to experience a cashmere rush at Christmas.
There is something about the soft cuddly feel of this sybaritic knit that is luxurious, as precious to give as to receive.
Classic sweaters are obvious choices.
Now, though, is the moment to contemplate cashmere dreams.
Donna Karan has made cashmere sweats.
The drawstring pants are $2,025 a pair for women at Saks Fifth Avenue and $1,900 for men at Bergdorf Goodman.
There are matching hooded sweatshirts -- $2,900 for her, and $1,900 for him.


Trenton Assembly Restores Millions to Social Programs
In a vote that revived partisan debate over the state budget, the Assembly today approved nearly $150 million in supplemental appropriations, including millions of dollars to restore welfare programs and human services that the Republican majority cut six months ago.
"There is nothing unusual about a supplemental appropriations bill, but what is different about this supplemental, from this side of the aisle, is that 'We told you so,' " said Assemblyman Wayne R. Bryant, a Democrat and a sponsor of the measure approved today.


Review/Television; 'Gang for Good' Offers Antidote for Pessimism
America's urban landscape needs any glimmer of hope it can find these days.
When a Brooklyn grade-school principal, searching for one of his young charges, is killed in a midday street shootout, we must mourn for ourselves as well as the victim.
Reassurance is desperately needed.
And that's what can be found in "A Gang for Good," a small-budget documentary that WLIW-TV, Channel 21, is presenting tonight at 8.
Directed, written and edited by Frederick Rendina and narrated by F. Murray Abraham, the hourlong program visits the Lower East Side of Manhattan to look at an organization called the Boys Brotherhood Republic.
This particular "gang," really a club, dates back to the early decades of this century and assorted social reforms.
Along the way, it has attracted supporters ranging from Theodore Roosevelt to Fiorello H. La Guardia.
One of its more recent patrons, saving the club from extinction, is Brooke Astor.


STV Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Jiri Kylian Starts a Company for Dancers Young at Heart
Professional dance can be cruel.
In the Western world, at least, it is the province of youth, of young bodies that can be molded by choreographers and accomplish breathtaking physical feats.
After a certain age -- conventionally, 40 -- a dancer accustomed to a glamorous life and applause and world travel suddenly finds himself or herself on the professional scrap heap.
In a big ballet company, there are always character parts.
There are ballet-master and teaching jobs.
A choreographer in the modern-dance tradition can continue performing, incongruously surrounded by a seemingly unchanging cadre of youthful dancers; one thinks of Martha Graham or Merce Cunningham.


Eagle Player Arrested
Philadelphia Eagles tight end MAURICE JOHNSON was arrested early yesterday after a fight at a downtown dance club.
DARQUETTA DENNIS, manager of the Cat Club, said Johnson used profanities and threatened some of her employees after refusing to pay the entrance fee shortly after 1 A.M.


Physicians Clinical Lab reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Embryos of Fruit Flies Are Frozen and Revived
The art of preserving live organisms in frozen storage has taken an important step with a report that scientists have successfully frozen and revived the embryos of fruit flies.
The achievement will greatly simplify the work of the many laboratories that use fruit flies in experiments and is also expected to improve techniques of cryogenic preservation generally.


Pico Products reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


No Headline
"The protesting and advice-giving world that is flinging criticism at us is the same world that didn't say a word when 300,000 Palestinians were thrown out of Kuwait. And this is the same world that day by day and night by night sees thousands die -- slaughtered, butchered, raped -- in Bosnia and doesn't lift a finger." YITZHAK RABIN.  [ A1:6. ]


Bacteria Recycle Oil In Searing Spot in Sea
BACTERIA that live without oxygen or sunlight beneath the ocean floor survive by recycling crude oil and other materials containing sulfur that are deposited under the seas.
New research on these bacteria, known to use sulfur compounds for respiration, found that they are able to function under a wider range of environmental conditions than scientists had previously thought.


The Sun Makes Its Quickest Getaway of the Year


Corrections
An article on Sunday about the conflict between Armenia and Azerbaijan referred to Minsk incorrectly in some editions.
It is the capital of Belarus, not Ukraine.


The Microscope Reveals Beauty as Well as Structural Secrets
PHOTOMICROGRAPHIC images that combine artistic beauty with scientific information are the quarry of the International Instant Photomicrography Competition, sponsored each year by the Polaroid Corporation.
This year's winning images were selected from 600 entries by a jury of outside microscopy experts.
They awarded cash prizes to a grand prize winner and to winners in the categories of life science and materials science electron micrography, color prints, black-and-white prints, Polachrome instant slides and student photography.


Hartco Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Tax Politics Last of four articles.
When Margaret Thatcher became Prime Minister in 1979, the top personal income tax rate was 83 percent, a level that she said sapped incentives to work harder and create more wealth.
In a policy shift foreshadowing similar though less drastic moves across the Atlantic, Britain drove down the top rate over several years to 40 percent, where it remains today.
But reductions for people in the middle-income brackets were considerably less, and for all taxpayers, loopholes were tightened or eliminated.
And as income tax rates fell, the Government was raising other taxes, most notably the value-added tax, a form of sales tax on goods at the retail, wholesale and producer levels.
That levy, which stood at 8 percent in 1979, is now 17.5 percent.


Key Witness Backs Officers Who Shot Transit Colleague
The key witness in the shooting of a plainclothes transit police officer in Brooklyn last month has backed up the claims of the officers who shot him, saying they fired at him only after he turned toward them with his gun drawn, the witness's lawyer said yesterday.
In giving her account of the shooting of Officer Derwin Pannell to the Brooklyn District Attorney's office, the witness, who was being held that night as a fare beater, said Officer Pannell turned toward the other officers after they shouted the standard declaration, "Police, don't move," the lawyer, Jacqueline McMickens, said.


Not Every TB Case Within 50 Miles Comes From New York
To the Editor:
Your Dec. 6 article about the increase of tuberculosis cases far from the crowded city reports on an upstate New York family in which the father and one toddler had active tuberculosis disease, while the other family members were infected with the tuberculosis germ.
You raise an important issue in the occurrence of tuberculosis outside the urban setting.
Clearly, the father was the source case of tuberculosis in his family, spreading the germ to his close contacts.
You omitted a most important epidemiologic fact: Where was he from?


Goodmark Foods reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 29


Move to Speed Trade Talks
The European Community and the United States formally told the GATT trade body today that they are aiming to reach an accord in the long-running Uruguay Round of trade talks by mid-January.
President Bush, Prime Minister John Major of Britain and Jacques Delors, the President of the commission of the European Community, sent a message today to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade urging that the negotiations be speeded up.
The three leaders met in Washington on Friday,


Colombian Drug Leader Gets 17 1/2-Year Term
A judge approved a 17 1/2-year prison term today for the leader of a drug gang that the authorities say was instrumental in expanding the heroin trade here.
The sentence, which the authorities said was quite likely to be reduced to seven years because the chieftan, Ivan Urdinola, 32, had cooperated with the authorities, was received warmly in Colombia but regret in Washington.
"It would be disappointing if he served as little as seven years in prison, given the magnitude of Urdinola as a major Cali cartel kingpin," the head of the United States Drug Enforcement Administration, Robert C. Bonner, said.
"I don't think that kind of a sentence would be commensurate with both his level as a major cocaine trafficker or with the other kinds of violent crimes like homicide that Urdinola has committed in Colombia."


Man Is Convicted in Drug Agent's Torture Death
The brother-in-law of a former Mexican President was convicted today by a Federal court jury in the 1985 kidnapping and torture death of a United States drug agent.
Verdicts in the high-profile case were returned after two and a half days of deliberations by the jury of nine men and three women.
The defendant, Ruben Zuno Arce, was found guilty of all four counts, including two counts of conspiracy.


Rosel H. Hyde, 92, Chairman of F.C.C.  Under 4 Presidents
Rosel H. Hyde, a former chairman of the Federal Communications Commission, died Saturday at the Bethesda Retirement and Nursing Center in Chevy Chase, Md.
He was 92 and lived in Washington.
Mr.
Hyde died of complications from a stroke, said a spokeswoman for the Washington law firm of Wilkinson, Barker, Knauer &amp; Quinn, where he had been a partner.


Stella Adler, 91, an Actress And Teacher of the Method
Stella Adler, an exponent of Method acting whom many considered the leading American teacher of her craft, died yesterday at her home in Los Angeles.
She was 91 years old.
She died of heart failure, said Irene Gilbert, the director of the Stella Adler Conservatory in Hollywood.


Drug Lord Turned Informant To Be Released in Six Years
Leroy (Nicky) Barnes, one of the most deadly and powerful drug lords in New York City history, who became an undercover informer while serving a life sentence in prison without parole, is expected to be released from prison in six years at the request of Federal prosecutors.
Now 60 years old, Mr.
Barnes has already served nearly 15 years, most of it in the protective custody of the Justice Department.


Acting Crime Boss Is Convicted of Murder and Racketeering
Victor J. Orena, described as the acting boss of the Colombo crime family, was convicted yesterday of racketeering and murder charges that could keep him in prison for the rest of his life.
It was the third time this year that Federal prosecutors in Brooklyn obtained the conviction of a boss of one of New York City's five Mafia families.
In April, John Gotti was convicted as the Gambino boss, and Vittorio Amuso, the Lucchese boss, was convicted in June.


New Access to Scrolls Fuels Scholars' Warfare
The "freeing" of the Dead Sea Scrolls a year ago from the restrictive control of a few scholars has unleashed a storm of controversy among the warring factions of biblical researchers.
As more scholars have access to the ancient texts, they are challenging some of the reigning assumptions about who wrote them, when and how they fit into the volatile history of Judaism from about 250 B.C. to A.D. 70.
"Everything about the scrolls is being re-examined and rethought," Dr.
Michael Wise, a scrolls scholar at the University of Chicago, said in an interview last week at a conference on the manuscripts in New York.


CHRONICLE
United Press International is establishing an internship to honor HELEN THOMAS, who has been the news service's White House correspondent since 1961.
Every spring, a woman who is studying journalism, chosen by the Washington Center for Politics and Journalism, an independent organization, will work in U.P.I.'s Washington bureau for a semester and receive a $1,000 stipend.
The first intern, starting Feb. 1, will be JULIANA GRUENWALD, who graduates this month from the University of Minnesota.


Margaret Hockaday Is Dead at Age 85; Started Ad Agency
Margaret Hockaday LaFarge, a pioneer among women in the advertising industry whose saucy, irreverent ads shook up Madison Avenue, died on Friday in her apartment in Manhattan.
She was 85.
She died in her sleep of heart failure, said her niece, Susan Hockaday Jones.


The Science Behind Mailing Lists
Mailing lists are the lifeblood of many nonprofit theater companies, and these groups frequently exchange lists among themselves.
Because so many subscribers to one company also subscribe to others, however, the number of duplications is large, and culling is necessary.
"We have to gather about 400,000 names to mail 200,000 pieces," said Helene Davis, the director of press and marketing at the Manhattan Theater Club.
That company rents its list for $100 for each 1,000 names, and offers 7,000 households to marketers.
It has an additional 30,000 names on its single-ticket sales list.


Clairol Loving Care Moves to Thompson
Bristol-Myers Squibb said yesterday that it had moved its $10 million Clairol Loving Care hair color account to J. Walter Thompson New York after nearly seven years at DDB Needham New York.
Both agencies also handle other Bristol-Myers Squibb accounts.
Connie Kain, a Clairol spokeswoman in New York, confirmed a report of the switch this week in Adweek.
DDB Needham New York will continue to handle Clairol's Nice 'n Easy hair color line, she added, as well as professional products and new items.


For Boggs, Pinstripes Are In
After picking up a new contract, a pair of contact lenses and three votes of confidence from the Yankees, Wade Boggs is fast forgetting the Boston Red Sox.
He is also looking forward to playing third base in New York and regaining the hitting form that earned him five American League batting titles.


Gastineau Extradition
MARK GASTINEAU, the former New York Jets star, agreed yesterday to return to Arizona, where he faces contempt charges for violating the terms of a court-ordered drug treatment program.
At a hearing in the First District Court in Mineola, L.I., the 36-year-old Gastineau agreed to waive his right to an extradition hearing, said ED GRILLI, spokesman for the Nassau County District Attorney's office.


Striking Nurses At 5 Hospitals Reach Accord
A one-day strike by registered nurses and aides at five hospitals in Brooklyn and Queens ended after six hours yesterday, when negotiators agreed on a tentative contract that, among other things, limits the nurse-patient ratio in hospitals.
The tentative contract also increases wages by 14.5 percent over three years.


Estee Lauder Puts Aramis in Review
The Aramis unit of the Estee Lauder Companies said yesterday that it had placed in review its men's toiletries brand account after more than two decades at AC&amp;R Advertising in New York.
Michal McKay, a spokeswoman for Aramis in New York, said the review was being conducted to find "a renewed vision" for the brand, adding that seven to eight shops would probably be involved.
The contenders she identified were AC&amp;R; Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising in New York, AC&amp;R's parent, and Deutsch/Dworin in New York.


When Jets Are Down, They Don't Feel Out
Jets strong safety Brian Washington struck an incredulous expression when asked whether the team had a sense of dread when the Dolphins took a 7-0 lead into the locker room at halftime of Sunday night's game.
"Seven-zero is nothing in this game," Washington said.
"We knew that the game wasn't over. We still had over 30 minutes to play and we knew that something would happen, somebody would score some points before it was over."


Somali Women Stride Ahead Despite the Scars of Tradition
It was the eyes of the children that tortured Dahabo Isse the most.
So she solicited food from the Red Cross, and with a handful of other Somali women turned an abandoned building into a kitchen that served two high-protein meals a day to the hungry on the streets of Mogadishu.
That was almost two years ago.
Today, at 27, she directs about 140 kitchens for the International Committee of the Red Cross in the southern section of the capital, feeding more than 200,000 people a day and employing about 3,000 other Somali women.
Women in Charge
If Miss Isse's compassion triggered the idea, it was her business acumen that led to success and made her a symbol of the new power of the Somali woman in this deeply traditional Muslim society.
The two years of civil war that killed hundreds of thousands, displaced others and destroyed much of the country has redefined the position of women, transforming them into the backbone of the economy and loosening strictures that kept them from power.


Tracking Time Warner


Topics of The Times; Correction
Roy Gutman, the reporter who first uncovered Serb-run concentration camps in Bosnia, was incorrectly described in an editorial Sunday.
He writes for Newsday.


Long Bond's Yield at 2-Month Low
The price of the 30-year bond jumped almost half a point yesterday, sending its yield down to 7.39 percent, its lowest close since early October.
Because of the light pre-holiday trading, traders were not ready to say that the bond was in for a new rally.
A slide in prices before the election pushed the yield from a six-year low of 7.21 percent in October to 7.76 percent on Nov. 6.
Some traders warned that all or part of yesterday's gain could be wiped out when the Treasury holds auctions of two-year and five-year notes today and tomorrow and the trading volume thins even more as Christmas and the New Year's holiday approach.


CLINTON CHOOSES 2 AND DEPLORES IDEA OF CABINET QUOTAS
At a news conference where he named two more members of his Cabinet, President-elect Bill Clinton lashed out at women's groups who had been complaining about the pace of appointing women, calling them "bean counters" who were more interested in quotas than competence.
His comments came as he announced the appointment of Hazel R. O'Leary, a 55-year-old power company executive from Minnesota, to be Energy Secretary, and former Gov.
Richard W. Riley of South Carolina, 59, as Education Secretary.


Last Call for Some Agencies As Drinkers Sip, Not Gulp
DRINKING and driving are not supposed to mix, but when it comes to advertising, those industries have something in common: a ravenous appetite for change.
The marketers of alcoholic beverages have been reviewing their accounts and switching agencies at a pace as frenetic as that of the automotive industry, which has roiled Madison Avenue with its newfound restlessness.
An estimated $250 million in beer, wine, liquor and liqueur billings have changed hands since early last year, when the Miller Brewing Company moved its estimated $110 million Miller Lite beer account to Leo Burnett U.S.A. in Chicago from Backer Spielvogel Bates Inc. in New York.


National Beverage reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Police Dept. Vows a New Caution In Labeling Crimes as Bias Cases
The New York City Police Department said yesterday that it would be more cautious in attributing the motive of crimes to bias, a move intended to slow the rush to judgment that has helped turn recent attacks on Jews and blacks in Brooklyn into citywide symbols of racial tension.
Altering a decade-old policy, Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly ordered that crimes that had been labeled "bias incidents" would now be called "possible bias incidents" until investigations are completed.


The Great Giveaway Game
It's official: The 90's is the Decade of Inclusion.
Bill Clinton has made "inclusion" a hallmark of his permanent campaign, offering balm, bucks and solemnities to all.
And some Republicans, eager to prove they are not Bible Belt Torquemadas, also pose as partisans of the open door.
The battle for inclusion represents the latest installment in both parties' struggle to seize the great American middle ground.
For them, "inclusion" provides a much-needed nonce word -- a cozy, empty, inviting euphemism for "pandering."


PATH Back In Operation After Repairs
PATH service from Hoboken to the World Trade Center and 33d Street stations resumed yesterday morning after a 10-day suspension while workers pumped out storm-flooded tunnels and repaired electrical equipment.
It was the longest service interruption on a PATH line since a two-and-a-half month strike in 1980.
The railroad began testing the tunnel approaches to the Hoboken station with crew-only trains at noon on Sunday, said Michael A. Scott, General Superintendent of PATH operations.
The first passengers made the nine-minute trip from the terminal to the World Trade Center at 5:26 A.M.
The Hoboken connection was the last part of the PATH system to return to service after the Dec. 11 storm, which flooded parts of several tunnels and briefly interrupted traffic across the system.


Chess
When you have tramped over and over again the circuitous paths of analysis looking for a better move than anything yet seen, there is a real danger of losing your bearings and circling back on an alternative that you and everybody else had rejected long ago.
And, in a feverish state of overwork, you don't recognize it for the lemon that it is.
Disaster follows.
That seems to have been what happened to Ilya Gurevich, an international master from Worcester, Mass., in his game with Walter Browne, a Berkeley grandmaster, in the second round of the United States championship in Durango, Colo.
Gurevich, an acknowledged specialist in the strategic territory in which he found himself, left the main track to pick up a trail that had been abandoned three years ago.
And he paid dearly for it, because Browne produced a method against it more convincing than anything heretofore seen.
The action took place Dec. 3 at the Red Lion Inn.


Q&amp;A
Cans Gone Bad
Q.
Why do spoiled cans of food swell?


Nathan Milstein Dies at 88; An Exalted Violin Virtuoso
Nathan Milstein, the Russian-born violin virtuoso, died yesterday at his home in London.
He was 88 years old.
He died of a heart attack, said Maurice Clairmont, his brother-in-law.


Referee Clears Ice, Then the Rangers Clean Up
It's not even midseason, but the intensity between the Rangers and the Devils is already reaching playoff levels.
Tonight, with the National Hockey League's new anti-fighting commissioner on hand and with their best defensemen missing, the Rangers scored a 3-0 victory at the Byrne Meadowlands Arena in a game that saw all 10 skaters from both teams ordered to the penalty boxes on the second shift of the night.


With Casino, the Poor See a Change in Luck
In years past, politicians trooped to this Mississippi Delta town whenever they wanted a backdrop that showed the worst of rural poverty, especially the tumbledown shacks, outhouses and open sewers of the Sugar Ditch section.
But since it opened two months ago, a riverboat casino has begun to transform this town and surrounding county into a gambling and tourist destination, drawing people from Memphis, northern Mississippi, Arkansas and even Kentucky and Missouri.


Ray May Go, but Some Of These Kids Will Stay
One reason the Giants have gone downhill the last two years has been an aging defense.
Now, in a season that will end in Philadelphia on Sunday and leave the Giants with either a 6-10 or 7-9 record, they seem to have uncovered a good group of rookies on defense.
Coach Ray Handley cited three of the rookies for their work in last Saturday's 35-21 upset of Kansas City -- cornerback Phillippi Sparks, defensive end Keith Hamilton and safety Corey Raymond.
And there are others awaiting playing time next year, notably defensive end Stacey Dillard, nose tackle George Rooks and inside linebacker Corey Widmer.


School Director Charged With Abuse
The director of a Manhattan junior high school for children at risk of dropping out was arrested yesterday and charged with sexually abusing a 14-year-old boy who was a ninth grader at the school, officials said.
Investigators are also attempting to determine whether the director, Michael Friedman, 49, abused other students as far back as 1985, said Robert Viteretti, deputy commissioner of investigation for the New York City School District.


What Global Warming?
To the Editor:
"Cheapest Protection of Nature May Lie In Taxes, Not Laws" (Science Times, Nov. 24) echoes the theme that bad taxes become good taxes (alias "green fees") when they tax "bad" things.
According to the article, these include fossil fuels, traffic and household garbage.


Sports of The Times; Happy Days Home Again In Kentucky
FOR a number of fans, Kentucky's last-second loss in overtime to Duke last March signaled the Wildcats' full recovery from the devastating blow of probation.
But after watching Kentucky rout Morehead State last Saturday, I realized that the 104-103 loss to Duke marked the end of an era, not the beginning.
This season is the beginning.


Burnham Finney; Editor and Writer, 92
Burnham Finney, an editor and writer specializing in the machine-tool industry, died on Saturday at his home in Scarsdale, N.Y.
He was 92.
He died of congestive heart failure, said his son, Paul Burnham Finney.


U.N. Chief Faults U.S. Again on Disarming Somalis
The United Nations Secretary General has again criticized the Bush Administration for being reluctant to disarm fully all the warring factions in Somalia.
In a report to the Security Council, Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali also turned down an American request to start planning a new United Nations peacekeeping force to take over the safeguarding of relief convoys as the American troops withdraw.


Bioplasty Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Special Gifts For Children Who Need Special Care
IT'S a tricky time of year, these holidays, when so many joys bubble so visibly everywhere.
Yet, not far beneath the surface, there sometimes lurks an undercurrent of sadness, of memories past, of might-have-beens or if-onlys, even of why-mes.
Much of the holiday focus is, of course, on children and their incredibly fresh and flexible faces, those wondrous windows into excitable souls that reflect so many complex feelings back to the parents watching through the viewfinder.
That's what the parents, focusing tightly while walking backwards into the colorfully lighted room, want to capture on film this week, the wide-eyed look of those little people in the Mickey Mouse pj's.


With AIDS Care
To the Editor:
A panel reporting to the United Hospital Fund urges tougher measures to fight the rampant spread of tuberculosis in New York City (front page, Nov. 30).


Datamarine International reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


George Murnane, 75, a Partner, Like His Father, at Lazard Freres
George Murnane Jr., a former partner at the investment banking firm of Lazard Freres &amp; Company, died on Sunday at Indian River Memorial Hospital in Vero Beach, Fla.
He was 75 and lived in Vero Beach.
Mr.
Murnane, a former resident of Locust Valley, L.I., died of emphysema, said his wife, the former Mary McDonnell.


SERB NATIONALIST CLAIMS A VICTORY; RIVAL CRIES FOUL
Slobodan Milosevic claimed victory today in his race for re-election as President of the Serbian republic.
But his principal opponent, Prime Minister Milan Panic of Yugoslavia, denounced the election Sunday as fraudulent and said he would demand a new vote.
A victory by Mr.
Milosevic, a militant nationalist, would be a clear setback to the United States and other nations that have openly endorsed Mr.
Panic, a naturalized American citizen, and have threatened further sanctions against Yugoslavia if Mr.
Milosevic wins.


COMPANY NEWS
CRESTAR FINANCIAL CORP., Richmond, signed a definitive agreement to acquire CFS Financial Corp., Fairfax, Va., the parent of Continental Federal Savings Bank, for $66 million.
RYDER SYSTEM, Miami, the truck rental company, will form an international division to manage its services outside the United States.


Nassau Approves Budget That Eliminates Deficit
The Nassau County Board of Supervisors today approved a budget for 1993, ending a four-month deadlock between Republicans and Democrats that threatened to drop the county's credit rating to junk-bond status.
County officials said the approximately $1.9 billion budget would eliminate a $121 million deficit while freezing property taxes and adding about 1,000 more employees over the next two years.
It also eliminates a mortgage-tax increase that County Executive Thomas S. Gulotta, a Republican, had included in his budget proposal last month.


Krelitz Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Holiday Festival Has a Local Angle
Back in 1952, the Holiday Festival was conceived with a rather modest immediate goal -- to help the sponsoring Eastern College Athletic Conference pay the rent for its offices over the clock in the old Biltmore Hotel on East 43d Street.
Now called the Chemical Bank ECAC Holiday Festival, the tournament remains, in its 41st year, a distinctly New York institution even with Kentucky as a participant.


Lady Foot Locker Changes Its Tune
The Lady Foot Locker retail footwear chain and its agency, AC&amp;R Advertising in New York, have made changes in a humorous television commercial after some viewers took it at face value.
The spot, which began running earlier this month, advertised Nike running and exercise shoes for women.
As women worked out on screen, a 1930's song played on the soundtrack, intended as a counterpoint.
The tinny-sounding tune urged women to "keep young and beautiful, if you want to be loved."


Hidden Beauty In the Lab


Military Step: West Is Wary
Although Slobodan Milosevic's seeming victory in the election in Serbia increases the pressure on Western nations to live up to their tough warnings in the Balkans, the Bush Administration and its allies seem to have little appetite for military action to stop the killing in Bosnia.
The only immediate military action that the Western nations are contemplating is enforcing the existing ban on military flights over Bosnia.
But there are still disagreements about how and when to do that, and even if those are resolved, as seems likely, there is no expectation that this would stop the fighting in Bosnia and Herzegovina.


Photronics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


BUSH AIDE ACCUSED OF LYING IN INQUIRY ON CLINTON SEARCH
The Justice Department says that the White House political director, Janet G. Mullins, "may have made false statements" to Federal investigators and may have helped direct the search of Bill Clinton's passport files during the Presidential election campaign.
The accusations against Ms.
Mullins, who is among the inner circle of aides to James A. Baker 3d, mark the first time Federal officials have suggested that the White House may have helped orchestrate the effort to find damaging information about the Democratic candidate at the height of the campaign.


U.S. Moves to Impose Limits on Killing of Coastal Sharks
In an attempt to stem a slaughter that scientists fear will seriously disrupt marine ecosystems, the Federal Government is moving to impose controls on shark fishing within 200 miles of the Atlantic and Gulf coasts.
The National Marine Fisheries Service, which fashioned the regulatory plan after more than three years of study and public comment, says it will arrest a serious decline in the numbers of large coastal sharks, the most threatened group, and enable them to rebound to sustainable levels by 1995.
The regulations are to go into effect next month.


John Kimberly, 89, Ex-Chief Executive Of Paper Company
John R. Kimberly, the former chairman and chief executive of the Kimberly-Clark Corporation, died Sunday at his home in Easton, Md.
He was 89.
Mr. Kimberly died of heart disease, said Tina Barry, a spokeswoman for Kimberly-Clark.


And Now Carroll Makes An Extra Point: He's Sorry
Pete Carroll, the Jets' defensive coordinator, said yesterday he regretted making a choke gesture after Miami's Pete Stoyanovich missed an extra point late in Sunday night's game at Joe Robbie Stadium.
Stoyanovich's wide-right miss left the Jets on top, 17-16.
But he atoned for the shank by making a game-winning 37-yard field goal with seven seconds left.


The Talk of Hollywood; Louis Malle Cuts a Film and Grows Indignant


Government in India Wins a Crucial Vote On Reaction to Riots
The 18-month-old Government crushed a right-wing challenge tonight from the pro-Hindu Bharatiya Janata Party in Parliament.
Prime Minister P. V. Narasimha Rao won a confidence vote over his handling of violence between Hindus and Muslims.
Mr.
Rao attacked the main opposition party for what he called its betrayal of assurances by senior officials that the mosque at Ayodhya would be protected during a Hindu gathering.
Hindus say the 16th-century shrine is built at the birthplace of Ram, on the ruins of a temple honoring the deity.
The mosque at the site was demolished by mobs on Dec. 6, setting off violence between Hindus and Muslims and clashes with the police.
The riots killed more than 1,300 people.


GeoResources reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
7.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.00
2.73
4.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.23
3.13
3.74
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.42
3.30
3.84
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.38
6.41
6.45
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.39
7.42
7.52
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.39
8.42
8.65
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.42
6.42
6.72
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Israel's Buffer in Southern Lebanon
Israel's "security zone" in southern Lebanon was created to serve as a buffer against guerrilla attacks on towns and farming settlements along Israel's northern border.
Carved out and controlled by Israel, the zone has been held despite repeated demands by the Beirut Government that Israeli forces withdraw from the area.


On My Mind; As You Sow
Across the Middle East, Arab states are profoundly moved by the kind of Muslim militant fundamentalists deported by Israel.
They are moved to terror and loathing.
If they had the self-confidence, these Arab states would round up their own fundamentalists.
They would not only deport them but introduce them to those other common instruments of Mideastern law enforcement -- torture and execution.


Suburban Bankshares Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bird-Watching Biologists See Evolution on the Wing
THE work of evolution is usually done on a time scale of millennia, too protracted for scientists to witness.
So biologists were surprised by a finding that a bird known as the blackcap had evolved an entirely new migration pathway in a mere 40 years, right under the watchful binoculars of Europe's devoted bird enthusiasts.
The blackcap, a European wood warbler and relative of American gnatcatchers and kinglets, appears to have developed the genetic program for an entirely new migration route that shuttles it each winter from Central Europe to England rather than to the warmer climes normally sought by these birds in the western Mediterranean.


Irwin Toy reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Britain to Help Insurers Cover Terrorism Risks
Faced with a potential crisis among commercial property owners and tenants unable to buy insurance against terrorist attacks, the British Government agreed today to help insure buildings against damages from bombs set off by the Irish Republican Army.
The Government, acting under pressure from the insurance industry, landlords and commercial tenants, said it would act as an insurer of last resort if insurance companies could not cover bombing losses.


CANADA TIGHTENS IMMIGRATION LAW
Long considered a model of generosity in granting asylum to the world's persecuted, Canada is making its immigration procedures more restrictive in the biggest change in Canadian immigration law in 16 years.
After a long period of economic hard times, and with unemployment well over 10 percent, the new law responds to a decline in Canadian tolerance toward immigrants, among other reasons, because they are seen as competitors in the labor force.


Northwest Drug reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


St. Nick On a Disk to Cheer Holidays
PERHAPS the time has come when families gather on Christmas Eve around a glowing computer monitor.
Knowledge Adventure of La Crescenta, Calif., is ready for them.
The company, known for its innovative software series including Knowledge Adventure, Sports Adventure, Space Adventure, Isaac Asimov's Science Adventure and Dinosaur Adventure, has put the Clement C. Moore classic, "A Visit from St. Nicholas," on a computer disk.


Donors to Neediest Cases Wish They Could Do More
"Wish I could do more."
The note scribbled by Therese W. Trachtman of Manhattan was brief, but it gave voice to a sentiment expressed by many donors to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
More and more people seem frustrated by a recession that refuses to release its grip on the New York region.


Tailor-Made for Bowe: The Homecoming Bout
The promoters will hype the RIDDICK BOWE-MICHAEL DOKES heavyweight championship bout as "The Homecoming," because it will be held at Madison Square Garden on Feb. 6.
The Garden will officially announce the fight today at a news conference.
Bowe, who grew up in the Brownsville section of Brooklyn, began his boxing career at 11 in the Kid Gloves at the Garden.
He later won four New York Golden Gloves titles there.


At Least Handley Has Admirers at One Network
If NBC's Bob Trumpy sounded a bit like Alan M. Dershowitz last Saturday in defense of Giants Coach Ray Handley -- "No one deserves the disrespect Ray Handley's gotten the past six weeks" the analyst said during the Giants' 35-21 upset of the Kansas City Chiefs -- well, Trumpy had an extremely willing client.
(Handley has another defender, too; the MSG Network's acerbic Bob Page, who says only "psychopathic murderers" deserve the bile Handley has swallowed.)


Slain Principal Is Called a Martyr and a Saint


Market Place; Expectations Cut, Ivax Drops $5.75
AFTER more than a year of lofty promises for the the Ivax Corporation, expectations fell to earth yesterday as investors learned that the company's hot-selling drug was a little cooler than expected.
Ivax, a holding company for pharmaceutical and chemical businesses, was among the biggest losers yesterday on the American Stock Exchange, dropping $5.75 a share to close at $29.25 on volume of almost 1.7 million shares.
It was the worst day in the stock's trading in its recent history.


Taipei Journal; Dissident Finds Democracy Isn't Its Own Reward
Sipping coffee in a dark corner of a small cafe, a bit furtively as if the police might still be interested in him, Huang Hua spoke softly of a long and distinguished career in which he had lately worked himself out of a job.
Lean and rumpled, Mr.
Huang is a professional political prisoner, a 53-year-old who has spent most of his adult life behind bars for speaking his mind.
These days, in an increasingly democratic Taiwan, the prisons have fewer openings for dissidents, and he has little experience in doing much else but protesting.


Dalfen's Ltd. reports earnings for Year to July 31


H. Paul Warwick; Advertising Executive, 98
H.
Paul Warwick, a retired advertising executive, died on Sunday at Boca Raton Community Hospital in Florida.
He was 98 and lived in Boca Raton.
He died after surgery on a fractured hip, his son, John, said.


Schield Management Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


RESULTS PLUS
BOXING  Vasquez Wins Title
Cesar Vasquez of Argentina knocked out Hiroshi Kamiyama of Japan in the first round last night to win the World Boxing Association junior middleweight crown in Buenos Aires.
A violent right cross by Vasquez floored Kamiyama in the first minute and opened a deep gash over his left eye.
A combination of rights and lefts by Vasquez sent Kamiyama down a second time, but Venezuelan Referee Isidoro Rodriguez allowed the fight to continue after the count of 8.
Finally, a left cross floored Kamiyama for the third time.
The crown was left vacant when former champion Vinnie Pazienza of the United States was severely injured in a car accident. (AP) N.B.A.
Price Leads Cavaliers
Mark Price scored Cleveland's last 9 points in regulation, then added 7 more in overtime as the Cavaliers won their sixth consecutive game, 111-107, over the Washington Bullets last night at Landover, Md.
Rex Chapman scored 37 points, including 11 in overtime, but it wasn't enough to prevent the Bullets from dropping their seventh straight. (AP)


Pupils Say Goodbye To a Slain Principal
They had traveled from Brooklyn to Staten Island to stand quietly in the rear of the church, brushing away their tears, and they had touched the coffin moving past.
They had said a final goodbye to their school principal.
Now the long black hearse was carrying away the remains of Patrick Daly, and the crowds and the politicians were drifting off.
But these three children from the Red Hook Houses were still sobbing.
This particular killing had been, they said, just more than they could bear.


It's Decision Time for Well-Armed 49ers
Steve Young's baseball cap spoke 1,000 words, or, in this case, three.
"Keep The Peace," his hat said in indelible stitching the other day at a team practice, and serenity is precisely what the San Francisco 49ers wish for.
Joe Montana's re-entrance to the team could make for an unseemly schism, if egos are not handled tidily.
Young has sailed through a 13-2 season as the unopposed starting quarterback and a candidate for the league's most valuable player award, but Montana is a future Hall of Famer whose return to uniform might throw matters out of kilter.


Bridge
A strong claimant for the best defensive play of 1992 is Mike Passell of Dallas, who sat East on the diagramed deal in a regional Swiss team championship in Vancouver.
His opponents reached a normal three no-trump contract, and his partner led the club queen to dummy's king.
Since West has no side entry for his clubs, it is clear that South can make his contract.
He can work on spades and make two tricks in that suit, together with three diamonds, two hearts and two clubs.
But a funny thing happened.


Aztec Manufacturing Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


What's Selling? Anything New
Fashion has not, despite some popular misconceptions, fallen into a hole and had a cover pulled over its head.
After a couple of seasons of lackadaisical sales and perfunctory interest, it is alive and well and selling quite nicely.
Stores report that fashion sales, while not booming, have been moving along energetically, especially since Thanksgiving.
New styles, technically for the resort season, have given sales a boost.
Many of them, of course, are as appropriate for the social scene in cold climates as they are under the southern sun.
Settling the question of whether women would stick to old standbys or go for striking new fashions at a time of economic distress, the prevailing sales pattern shows that new styles are the big winners.
Bell-bottom pants, bare midriffs, visible bras and wide (as opposed to skinny) pants are important sellers at most stores.


Bush Goes Back to Work After Viewing Film on Kuwait Fires


Ruptured Main Disrupts Traffic and Delays Subway Service


New Energy Chief Has Seen 2 Sides of Regulatory Fence
President-elect Bill Clinton's choice of Hazel R. O'Leary, a little-known executive with a Minnesota utility, to lead the Department of Energy was bound to please groups that had been looking for more women and blacks in his Cabinet.
But it may take longer for energy producers, marketers, environmental groups and the Energy Department's biggest constituency -- the military and the nuclear weapons industry -- to see how they feel.
Mrs.
O'Leary, a 55-year-old former regulator in the Ford and Carter Administrations who later worked in an energy-consulting firm, fits the developing mold of the Clinton Administration: she is familiar with Washington's power brokers in her field.
Still, her own views are not widely known.


Police Dept. Vows a New Caution In Labeling Crimes as Bias Cases
The New York City Police Department said yesterday that it would be more cautious in attributing the motive of crimes to bias, a move intended to slow the rush to judgment that has helped turn recent attacks on Jews and blacks in Brooklyn into citywide symbols of racial tension.
Altering a decade-old policy, Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly ordered that crimes that had been labeled "bias incidents" would now be called "possible bias incidents" until investigations are completed.


Metro Airlines reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Topics of The Times; Summer Souvenir
After the day of the nor'easter, the day of the blizzard that didn't stick and the day of the downpour, one could see, strolling down a Greenwich Village street, the floral equivalent of the little engine that could.
It was a yellow rose, twined around a trellis positioned against a small brick house.
Stray roses are not uncommon in New York City in December.
Yet this rose had been through everything short of a hailstorm -- snow, rain and a 75-mile-an-hour wind.
There it was, looking as if it had never been troubled by anything harsher than a summer breeze.


Suffolk County Issues Bonds
Suffolk County, L.I., went to the public debt market yesterday and tentatively priced for sale to the pub lic $49.3 million of tax-exempt refunding general obligation bonds through Bear, Stearns &amp; Company.
The financing includes short-maturity serial bonds that are priced to yield 2.8 percent in 1993, 4.7 percent in 1997, 5.5 percent in 2002 and 5.85 percent in 2005 -- and 6.2 percent bonds due between 2011 and 2015.


Uncovered Short Sales Over 1 Billion on Big Board
For the first time, the number of shares sold short and not yet covered on the New York Stock Exchange surpassed the billion mark between mid-November and mid-December, the exchange reported yesterday.
At the end of the period on Dec. 15, the short positions stood at 1.01 billion shares, up 5.2 percent from the 960.5 million reported in the previous period.
The latest increase continued a string of records of short interest begun in March.


43 Years Later, a Love Still Thrives
TO mark their first meeting 43 years ago, William Wynkoop and Roy Strickland celebrated at Fedora's, a Greenwich Village restaurant, where they happily told a dinner companion how they had found each other, fallen in love and stayed together.
"I remember Dec. 19, 1949, was a remarkably warm night," said Mr.
Wynkoop, a 76-year-old retired professor of English literature.
"It was about 9:15 and I was walking across Washington Square Park. I saw Roy on a bench and sat down next to him."


Review/Film: Scent of a Woman; Al Pacino, Indulging A Lust For Life
"Scent of a Woman," a glorified father-son buddy film with a needlessly sensitive title, offers Al Pacino the kind of opportunity actors dream about.
As Lieut.
Col.
Frank Slade, a corrosively bitter military man who has been blinded (quite literally) by his own stupidity, Mr.
Pacino roars through this story with show-stopping intensity.
Bo Goldman's screenplay provides him with a string of indelible wisecracks, and Martin Brest's direction allows room for the character to be developed at great length.
Mr.
Pacino's contribution, in the sort of role for which Oscar nominations were made, is to remind viewers that a great American actor is too seldom on the screen.


Mont Saint-Sauveur International reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 1


Naylor Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3


Long Bond Continues Rally; Note Auction Is Successful
The bond market continued its holiday rally yesterday, with the price of the 30-year bond jumping more than half a point and the yield dropping to 7.34 percent, its lowest since Oct. 5.
In the last two days, the price of the long bond has risen a point, and the yield has fallen almost a tenth of a point.
The rest of the market followed, with Treasury notes up a quarter-point to a half-point.


Devtek Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Lawrence Journal; Throwing Up, and Living With, Barriers to Crime
Every time he left his South Lawrence home to run an errand on Monday, Nelson Martinez was stopped by the police and asked to prove he had a right to be in the neighborhood.
But he doesn't mind the hassle, he said today, if it helps chase out the drug dealers.
The Lawrence police have barricaded every street but one leading into Mr.
Martinez's four-block neighborhood in an unusual effort to drive away the dealers by scaring away their customers.


Personal Health
AS you batten down the hatches to shut out winter's chill, keep in mind that some seasonal hazards come from within and can rise to dangerous levels when all the windows and doors are shut tight.
The most common is carbon monoxide, an insidious vapor that can kill with little or no warning.
Improvements in venting systems and public warnings to consumers have resulted in a steady decline in carbon monoxide deaths in recent years.
Still, more than 3,800 people will die from carbon monoxide exposure this year, and at least 10,000 others will be poisoned seriously enough to require medical attention or to miss a day or more of normal activities.
Those who survive serious carbon monoxide poisoning can suffer brain damage causing memory problems, other intellectual impairments and personality changes like irritability, moodiness and aggressiveness.


Dean Foods reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 29


Global Yardsticks Are Set to Measure 'Quality'
American companies got religion on quality during the 1980's, studying the teachings of such gurus as W. Edwards Deming and Joseph Juran and introducing programs that usually had the words "total," "quality" and "management" in their name.
The problem: Everybody seemed to have a slightly different definition of what quality was.
But now, any American company hoping to sell its products in Europe is being forced to come to grips with a series of internationally agreed-upon quality standards.
Formulated by the International Standards Organization in Geneva, the guidelines have been adopted by the countries in the European Community as the yardstick for measuring quality.


Broderbund Software Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


COLLEGE HOCKEY REPORT
Boston College
The Eagles, a young team under a new head coach, Steve Cedorchuk, had won only 4 of 13 games this season before pulling off a coup on Monday night.
Behind by 7-4 against the touring Moscow Spartak club, the Eagles managed to tie the contest, 8-8, in Kelly Rink before a modest crowd of 2,362.
How was the goaltending?
Don't ask.


FATAL MINE BLAST LINKED TO SMOKING
The Government said today that cigarette smoking and tampering with safety equipment might have caused the explosion that killed eight coal miners in southwestern Virginia this month.
The head of the Federal Mine Safety and Health Administration, William J. Tattersall, said at a news conference that he and the Virginia Division of Mines had only begun their investigation but that cigarettes, cigarette butts and lighters had been found "on and around the explosion victims."


Computer Automation reports earnings for Year to June 30


Healthtrust Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


All American Communications Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Store Chain Unfazed by a Few Empty Shelves
Every day during the hectic run-up to Christmas, customers at the more than 500 Target discount stores around the nation find empty display racks where hundreds of different products ought to be.
Are executives here at Target's headquarters frantic over lost sales?
No way.


Home Care Serves a Need, Provides Jobs and Is Cost-Effective
To the Editor:
New York State's home care program, which faces serious budget cuts by the Department of Social Services, offers true social and cost advantages (front page, Nov. 20).


New York Court Shields Lawyers Who Report Dishonest Colleagues
New York State's highest court ruled yesterday that law firms cannot dismiss lawyers for doing what their professional disciplinary rules require -- blowing the whistle on a dishonest colleague.
The court, the State Court of Appeals, has almost uniformly protected the rights of employers to dismiss almost any worker for almost any reason, at least when anti-discrimination laws do not apply.
But given the role of lawyers as self-regulated officers of the court, the court held, in a 5-to-0 decision, that the rights of law firms must be read more narrowly.


Whittaker Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Bank Rates Remain Flat This Week
The average yields on bank money market accounts and certificates of deposit for the week beginning today are little changed from the previous week, according to the latest survey by The Bank Rate Monitor.
Analysts at The Monitor see no further interest rate reductions coming from the Federal Reserve, which has cut rates two dozen times since June 1989.


Hunger, a Growth Industry
Despite the tepid economy, one New York enterprise continues to grow rapidly.
City Harvest, the nonprofit group that collects leftovers and delivers them to the hungry, expanded by 30 percent this year.
City Harvest is likely to keep growing.
There's no shortfall in supply or, unfortunately, demand.
That disturbing fact poses a challenge for Democrats about to move into the White House.


Knicks Get No Respect, From Bulls
Pat Riley and the Knicks will not be exchanging Christmas cards with the Chicago Bulls.
That much was evident yesterday as the Knicks prepared for their Christmas night showdown in Chicago
Riley, who does not often pass on a chance to motivate his team, said of the Bulls: "I still don't think they respect us. I just don't get the feeling that they do. As an athlete and as a coach, you just know.


Alpine Group reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Clinton Ire on Appointments Startles Women
Cutting across party and political lines, women yesterday reacted with a mixture of anger and bemusement at President-elect Bill Clinton's swipe at women's groups, who he said were "playing quota games and math games" with the selection of his Cabinet.
And they were stunned by the vehemence with which Mr.
Clinton criticized behind-the-scenes efforts to create a more inclusive advisory body than those of his Republican predecessors.


Herley Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 1


Alcide Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


THT Inc. reports earnings for Year Sept 30


Campus Journal; A Wordsworth Scholar Worthy of the Name
Relevance, said Wordsworth, is irrelevant; what really counts in art, as in life, are values.
Don't bother checking Bartlett's.
The author is Jonathan Fletcher Wordsworth, great-, great-, great-nephew of the Romantic poet William Wordsworth, and a well traveled Oxford scholar.


Accounts
*
Oxford Health Plans, Darien, Conn., to Deutsch/Dworin, New York, to handle the health maintenance organization's account, previously handled in-house.
Deutsch/Dworin was awarded the account, with billings estimated at $3 million to $5 million, in a review that also included Cliff Freeman &amp; Partners and Messner Vetere Berger McNamee Schmetterer Euro RSCG, both in New York, and Wieden &amp; Kennedy, Philadelphia. *
Baker Furniture, Grand Rapids, Mich., to McKinney &amp; Silver, Raleigh, N.C., for its estimated $3 million advertising and sales promotion account, formerly at Aves Advertising Inc., Grand Rapids.
McKinney was awarded the account after a yearlong review involving many agencies.


Bush Trip to Somalia Is Planned for Jan. 1
President Bush will mark the New Year with a visit to the troops he dispatched to Somalia to help feed the victims of war and famine, the White House said yesterday.


Market Place; Wireless Phones: Way of the Future
WHEN the Pacific Telesis Group, one of the largest phone companies in the world, announced earlier this month that it planned to split into a $9 billion traditional phone company and a $1 billion cellular business, the chairman voted with his feet: he's going to the smaller, but faster-growing cellular company.
That seems to say volumes about the future of telephones without wires.
Analysts say that while plain old telephone service will remain the biggest revenue source for most phone companies in the near future, it will eventually be displaced.


Tellus Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Gervin Joins Spurs
A former San Antonio Spurs star, GEORGE GERVIN, is returning to the team's bench as an assistant coach.
Gervin will assist the team's new coach, JOHN LUCAS with the backcourt. (AP)


RailAmerica Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Schott's Lawyer Joins Race Relations Meeting
A civil rights leader and a lawyer for the Cincinnati Reds' owner, MARGE SCHOTT, said they were encouraged by a two-hour meeting yesterday during which they discussed ways to improve race relations.
"I think they'll be doing several constructive things, and I think you'll hear of one very soon," said FRANK ALLISON, president of the Cincinnati chapter of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
British Airways abandoned its plan to take a stake in USAir, after the United States and Britain were unable to agree on steps to open their airline industries to more foreign competition.  [ A1. ]  In lobbying against the British Airways deal, the heads of four major U.S. airlines demonstrated an unusual, but effective, level of cooperation.  [ D2. ]
Target has managed a healthy "in stock" average, despite joining many other retailers in ordering less for the Christmas season.
But with more empty shelves this year than last, shoppers seeking last-minute bargains may be frustrated.  [ D1. ]


VideOcart Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


Book Notes
Ethics and the Ethicist
Last week, the University Press of New England received its spring 1993 catalogues, listing among the books the new paperback edition of "Ethics at the Bedside," a collection of 12 case studies written by leading medical ethicists.


Fairfield Thrashed By UConn
Connecticut scored 90 points against Fairfield tonight in another one of its "routine" contests, which have usually come to mean those outside the Huskies' Big East schedule.
The final score this time was 90-66, with Scott Burrell, the UConn senior forward, displaying all of his skills.
Burrell scored 19 points, but there was more to his game than that.


Corrections
An article yesterday about a change in the New York City Police Department's procedure for classifying bias crimes described the new process incorrectly.
The department's bias unit will determine whether a crime is bias-related.
The department's bias review panel will review those decisions and has the power to reverse them.


Astro-Med Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Great Atlantic &amp; Pacific Tea reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 5


Review/Film; Sexual Obsession, Edited for an R
There are no words in "Damage," Louis Malle's elegant film version of Josephine Hart's slender, soapy novel of sexual obsession, to explain what happens when Dr.
Stephen Fleming (Jeremy Irons) and Anna Barton (Juliette Binoche) meet.
The setting is an otherwise boring party.
The encounter seems random, though the two have reason to cross paths: Anna happens to be the new girlfriend of Martyn (Rupert Graves), Stephen's son.
The chemistry is so intense that an affair begins immediately, for reasons that the film simply takes for granted.
Stephen has been seen staring wistfully around the house, showing only perfunctory interest in his unobjectionable wife (Miranda Richardson) and precocious daughter.
The much bolder Anna is presented as one of those fearlessly honest sexual beings, the sort who make more sense in the imagination than they do in the flesh.
On the simplest level, the two make a handsome couple, with Ms.
Binoche's serene, chiseled features and Mr.
Irons's ability to look great with a walking stick and a Labrador retriever.
It's not possible to watch him without thinking of the word debonair.


BRITISH AIR HALTS PLAN TO PURCHASE BIG STAKE IN USAIR
British Airways today abandoned its plan to take a stake in the USAir Group, dealing a blow to the ailing American carrier, after the United States and Britain were unable to agree on steps to open their airline industries to more foreign competition.
British Airways and USAir held out the possibility that a new deal could be put together, saying they would discuss alternatives to their original agreement, which called for British Airways to pay $750 million to USAir in exchange for 44 percent of its equity and 21 percent of its voting stock.


HRE Properties reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Man in the News; Pathfinders of the Middle Ground: Leslie Aspin Jr.
In selecting Representative Les Aspin to be his Secretary of Defense, President-elect Bill Clinton has picked a military specialist who favors further cuts in Pentagon spending but who will also fortify the new Administration's inclination to intervene in the fighting in Bosnia.
By all accounts, Mr.
Aspin's strength is his fascination with military issues.
In recent years, as chairman of the House Armed Services Committee, he has thought hard about the future of the Pentagon, the question of military intervention, and about how to put the weapons industry to civilian use.
He knows the ins and outs of the budget process in the Pentagon and on Capitol Hill.


Electric &amp; Gas Technology reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Review/Dance; Ted Levy and Friends Reconfirm Tap's Rebirth
The evening was billed as "Ted Levy and Friends" and the friends included Gregory Hines, Savion Glover and Jimmy Slyde, among others, and they were, as usual, terrific.
Mr.
Levy is a member of the gifted generation of younger tap virtuosos who have come of age in recent years, successors to the veteran hoofers who sparked the tap revival of the last two decades.


ISRAEL COURT BARS APPEAL FOR ARABS
Israel's Supreme Court rejected appeals today that 415 banished Palestinians be brought back to Israeli territory because Lebanon refuses to receive them.
The ruling came as the Lebanese Army reportedly blocked international relief workers from bringing fresh supplies to the Palestinians, forcing them to begin rationing food and water in the tent camp they have set up in a area of southern Lebanon that lies between Israeli and Lebanese checkpoints.


Lethal Lobbying; A Deal Dies as a U.S. Carrier's Rivals Demand Britain Relax Rules on Them
When Robert L. Crandall, the chairman of American Airlines, began to speak out four months ago against the British Airways plan to buy a major stake in USAir, his was a voice crying in the wilderness.
British Airways and USAir had got the jump on him by winning endorsement for their venture in major newspapers, and USAir's workers had sent thousands of letters to legislators who seemed to have the ear of important political figures -- including President Bush.


Judge Orders Mentally Ill Manhattan Man to Remain in Hospital
Larry Hogue, a mentally ill man whose aggressive behavior has terrified many Upper West Side residents, was ordered held in a state hospital against his will yesterday by a judge who ruled that Mr.
Hogue was likely to abuse crack, refuse treatment and become psychotic and dangerous if he was released to the streets yet again.
The judge ruled after a state psychiatrist testified that Mr.
Hogue, who is being held in Creedmore Psychiatric Center in Queens, is "a disaster waiting to happen."


Failure Group reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 27


Nets Put Up Losing Fight At Home
Showing tonight: "The Nets." Right before your very eyes, they were horrifying, with 43 percent shooting from the field against the Boston Celtics and a ho-hum attitude in front of their home fans.
They stunned you, confused you, acting as though they didn't care early, then suddenly fighting like mad to the last second only to lose on the final shot to the Celtics, 106-104.
New Jersey's loss to the decaying Celtics gets one thumb up and one down.
The Nets trailed by as many as 16 points to the Celtics because of incredibly horrid shooting early on (41.8 percent in the first half) and poor defense.


Integral Systems reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


Corrections
The Patents column in Business Day on Monday missidentified an inventor at Bell Laboratories who patented a new application for carbon molecules known as Buckminsterfullerenes.
He is Arthur Hebard.
The article also omitted the name of one inventor; he is Joseph M. Rosamilia.


U.N. Censures Khmer Rouge For Kidnappings and Threats
The Security Council condemned the Khmer Rouge today for kidnapping and threatening members of the United Nations peacekeeping force preparing Cambodia's first free elections.
But it went no further than demanding that the Khmer Rouge cease all such hostile acts and abide by the agreement it signed in Paris last year to cooperate with the elections.


Base Ten Systems reports earnings for Year to Oct 31


William E. Hegarty, 66, a Lawyer For Times on the Pentagon Papers
William E. Hegarty, a lawyer who played a part in winning the landmark court case permitting publication of the Pentagon Papers, died yesterday at Greenwich Hospital in Greenwich, Conn.
He was 66.
He had pneumonia and died of heart failure, his family said.


Idan Software Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Haskell R. Coplin, 70, A Scholar of Sexuality
Haskell R. Coplin, Professor Emeritus of Psychology at Amherst College and a scholar of human sexuality, died Sunday at St.
Mary's Hospice in Tucson, Ariz.
He was 70 years old and lived in Amherst, Mass.
He died of cancer, said his wife, Jo Ann Shinaberger Coplin.


Follis DeVito Verdi Gets Viacom's VH1
VH1, the adult video music cable television network owned by MTV Networks, said yesterday that it had awarded Follis DeVito Verdi Inc. in New York its account, previously handled by Fred/Alan in New York, which has closed.
Barry D. Kluger, a VH1 spokesman in New York, said Follis DeVito was awarded the account following a review that also included two other New York shops, Kirshenbaum &amp; Bond and Margeotes Fertitta &amp; Weiss.
Though he declined to discuss billings, industry executives estimated them at $1.5 million to $2 million.


Richard Christie, 74; Social Psychologist Studied Personality
Richard Christie, a social psychologist at Columbia University, collapsed and died on Monday in Schermerhorn Hall on the Columbia campus.
He was 74 and lived in Manhattan.
Professor Christie died apparently of a heart attack, said Fred Kneubel, a Columbia spokesman.


Tuscarora Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Clinton's New Foreign-Policy Thinkers: Like-Minded Ex-Carter Teammates
President-elect Bill Clinton said today that the times demanded "bold new thinking" in foreign policy.
But in choosing his foreign policy team, he took the most conventional of approaches -- picking experienced, loyal and generally like-minded friends and advisers whom he can count on not to get him in trouble abroad while he focuses on problems at home.
What is unsual about that experienced team of advisers is that for most of them, the last time they had their hands on foreign policy was 12 years ago, when many of them served together in the Carter Administration.


Women Need Better Friends Than Packwood; Saints vs. Libertines?
To the Editor:
Lisa Schiffren (Op-Ed, Dec. 2) sets up two new male stereotypes, two packaged personalities:


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-12  USAIR DEAL IS OFF


Robert A. Katz, 65, Corporate Executive And Lawyer, Dies
Robert A. Katz, an international lawyer and corporate executive, died on Sunday at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in Manhattan.
He was 65 and lived in Manhattan.
Mr. Katz died of complications from cancer, said his son, Michael, of College Park, Md.


Taking the 8:15 to the Suburbs; Commuting Transformed by Growth Outside New York City
More and more people in the metropolitan region are commuting from homes in the suburbs to jobs in other suburbs, a new Federal study shows, continuing a trend that experts say has been reshaping the region's economy for 30 years.
The study of commuting patterns, released yesterday by the Census Bureau, also found that while New York City remains the region's job center, reverse commuting has risen as more businesses have moved all or part of their operations to the suburbs, where many employers have fared better in the recession than their counterparts in the city.
Impact on Transportation Policy
"What this all tells us is that the region has changed permanently," said Regina Armstrong, an economist and senior fellow with the Regional Plan Association, which analyzes social and economic patterns in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut.


This Just In: Recession Ended 21 Months Ago
Here's proof that economics is an inexact science: An official panel of economists determined today that the nation's ninth postwar recession ended a month before they realized it had started.
And it took 21 months to sort all this out.
The dating committee of the National Bureau of Economic Research declared today that the recession had ended in March 1991 -- the month before it even announced there was a recession.
The committee determined in April 1991 that the recession had begun in the previous July.


Bridge
One of the world's leading player-writers has made a habit of writing interesting essays on important bridge subjects.
Mike Lawrence calls them "Topics on Bridge," and his second set of 15 can be obtained directly from him: 131 Alvarado Road, Berkeley, Calif., 94705.
The price is $5 each, or $42 for a set, postpaid.
There are several unusual topics.
One answers the question, "When can you overcall with a four-card suit?" This details the rare exceptions to the normal rule that an overcall needs a five-card suit.
A second answers the question, "How long is partner's suit?"


FOOD NOTES
Wild Venison for Sale
Having wild venison for dinner usually means being a hunter or knowing one.
The only venison that can be sold commercially by butchers is ranch-raised.
But now there is a new, legal source for wild venison.
The Ojibwa tribe of northern Wis


No Easy Out for Bosnia
There's no easy way in Yugoslavia.
Serbia's election result dashes hopes that the strongman Slobodan Milosevic would be removed peaceably at the polls.
He'll have to be forced the hard way to slow the slaughter in Bosnia.
Washington rightly complains of voting irregularities and media manipulation during the campaign.
But contesting the election won't substitute for confronting Mr.
Milosevic with force.


A (Nearly) Presidential Call for Care in Holiday Imbibing
A SOUTHERN BAPTIST, described as a social drinker who has a beer now and then, hardly seems the ideal spokesman for a national public-service announcement warning holiday revelers about the perils of drunken driving.
It makes sense, though, when he turns out to be Bill Clinton.


Northwest Indians Live on Poverty Coast
To the Editor:
In the far northwest corner of Washington State, near Cape Flattery, lives (rather, exists) a tribe of native Americans called the Makah.


Wine Talk
FORGET the pre-wrapped food processor.
And the overpriced tie.
Or the gift certificate.
You can do better than that, even with only two shopping days to go.
When it comes to the true last-minute Christmas gift, the cliffhanger, the desperation move, it's time to think about wine.
If you are sure of yourself -- and the recipient -- the complete recordings of Glenn Gould may be in order.
Or the catalogue from the Matisse show.
Or Knicks tickets.
But if gift-giving confidence is not your long suit, get yourself and your credit cards to the nearest wine shop.


A New 'Challenge' For a Pepsico Unit
Ideas that work for one division of Pepsico often turn up at another.
The latest example: the company's Frito-Lay snack-food operation will conduct a "Lay's Challenge" for its Lay's potato chips, echoing the successful "Pepsi Challenge" that pitted Pepsi-Cola in taste tests against Coca-Cola.


Vitalink Pharmacy reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Home Care Serves a Need, Provides Jobs and Is Cost-Effective; For the Clinton Agenda
To the Editor:
You tellingly portray the plight of older New Yorkers who depend on Medicaid-financed home care to keep them living in their own homes (front page, Nov. 20).
Precarious as their position is, they are better off than the thousands of the near-poor, frail elderly who do not qualify for the Medicaid home attendant program administered by the Human Resources Administration because their incomes are slightly above the poverty level of $529 a month, and they may have more than the legally permitted $3,050 in assets and the $1,500 burial allowance.
This group does not have the money to buy home care services.


Ultimap Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Atlanta School's Ban on Hiring Non-Christians Opens a Debate
Along with the Christmas wreaths, the performance of Handel's Messiah and the seasonal good cheer, something else swirled around the Christmas season at the elite Westminster School here -- an increasingly public debate over a policy barring non-Christians from teaching or being trustees at Atlanta's most prestigious prep school.
The policy has already been criticized by from some of the nation's top colleges, and many parents fear it could affect their children's college applications.
It has also generated unaccustomed controversy at a school that has become a pillar of the Atlanta establishment and one of the most distinguished college preparatory schools in the South.


Bill Clinton and Food: Jack Sprat He's Not
"THE good news is, my husband loves to eat and enjoys it," Hillary Clinton said.
"The bad news is, he loves to eat, even when things are not always right for him."
Visits to nine restaurants here that his friends say are among Bill Clinton's favorites, as well as sightings around the country, confirm his wife's description of his eating habits.
From Sims Bar-B-Q to Juanita's, from Doe's Eat Place to Hungry's Cafe, President-elect Clinton prefers the stuff with fat in it: jalapeno cheeseburgers, chicken enchiladas, barbecue, cinnamon rolls and pies.
But no chocolate-chip cookies.


Computrac Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Bronx Man Killed by Robbers As He Tries to Protect Family
As she cried and held her daughter yesterday, Judith Davilla told 5-year-old Melissa that her father would not be coming home because he was in heaven.
The child's father, Felix Vargas, 26, died of a gunshot wound to the neck late Monday night after two robbers forced their way into his apartment in Soundview, the Bronx, and threatened to kill his family.
The shooting, which woke friends and neighbors who ran to his rescue, occurred shortly after the robbers ordered the child and her mother into the bedroom.
Felix Jr., 7 months old, was sleeping in his crib in his parents' room.


Official Serbian Voting Tally Puts Hard-Liner Way Ahead
The president of Serbia, Slobodan Milosevic, consolidated his lead today in official returns from Sunday's balloting, in which he sought re-election.
But his opponent, Milan Panic, the Prime Minister of Yugoslavia, insisted that the election had been stolen and demanded that Mr.
Milosevic resign.
"It's an outrage," Mr.
Panic said, when the Serbian election commission reported that Mr.
Milosevic had won 55 percent of the vote, against 36 percent for Mr.
Panic.
The commission said its figures were based on a tally of about 55 percent of the votes cast.
A formal announcement is expected Thursday.


Bed Bath &amp; Beyond reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 29


Bowe to Fight Dokes at Garden Feb. 6
Michael Dokes has fought 339 rounds in 55 professional bouts.
He is 34 years old, a three-time loser, a reformed drug abuser, and says he is more effective when he is overweight, which he is now.
Despite these apparent liabilities, Dokes yesterday officially became part of the promotional package known as "the Homecoming," an $8 million boxing match against Brooklyn native Riddick Bowe at Madison Square Garden on Feb. 6, for two-thirds of the heavyweight championship of the world.


Oxboro Medical reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


Justice Dept. Is Critical Of Molinari
A Justice Department official has asserted that the office of Guy V. Molinari, the Staten Island Borough President, supplied fabricated information to a department investigation into claims that a Federal immigration agent convicted on civil rights charges was framed.
In a letter to Mr.
Molinari, Deputy Attorney General George J. Terwilliger wrote that after a five-month investigation, the Justice Department concluded that material said to exonerate the agent, Joseph Occhipinti, was fabricated.


An Explosive and Unpredictable Ranger
He brought the new car home on an October Thursday, barely one week after scoring his first National Hockey League goal.
Like so many American kids, Aleksei Kovalev took the money from his first real paycheck -- a hefty sum that comes from a five-year contract signed in September with the New York Rangers -- and blew a wad on a new set of wheels.
Unlike most kids, though, Kovalev, a 19-year-old Russian, had trouble finding his way home.
He was supposed to follow his interpreter, Irina Cytowicz, back to his temporary residence in Rye, N.Y., but somewhere on the Long Island Expressway, Kovalev decided to design his own directions.
He eventually got to the Triborough Bridge, to the George Washington Bridge, to the New Jersey Turnpike, to the Lincoln Tunnel, to Madison Square Garden, from where he knew his way home.


Louisiana Acts to Keep Its Anti-Abortion Law
The Louisiana Attorney General asked the Supreme Court on Monday to review the state's strict anti-abortion law, arguing that it should be upheld because new medical advances prove that "unborn children are human beings."
The Attorney General, Richard P. Ieyoub, had recently announced that he would seek a review of the Louisiana law, virtually an abortion ban, despite the Supreme Court's decision last month reaffirming the constitutional right to abortion.


Review/Opera; Cast Changes in 'Lucia' And 'Eugene Onegin'
The Met's productions of "Lucia di Lammermoor" and "Eugene Onegin" have received an infusion of new personnel.
Martile Rowland, a young soprano who has caused commotions of praise elsewhere, made her Met debut on Dec. 15 as Lucia, and seemed at times on the verge of a triumph; her Act I cabaletta received a huge ovation.
But the upper range of her voice proved to be problematic.
She possesses a dazzling virtuoso technique, and can also float a shimmering pianissimo, but her high notes were often harsh and inaccurate.
While the Mad Scene was intriguingly meditative and rhapsodic, its peak E flats failed to materialize.
Some of these difficulties were probably due to nervousness: Ms.
Rowland will undoubtedly have greater success in the future.
Also new to the "Lucia" cast were Haijing Fu as Enrico and John Fowler as Edgardo.
Mr.
Fu has a strong and eloquent baritone, rich in the darker colors; his portrayal of Enrico might have been a little stiff, but he was a substantial vocal presence.
Mr.
Fowler's tenor tended to be thin and unsteady under pressure, but he improved as the evening went on and played the role with a great deal of verve.


LaTex Resources reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


A Step-by-Step Guide to the 'Not Too' Cocktail Party
A GOOD cocktail party is fast, electric and perfect for meeting, renewing and disconnecting at will -- an arena for encounters without commitment.
But how does the cocktail party, with its signature high-calorie fare of triple-cream cheeses and thick pates, fit in with this age of counting grams of fat with every bite?
The answer is the "not too" party, which offers food that's not too fatty (but not too much like health food) and beverages that take into account the desire to limit alcohol without eliminating it.
And very important, the party is not too much work and not too expensive.


At Least 8 More Students Accuse School Leader of Sexual Abuse
At least eight students have stepped forward with new allegations of sexual misconduct against the popular director of an alternative junior high school in East Harlem, the authorities said yesterday.
The school director, Michael Friedman, was arrested on Monday after the school system's investigators issued a report accusing him of fondling a 14-year-old boy in his office.
Because the student was over 11 years of age, Mr.
Friedman was charged with misdemeanor abuse.


Industra Service reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Ingles Markets reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


Corrections
A picture caption in The Times Magazine on Sunday with an article about home design misstated the name of a design firm.
It should have been Irvine &amp; Fleming.


PRESIDENT TO VISIT TROOPS IN SOMALIA
President Bush will fly to Somalia to spend the New Year with American troops there, the White House announced today.
Marlin Fitzwater, Mr.
Bush's spokesman, said the President's trip would "demonstrate United States concern for the people of Somalia, our commitment to humanitarian assistance and our support for American and United Nations forces."


Commission Backs Inheritance Rights For Homosexuals
In a decision that lawyers and city officials say could affect thousands of cooperatives in New York City, the city Human Rights Commission has ruled that homosexuals have the right to inherit co-op apartments from their partners.
The decision essentially extends to gay people the same rights of inheritence that apply to heterosexual spouses.
In all co-op agreements that allow heterosexual spouses to inherit apartments without being subject to the approval of the co-op board, the agreement must specifically spell out that gay couples have the same right.


Duke's Bench Has Answer for Its Critics
Duke 96, L.S.U. 67  LAHAINA, Hawaii, Dec. 22 (AP) -- It's tough to knock a team that is ranked No. 1 and coming off consecutive national championships.
Those who do such things decided that Duke may not have the depth of past years, that the bench could be an Achilles' heel if Coach Mike Krzyzewski has to turn to it.


Critic's Notebook; 3 New British Plays With Serious Messages
It's no secret that the outstanding British farce of the moment is being written every day by the royal family.
But who is going to write the great tragedy this reeling former empire demands?
Battered by recession and terrorism, uncertain of its relationship with either the new Europe or the new Washington, Britain would seem, if little else, a fertile subject for its serious native playwrights.


Devils Have an Identity Problem at Home
It's tough enough for the Devils to lose to the Rangers at home before a rare capacity crowd at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
It's worse when at least half the fans are cheering for the visiting team and chanting "Bee-ZER! Bee-ZER!" because goalie John Vanbiesbrouck led the Rangers to a 3-0 shutout on Monday night.
On top of all this, the Devils continue to pay the Rangers for the right to exist.
Above and beyond the territorial indemnity they paid the Rangers to move into the metropolitan market in 1982, the Devils also must give up half their yearly television revenue: 20 percent to the Rangers, 20 percent to the Islanders and 10 percent to the Flyers.


A Togetherness Theme: Taylor Looks to Parcells
Lawrence Taylor, whose glorious pro football career appeared ended six weeks ago by a torn right Achilles' tendon, said tonight he would return next year if Bill Parcells returned as the Giants' head coach.
If the Giants keep Ray Handley or hire someone other than Parcells, Taylor said he would have to rethink his decision.
Handley's job has been imperiled because of two disappointing seasons as Parcells's successor.
Taylor's career has been imperiled by the serious injury he suffered against the Green Bay Packers and the long rehabilitation it requires.


Samuel Lenher, 87, A Du Pont Executive And College Trustee
Samuel Lenher, a retired Du Pont executive and chairman emeritus of the University of Delaware board, died Thursday at Cokesbury Health Care Center in Hockessin, Del.
He was 87.
Mr.
Lenher, who was a patient at the health care center, joined the E. I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Company as a research chemist in 1929 and spent his entire career there.
In 1955 he was elected a director, vice president and member of the Du Pont executive committee.
He retired in 1970 and became a member of the company's audit committee in 1975.


Weprin Seeks Shift In Rail Line Funds
Assembly Speaker Saul Weprin yesterday proposed shifting $158 million from suburban commuter lines to buses and subways in New York City in a legislative maneuver aimed at removing the need for a fare increase next year.
Mr.
Weprin's plan, which comes amid an increasingly bitter debate over how to divide state transportation subsidies, calls for consolidating the operations of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority's five divisions, which include the Long Island Rail Road, the Metro-North commuter railroad and the Transit Authority.


Applied Extrusion reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Books of The Times; Trading in Misery On a Doomed Slave Ship
Sacred Hunger By Barry Unsworth 630 pages. Nan A. Talese/Doubleday. $25.
Reading "Sacred Hunger," Barry Unsworth's long and beautifully written novel, you know you are in the hands of a master craftsman when you find yourself slowing down on page after page to savor his thoughts and words.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about a new agreement for compensating Jewish victims of Nazi persecution misstated the conversion from marks to dollars in some copies.
Any Jew who previously received a one-time payment under the German Federal Indemnification Law received 5,000 marks, or about $3,200 at the current rate.
Those eligible under the new agreement will receive monthly payments of 500 marks, or about $320, plus "a limited interim payment."


CHRISTOPHER AND ASPIN NAMED FOR STATE DEPT. AND PENTAGON
President-elect Bill Clinton selected Warren M. Christopher as Secretary of State and Representative Les Aspin of Wisconsin as Secretary of Defense today, making them the two anchors of a foreign policy team that draws heavily from the last Democratic Administration.
In a news conference here today, Mr.
Clinton also nominated R. James Woolsey Jr., a 51-year-old former under secretary of the Navy and arms negotiator to be Director of Central Intelligence, Anthony Lake, 53, a professor at Mount Holyoke College, as his national security adviser and Madeleine Albright, 55, a political scientist, to be the United States chief delegate to the United Nations. 'No Longer a Simple Place'
In his comments today, as in the appointments themselves, Mr.
Clinton shed little new light on his foreign policy views.


Holco Mortgage Acceptance Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Ex-Inmates Urge Return To Areas of Crime to Help
After 23 years away, it is the parting image of prison, not the first glimpse of freedom, that lingers now with Eddie Ellis, a pioneer Black Panther and convicted murderer, as he labors back home in Harlem on his hard-won new appreciation of a criminal and his community.
The sight that haunts him came on a day last summer when Mr.
Ellis was finally being processed back to freedom and walked past a huge hall filled with hundreds of incoming prisoners, all neatly leg-shackled, manacled and seated in two long files of benches, as orderly and sad-eyed, he recalls, as fresh oarsmen on a galley ship.


Vital Living Products reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Jets' McNeil Applauds Settlement
Freeman McNeil, the Jets running back who sued the National Football League over its free-agency system, expressed satisfaction today when told that the N.F.L. and the players had reached a tentative settlement of their legal disputes.
"The fact that we have a situation now where we try to look at every part of this game makes it better," McNeil said.
"It just creates a situation where the owners and the players can sit down and talk and not have impasses. That's what it's all about, creating a situation where everyone sits down and talks and tries to be fair about it."


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about insurance fraud included an imprecise reference to the state-licensed adjusters who represent property owners in their claims to insurance companies.
They are known in the industry as public adjusters.
"Independent adjusters" are those who represent insurance companies in evaluating property owners' claims.


Charter Golf Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Ponder Industries reports earnings for Year Aug 31


Mets' Signing Spree
Pitchers TOM FILER and MAURO GOZZO and catchers DANN BILARDELLO and SCOTT BRADLEY were among several minor league free agents signed yesterday by the Mets.
Filer, 36, split last season between the Mets and their Class AAA Tidewater team.
He was 0-1 with a 2.05 earned run average in nine games for the Mets, and 1-7 with a 2.78 e.r.a. in 18 games for the Tides.


Storm Victims Seek Grants and Loans
Bearing photographs of floating furniture, water-wrinkled papers and stories that they will no doubt retell for years, residents of Long Island, Westchester, Rockland and New York City flocked to eight newly opened storm-relief offices today, seeking grants and low-interest loans to help restore their homes.
They were told to take a number.


Man in the News; Pathfinders of the Middle Ground: Warren Minor Christopher
In this dissonant world of uncertainty, disorder and fear, Warren M. Christopher sells confidence and trust.
The quiet, discreet, almost shy Los Angeles lawyer was the man I.B.M. turned to when it needed help in fighting a major antitrust suit, the man President Carter called to negotiate the American diplomatic hostages out of Iran, the man Mayor Tom Bradley asked to resolve the police crisis in Los Angeles.
President-elect Bill Clinton tapped him to supervise selection of his running mate, to lead his transition and now to guide the foreign policy of the new Administration as the next Secretary of State.


Velazquez Is Suspended
Jockey JOHN VELAZQUEZ drew a 10-day suspension yesterday for careless riding in the feature race at Aqueduct on the previous day.
Velazquez rode Two the Twist to a third-place finish in the eighth race on Monday, but the horse was disqualified and dropped to fourth after a stewards' inquiry and a foul claim.
Velazquez will be sidelined today through Jan. 1. (AP)


Internet Information Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


South Africa's Armor Is Showing Signs of Tarnish
For much of Africa's modern history, the South African Defense Force stood as a symbol of white power, a continent's best-trained, best-equipped and most disciplined force, capable of projecting its power far beyond the country's own frontiers.
These days, its fortunes have never seemed so morose.
From its invasion of Angola in 1975 -- when, with covert American backing, it came within striking distance of Luanda, the capital -- to many other forays into neighboring countries, the South African military showed time and again that its forces could sweep north with relative impunity in pursuit of what its commanders termed a "total strategy" to mold the region to Pretoria's will.


Excerpts From Clinton's News Conference Introducing His Latest Nominees
Following are excerpts from President-elect Bill Clinton's news conference today in Little Rock, Ark., where he introduced his selections for several top positions.
The text was provided by Reuters.
OPENING STATEMENTS


Hy &amp; Zel's reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


A General Says Armed Vehicles Will Be Seized on Sight in Somalia
Expanding a campaign to rid Somalia of its heaviest weapons, United States forces will soon begin seizing armed vehicles wherever they are encountered, a senior American commander said today.
The comments by Brig.
Gen.
Tony Zinni, a Marine Corps officer who is the operations director for the United States military command here, signal a more aggressive disarmament policy that approaches the vigorous strategy advocated by the United Nations Secretary General, Boutros Boutros-Ghali.


The Grand Plan of Flushing Meadows Slowed Down by Dollar Signs
The longer this project takes, the smaller it gets.
Yesterday, the incredible shrinking blueprints of the proposed United States Open center received a final review here by United States Tennis Association officials and the architects whose original task has become less original.
Instead of designing three new stadiums, the architects will now design just one new and renovate two others routinely condemned by the star players who compete in them.


Barrett Resources reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


Facing Boycott, Alaska Drops Plan to Kill Wolves
With its billion-dollar tourism industry threatened by a boycott, the State of Alaska today canceled a plan to shoot hundreds of wolves from the air next year.
The state had planned to shoot 300 or more gray wolves out of a population estimated at 7,000.
Alaskan wildlife officials had hoped that killing wolves would lead to greater numbers of big game for hunters and tourists.


IQ Software Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


After Tough '91, Yale Finds 'Healer' in Acting Chief
The office of the president of Yale University, situated close to the heart of privilege and power in American education, looks almost exactly the same today as it did a year ago.
But oh how things have changed.
As 1991 was ending, the office had become a bunker for Yale's president, Benno C. Schmidt Jr., who was besieged by angry faculty members, distressed graduate students, grumbling undergraduates and just about everyone else in the Yale community who was unhappy with his leadership.


Duke's Bench Has Answer for Its Critics
Duke 96, L.S.U. 67  LAHAINA, Hawaii, Dec. 22 (AP) -- It's tough to knock a team that is ranked No. 1 and coming off consecutive national championships.
Those who do such things decided that Duke may not have the depth of past years, that the bench could be an Achilles' heel if Coach Mike Krzyzewski has to turn to it.


RESULTS PLUS
HOCKEY  Bruins Top Lightning
Brent Ashton and Ted Donato scored second-period goals, lifting the Boston Bruins to a 5-3 victory over the Tampa Bay Lightning last night in Boston.
Brian Bradley had two goals, his 27th and 28th of the season, for the expansion Lightning.
Ashton broke a 2-2 tie with his second goal of the season at 5 minutes 39 seconds of the second period as he picked up Gord Murphy's dump-in pass and beat Tampa goalie Wendell Young from a sharp angle.
Donato gave the Bruins a 4-2 lead at 11:13 when he converted Adam Oates's pass with a 55-foot slap shot on a power play. (AP)
Red Wings 4, Maple Leafs 4: Tim Cheveldae held off Toronto's power play over the final 2:37 of overtime as the Detroit Red Wings and Maple Leafs played to a tie in Detroit.
Bob Probert received a major and game misconduct in the extra period for high-sticking Bob Pearson.
Probert slugged Pearson in the mouth, without letting go of his stick.
It was Probert's first stick-related penalty of the season. (AP)


No Headline
If you're around the system any length of time, it becomes obvious you have to attack the problem at its root and get to 7- and 8-year-old kids. -- THOMAS A. COUGHLIN 3d, New York State Corrections Commissioner, discussing crime.  [ B2:4. ]


Transactions
Baseball  American League
OAKLAND ATHLETICS -- Signed Kirk Dressendorfer, pitcher, to a one-year contract.
National League
NEW YORK METS -- Signed Tom Filer, Mauro Gozzo and Brandy Vann, pitchers; Dann Bilardello, Scott Bradley, Andy Dziadkowiec and Javier Gonzalez, catchers; Steve Springer, infielder, and Wayne Housie and Bert Hunter, outfielders.


Corrections
A map and chart on Monday summarizing damage caused by the violent storm of Dec. 11 located several towns incorrectly and omitted others.
Readers wishing corrected copies of the chart may write to the Metropolitan Desk, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y.  10036.


Collins Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Albert King, a Master of the Blues, Is Dead at 69
Albert King, a blues guitarist and singer who became a major figure in postwar American music, died on Monday in Memphis, where he lived.
Mr.
King, who was 69, died after a heart attack, the N. J. Ford &amp; Sons Funeral Home in Memphis said.


HOLIDAY SHOPPING WITH: Connie Chung and Maury Povich; Quiet Blouse, Tight Jeans, It's a Wonderful Life
CONNIE CHUNG, the CBS News correspondent, and her husband, Maury Povich, the syndicated talk-show host, are having a spirited argument right in the middle of the stone-washed jeans and turtleneck sweaters at the Gap at 76th Street and Columbus Avenue.
Bystanders are trying to seem nonchalant, even as they crane their necks to hear what provoked this popular power couple into a public spat.
Well, for inquiring minds, it's the fit.


Harding Associates reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Univar Corp.(X) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


CHRONICLE
What kind of a year has been been for the longtime friends and colleagues ROBERT REDFORD and HARVEY WEINSTEIN?
Pretty good, they agreed in a phone conversation the other day -- with one exception.
"We were talking about our hits, and I said, 'We struck out on one thing,' " said Mr.
Weinstein, who is co-chairman of Miramax Films.
"He said, 'Yes, I know: 'Oglala.' "


Survival Technology reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Soderstrom Sidelined
TOMMY SODERSTROM, a rookie goaltender, has three strong National Hockey League starts with the Philadelphia Flyers, but now has to wonder again if a heart condition that delayed the start of his season may interrupt his career again.


Ross Cosmetics Distribution Centers Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Hillhaven Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Christie's, Too, Will Increase Commissions
Seven weeks after Sotheby's increased the commission it charges buyers to 15 percent from 10, its chief rival, Christie's, announced it would follow suit.
Beginning March 1, those who buy at Christie's in the United States, Switzerland, Hong Kong or at the King Street salesroom in London will be charged 15 percent on goods sold for $50,000 or less.
Sales of higher value will be charged 15 percent on the first $50,000 and 10 percent for the remainder.


Metropolitan Diary
THIS being the season of giving and receiving and of gathering together with those we love, what more appropriate time to talk about 6-year-old Erica, who lives on the Upper East Side?
At a post-Thanksgiving, pre-Christmas family get-together, Erica once again was telling her Aunt Bea how much she loved everything Aunt Bea was wearing.
Everything included Bea's dress, earrings, necklace, watch and rings.
When the rhapsody ceased at last, Aunt Bea smiled happily.


Miscellany
*
Grant Marketing Communications, Lafayette Hill, Pa., opened a direct-marketing unit, Grant Direct.


Push for Diversity May Cause Reversal on Interior Secretary
Under heavy pressure to add more women and members of minorities to his Cabinet, President-elect Bill Clinton appears to have replaced the leading candidate for Interior Secretary, former Gov.
Bruce Babbitt of Arizona, with Representative Bill Richardson of New Mexico, who is of Hispanic descent.
The shift seems to have been dictated by Mr.
Clinton's desire to name a second Hispanic-American to his Cabinet, say officials of the transition team.
If selected, Mr.
Richardson would join former Mayor Henry G. Cisneros of San Antonio, whose selection as Secretary of Housing and Urban Development was announced last week.


Agency Rent-A-Car reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Eating Well
IF you speak of potato pancakes during Hanukkah, which runs through Saturday night, you are speaking of latkes, the Yiddish word for pancakes.
It's hard to imagine what they would be doing in this column.
Potato pancakes are cooked in considerable amounts of oil.
It's the oil that is symbolic, not the potatoes.
The oil symbolizes the rededication of the Temple at Jerusalem 21 centuries ago, after the Maccabees defeated Antiochus of Syria.
Upon entering the Temple, the Maccabees found enough sacred oil to light the candles for only one day.
But the oil lasted for eight.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.81
3.06
4.36
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.19
3.23
3.82
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.29
3.42
3.89
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.31
6.38
6.47
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.34
7.39
7.51
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.39
8.39
8.65
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.40
6.42
6.72
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Martin S. Thaler, International Lawyer, 60
Martin S. Thaler, a partner in the New York-based law firm of Weil, Gotshal &amp; Manges, died on Monday at the Washington Hospital Center.
He was 60 years old and lived in Clarksville, Md.
He died of complications from abdominal surgery, said his wife, Mary O'Brien Thaler.


Correction
Because of an editing error, an article on Tuesday misidentified the forum at which President Bush referred to demands by his questioners for more Federal spending.
He spoke at a citizens' question-and-answer session in Miami on Oct. 23.


Honors
*
John Mack Carter, editor in chief at Good Housekeeping, New York, and director of magazine development at the monthly's parent, Hearst, New York, was named the first person to be honored by the Advertising Women of New York at a "Roast and Toast." The luncheon will be held Jan. 8 in New York.


AEP Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


INSIDE
N.F.L. Labor Agreement
National Football League owners and players reached tentative agreement on a labor contract that would include broad-based free agency.
Page B9.


Russians Outdo Us in Language Teaching
To the Editor:
In "English? Nyet" (letter, Dec. 4), Paul R. Joseph concludes after having spent two weeks in Russia that English is not widely known or well taught in the former Soviet Union.
My observations in nine months of teaching in Moscow and short visits differ.


Microwave Cooking
FOR informal parties at this time of year, the microwave oven can be a great help.
Two rules seem obvious: work ahead so you have as little to do at the last minute as possible.
And select food that is bite-size and easily eaten without forks, knives and plates.


Executive Changes
CRAY RESEARCH, Eagan, Minn., appointed Les Davis executive vice president and general manager of supercomputing operations; Bob Ewald, executive vice president of development, was appointed to the additional position of chief technical officer, and Carl Diem was named executive vice president of worldwide sales and marketing.
GE CAPITAL, Stamford, Conn., a unit General Electric Co., appointed Jeffrey S. Werner senior vice president of corporate treasury and global financing.
GRAHAM-FIELD HEALTH PRODUCTS INC., Hauppauge, L.I., a manufacturer and supplier of health-care products, appointed Wayne J. Merdinger president and chief operating officer.
PFIZER INC., New York, named Herb Ryan, assistant controller of corporate accounting, a corporate officer.
Mr.
Ryan will also become corporate controller.


Court Lifts Hurdle to Sale Of Daily News
A Federal appeals court in Manhattan yesterday removed what is expected to be the last legal hurdle blocking Mortimer B. Zuckerman from buying The Daily News.
In a decision released late yesterday afternoon, the court said that Mr.
Zuckerman can dissolve lifetime job guarantees won by the paper's typographers 18 years ago.
But the court ruled that to do so, he must abide by the last offer he made to the typographers when negotiations broke down on Dec. 17.
Under that package, some of the union's 167 members would not have jobs.


METRO DIGEST
COURT RULES TO PROTECT LAWYERS
Law firms cannot dismiss lawyers for doing what professional disciplinary rules require: blowing the whistle on a dishonest colleague, New York State's highest court ruled.
The decision marked the court's most dramatic incursion to date into what has been, at least in New York, the largely sacrosanct right of employers to choose and lose employees at will.
A1.
PRISONER-SCHOLARS' REVOLUTION
A radical new approach to penology is being spawned uninvited from within the system, an approach rooted in a hard fact cited by one of a growing number of prisoner-scholars: "More than 85 percent of prisoners in the state are black or Latino and -- most phenomenal of all -- that 75 percent of the state's entire prison population comes from just seven neighborhoods in New York City." A1.


Some Chefs Are Serving Cookies (a Few Even With Milk)
WITH meatloaf and mashed potatoes achieving new fame on restaurant menus, it stands to reason that sweets straight out of the home pantry, like graham crackers, Oreos and chocolate-chip cookies, would not be far behind.
They are right behind, in fact, ready and waiting to be served for dessert as soon as the main course is cleared.
But these aren't packaged cookies.
For several years, chefs in restaurants known for their inventive and trend-setting menus have been baking their own versions of popular everyday cookies.


Presidential Priorities; The First People to Put First
The Bush Administration offered lofty rhetoric about children and education.
But President Bush had no real track record on these issues and his legislative achievements were few.
Bill and Hillary Clinton have long been involved with children and education.
And Mr.
Clinton's choices of Richard Riley for Secretary of Education and Donna Shalala for Health and Human Services suggest that his administration will be marked more by action than words.


Real Estate; New Hotel For Glutted Los Angeles
CITY officials are hailing the opening of the 439-room Inter-Continental Hotel, a $100 million project that faces a bleak occupancy situation in the lodging industry.
The hotel is in California Plaza, a $1.2 billion, 11-acre mixed-use project in Bunker Hill, a financial district in the city's downtown area, which has been under redevelopment since 1959.
The 17-story hotel and a 217-unit residential tower are the two most recent additions to California Plaza, which also contains two office buildings and the Los Angeles Museum of Contemporary Art.
A third office building and a second residential tower are planned.


U.S. WILL RELEASE WEAPONS TO CHINA
The Bush Administration announced today that it would send China military equipment already paid for but put in storage for more than three years to protest against the Tiananmen Square massacre.
Richard A. Boucher, the State Department spokesman, said in a statement that the shipment would consist of four anti-submarine torpedoes, two artillery-locating radars, equipment for a munitions-production line and electronic gear to upgrade F-8 aircraft.


Photocomm Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


The Pop Life
Country music flexed its muscles this year and elbowed its way to the top of the pop music charts in a big way, ending up with both the No. 1 album and artist of the year as well as two other albums in the top 10.
According to the annual chart tallies in Billboard, the music industry's leading trade magazine, the country explosion was led by Garth Brooks, who had the No. 1 and No. 6 pop albums, "Ropin' the Wind" and "No Fences," respectively.
It was the first time that a country album became the year's top pop album.
Mr.
Brooks once again also finished as the year's top pop artist in combined sales of albums and singles and had four of the top five country albums, with "Ropin' the Wind" at No. 1.
Another country artist, Billy Ray Cyrus, hit the No. 4 spot on the album chart with "Some Gave All."


Davis Water &amp; Waste reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Boutiques San Francisco reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Core Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


XL Foods Ltd. reports earnings for Year Sept 30


Toll of American AIDS Orphans Put at 80,000 by End of Decade
The AIDS epidemic will leave 80,000 American children motherless by the end of the decade, including 30,000 in New York City, researchers predict.
Unless more resources are devoted to these children, a social catastrophe is unavoidable, they said.
In a study being published today in The Journal of the American Medical Association, the researchers said 80 percent of the children and teen-agers who would lose their mothers to AIDS were black or of Hispanic descent.


Protesters Light the Way for a New Germany


Joy Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 27


Oxford Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 27


Waltzing in Space


Rite Aid Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 28


Back So Soon, Neil?
The Pittsburgh Steelers, certainly not the same team with BUBBY BRISTER running the show as they were with NEIL O'DONNELL, may make an unanticipated change at quarterback Sunday against Cleveland.
Their new starting quarterback?
Maybe Neil O'Donnell.
O'Donnell, who was not expected to play until the playoffs because of a cracked bone in his right leg sustained Dec. 6 against Seattle, practiced throwing yesterday to tight end ERIC GREEN and could start Sunday, Coach BILL COWHER said.


Ault Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Tentative Agreement on N.F.L. Labor Contract
National Football League owners and players have reached a tentative settlement of their labor dispute that could result in the first collective bargaining agreement since 1987 and broad-based, unrestricted free agency for the first time in league history.
After five years of negotiation that gradually gave way to litigation, the two sides are on the verge of adopting an agreement developed during talks in recent weeks.


CHRONICLE
More than 50 years ago PEGGY LEE sold the watch her father had given her for her high school graduation, and bought a train ticket to stardom.
And now MERV GRIFFIN wants to find it and return it to her.
"It really wasn't much of a watch," the singer, who was born in Jamestown, N.D., in 1920, said yesterday in a telephone interview from her home in Bel Air, Calif.
"I sold it to my landladies in Fargo in order to get to California and then to Chicago. There I met Benny Goodman and recorded 'Why Don't You Do Right?' " That was the song that ignited her career.


Tab Products reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Will the Real Higgs . . .?
Felony warrants for a con man impersonating Miami Dolphins running back MARK HIGGS prompted the police to arrest the player by mistake early yesterday.
Higgs was stopped for speeding on an expressway at 2:45 A.M. by a Broward County sheriff's deputy.
The deputy discovered two outstanding warrants in Broward County from 1991 for "Mark Higgs, also known as Irving Bailey," and took Higgs to the county jail, where he was booked.


Apogee Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 28


COMPANY BRIEFS
CORESTATES FINANCIAL CORP., Philadelphia, has completed its previously announced acquisition of Financial Telesis Inc., a Philadelphia-based bank holding company.
Terms were not disclosed.


Handley's Future Is Left Up To Young
Within three weeks, Ray Handley will either be rehired or the Giants will have a new head coach, the co-owner, Bob Tisch, said today.
Tisch and Wellington Mara, the other co-owner, said that they would go along with whatever decision General Manager George Young made about Handley's future.
But the beleaguered Handley talked today like a man preparing to be back at the helm next season.
He outlined his organizational plans through next June and blamed much of the defensive problems on players who refused to attend voluntary minicamps.


U.S. Pawn reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Vallen Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Barkley Leads Suns To 10th Straight
Suns 106, Warriors 104
PHOENIX, Dec. 22 (AP) -- Charles Barkley's tip-in with 18 seconds left gave Phoenix the lead tonight, and the Suns held on through two Golden State possessions to beat the Warriors, 106-104, matching their single-season record of 10 straight victories.
The Warriors came from 13 points behind in the third quarter to take the lead on three occasions in the final period, the last time at 104-102 on Tim Hardaway's 3-pointer with 2 minutes 5 seconds left.


Mangia! It's Hungarian!
THERE are dozens of cross-culinary dishes around the world, and especially in the United States.
This Hungarian-Italian dish may be a first.
Paprika and caraway give a Hungarian accent to the chicken dish, but it is served over polenta, not noodles.
Long, pale-green Italian peppers can be used for Hungarian peppers.


Flamemaster reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Interphase Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


After Tough '91, Yale Finds 'Healer' in Acting Chief
The office of the president of Yale University, situated close to the heart of privilege and power in American education, looks almost exactly the same today as it did a year ago.
But oh how things have changed.
As 1991 was ending, the office had become a bunker for Yale's president, Benno C. Schmidt Jr., who was besieged by angry faculty members, distressed graduate students, grumbling undergraduates and just about everyone else in the Yale community who was unhappy with his leadership.


Equitrac Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Jay Leno Criticizes NBC On 'Tonight' Cliffhanger
Jay Leno, expressing what he called "surprise and disappointment" with NBC executives, said yesterday that he believed his performance as the host of the "Tonight" show should have more than satisfied the network and that he did not deserve to be threatened with losing the leading show in late-night television to David Letterman.
"Am I crazy?" Mr.
Leno said in a telephone interview.
"The ratings are going up, the advertisers are happy and so are the affiliates." And yet Mr.
Leno said he had not received any assurances from NBC executives in New York that he would not be dropped in favor of Mr.
Letterman by Jan. 15.
That is the deadline NBC is facing to match a CBS offer to give Mr.
Letterman about $16 million to star in a nightly talk show at 11:30, the same time as the "Tonight" show.


Devils Hit A Drought In Scoring
Scoring goals was the least of the worries for the Devils before the season, but it has surfaced as the biggest problem.
The Devils' recent scoring slump represents their worst offensive performance since they produced only two goals in three consecutive losses earlier in the season.
Although they have scored five goals in the last three games, one score came into an empty net and another was deflected in by an opposing defenseman.


Surprise for 'Flu'-Prone Skiers: It May Be Mountain Sickness
BARBARA SMOLEK LIPPIN, a 39-year-old New York City resident and avid skier, cannot wait to put skis to Rocky Mountain snow, but she also knows that for her there is a price to pay for the joys of high-altitude schussbooming: severe headaches, nausea and other effects of acute mountain sickness.
"The first time I got sick, I thought I had the flu," she said.
In the six years since she learned that she is susceptible to altitude sickness, she has taken medication to blunt its effects.


Humana Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Gauging a Recession


Women Need Better Friends Than Packwood
To the Editor:
In "Sexual Politics, the Real Thing" (Op-Ed, Dec. 2), on charges of sexual harassment against Senator Bob Packwood, Lisa Schiffren, an aide to Vice President Quayle, shows misunderstanding of feminist causes and how personal conduct bears on a public official's record.


Andal Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Lottery Fails To Finance School Safety
A special anti-crime lottery that was supposed to raise $50 million to pay for new programs at New York City schools this year is selling miserably, so far raising only about a half-million dollars.
In the last six months, the city's instant lottery game, part of Mayor David N. Dinkins's ambitious program to fight crime, has sold only $2 million worth of tickets.


Peters (J.M.) Co. (A) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Jetronic Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Review/Television; HBO's 20th-Birthday Celebration: Not a Surprise Party, But Surprising
When Home Box Office began beaming a microwave broadcast to 350 homes in Wilkes-Barre, Pa., on Nov. 8, 1972 -- with a lineup consisting of a Madison Square Garden hockey game and a movie called, aptly enough, "Sometimes a Great Notion" -- the prospect of a future television special called "HBO's 20th Anniversary" may have seemed remote.
That the celebration would be carried on CBS must have been inconceivable.
But, my, how the television business has changed, due in large part to the emergence of cable and pay-cable services like HBO.
So, tonight at 8, "HBO's 20th Anniversary" can indeed be found on CBS.
And why not?
Star power is irresistible, and HBO can summon an impressive collection of name performers whose careers were effectively launched on HBO specials.


Making Giving a Little Easier During the Season


Trizec Corp. reports earnings for Year Oct 31


Sears to Shut 100 Stores, Report Says
Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company is planning to announce in January that it will close about 100 unprofitable and underperforming stores and significantly scale back its hefty "big book" catalogue operation, according to a published report yesterday.
A company spokesman would not comment on the report in The Chicago Tribune, and telephone calls to executives' offices were not returned yesterday.


Moscow Journal; It's a Kiosk! It's a Mall! No, It's Slavyansky Ryad!
A year and a half ago, Vladislav Vasnev and two other graduate-school dropouts began selling goods on commission from a rented kiosk on Lubyanka Square, outside the great yellow headquarters of the K.G.B.
Now, Mr.
Vasnev, who is 24, is the czar of Moscow's downtown street marts, selling handmade souvenirs, video equipment, shoes, clothing, watches and other goods from a chain of custom-made booths that stretch from a street off Red Square, down to the central square opposite the Bolshoi Theater, and up Petrovka, one of the city's oldest thoroughfares.


People
*
Lon LaFlamme, 42, president and chief operating officer of Evans/ Kraft, Seattle, was named president and chief executive, succeeding Donald B. Kraft, 65, who will continue as chairman.
Dennis Miller, 40, executive vice president and media director, will succeed Mr.
LaFlamme as chief operating officer and was also named executive media director. *
Thomas Somerset, senior vice president and director of marketing services at Foote, Cone &amp; Belding, Santa Ana, Calif., was also named to handle those duties at the agency's Los Angeles office.


Martha, a Top Clothier, in Chapter 11
Martha, the Park Avenue institution that put such fashion designers as Valentino, Galanos, Zandra Rhodes and Christian Francis Roth on the map, succumbed yesterday to the weak economy and filed for bankruptcy-law protection.
The company, which also operates two Martha stores in Florida and a Martha International boutique next to the flagship store in Manhattan, had been struggling to pay its bills as the recession eroded the spending power of its best customers and wrought a fundamental change in attitudes toward clothing.


International Cablecasting Technologies Inc. reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


Virginia Aims to Shed Image as a 'Handgun Supermarket'
A few months ago the Federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms undertook a study of gunrunning on the East Coast, focusing mainly on tracing the origins of handguns seized at crime scenes.
The findings startled even the most hardened law-enforcement officials in Virginia.


Winnebago Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 28


Presidential Priorities; Mr. Clinton's New World Symphony
President-elect Clinton has assembled an experienced foreign policy team wise in the ways of Washington and skilled, variously, at devising policies and effecting them.
But caution and competence stir no souls.
If there's to be music, all now depends on the conductor.
Mr.
Clinton will need to define his new direction -- like the promising pro-democracy course he began to chart during the campaign.
Warren Christopher, his choice as Secretary of State, said as much yesterday, citing the global environment and global economic competition among the challenges of this new era.
The appointees who will serve closest to Mr.
Clinton, Anthony Lake and Samuel Berger at the National Security Council, had a large part in drafting his new direction in the campaign.
And Mr.
Clinton's other senior appointees have the know-how to put it into practice.


Mazda Chairman Retires; Pioneer of Rotary Engine
Kenichi Yamamoto, the chairman of the Mazda Motor Corporation who in his earlier days led the development of the company's trademark rotary engine, retired today.
The move was part of a shuffling intended to bring younger managers to the fore at the troubled automobile manufacturer.


Babes in Computerland
Computers, we're being told, are the answer to America's education ills.
Not long ago, I heard from a parent about aggressive computer acquisition plans at the school where my 5-year-old attends kindergarten.
The same week, I appeared on a panel with Benno Schmidt, the president and chief executive officer of Whittle Communications' schooling-for-profit Edison Project.
He explained the project's vision of "radical change," with classroom computers playing a big role.
As we all know by now, President-elect Clinton talks a lot about technology and about education.


Women Need Better Friends Than Packwood; It's Against the Law
To the Editor:
"The Packwood Problem" (editorial, Dec. 11) rebukes Senator Bob Packwood for failing to acknowledge sexual harassment of at least 10 women until after his re-election.
You also suggest that he resign because of this offensive behavior, while commending him for describing his behavior as "not merely inappropriate, boorish, but 'just plain wrong.' "


Witness Calls Woman Mentally Defective
A psychiatrist testifying in the Glen Ridge sex assault trial said today that the mildly retarded young woman at the center of the case might have used sex as a way to make friends.
But the psychiatrist, Dr.
Gerald Meyerhoff, said that did not mean that she understood the concept of consent in sexual matters.


60-Minute Gourmet
RACK of lamb remains, for me, one of the most flavorful and festive meats, and it is especially well suited to holiday entertaining.
Admittedly, it is a relatively expensive cut, but it has the advantage of being easy to prepare and it cooks quickly.
The trend in this country is to serve lamb of all kinds extremely rare, in the French style.
Whether to do so or not is really up to individual tastes.
When serving guests with varied preferences it is wise to aim for medium rare, which will yield pieces that are more rare in the center and medium toward the surface.


Donors to Neediest Cases Feel Lucky
Suzanne Crawford is a single parent raising a 5-year-old son, a self-described "Murphy Brown" mom who readily acknowledges that she would have trouble coping if she did not have a good job and supportive relatives and friends.
When she reads about other single mothers who are facing overwhelming burdens, she knows that their struggle could easily be her own.
With that in mind, she sent a check for $250 to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund, asking that the money be used to buy food for a poor woman bringing up children on her own.


Some Continuity in Reshaped Russia Cabinet
As negotiations over the formation of Russia's new Government continued in secret, the Foreign Trade Minister handed in his resignation today, becoming the first major member of former Prime Minister Yegor T. Gaidar's team of young, reform-minded economists to leave the Cabinet.
But according to several reports, other principal members of the Gaidar Cabinet are expected to stay in office, assuring some continuity in Russia's yearlong attempt to introduce a market economy.


Panel Calls for Tougher Tests For Trains Carrying Poisons
The National Transportation Safety Board called today for tougher standards for the 104,000 railroad cars that transport four billion tons of hazardous material a year.
The board's recommendation for stricter testing and inspections was prompted by two cases this year in which defects in railroad tank cars led to the release of hazardous materials.
There were no fatalities in either case.


Sports of The Times; Glickman Can't Stick To a Career
A MASSIVE scam is being perpetrated upon the football fans of this town by a man named Glickman.
He says he is retiring from broadcasting because he is 75 and getting too old to call the plays.
But I checked him out last Sunday, and I don't buy it.
This Marty Glickman has made Charlie Conerly and Emlen Tunnell and Freeman McNeil and Al Toon come to life on Sunday afternoons for the last four decades.


Mother, 19, Recounts Leaving and Then Regaining Her Baby
She has been vilified as an unfit mother.
She has been the target of death threats, and she has been thrown out by her family.
But Gina Pellegrino wants the world to know her side of the story.
Ms.
Pellegrino is the Connecticut teen-ager who walked out on her daughter only hours after giving birth and then won her back from the foster couple that wanted to adopt her after a much-publicized legal battle that wound up before the State Supreme Court.


ConAgra Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 29


Plastibec Ltee reports earnings for Year Sept 30


Somalis Assert Marines Have to Secure Villages
Abdi Ali, his wife, Kadija, and nine children were among the first families to stagger into this wretched camp eight months ago.
Since then, thousands have died here of starvation and disease, including four of their sons.
The arrival of the United States Marines five days ago brought the first realistic hopes of recovery for Mr.
Ali, a well-to-do herder rendered dependent on food handouts.
The marines brought food.
But what impressed Mr.
Ali, a tall, elegant man wrapped in a blue checked sarong, was the Americans' show of force on the streets of this bush town, and the retreat of the Somali gunmen who are responsible for Mr.
Ali's impoverishment.


New Artistic Director For Berkshire Festival
Julianne Boyd has been appointed artistic director of the Berkshire Theater Festival in Stockbridge, Mass., the theater's president, Jane P. Fitzpatrick, has announced.
Ms.
Boyd succeeds Richard Dunlap, who is retiring after five years in the post.
The festival runs from the end of June to the end of August each year and presents nine productions, including two for children.
Ms.
Boyd has directed more than 40 productions in New York City and regional theaters, among them the Broadway musical "Eubie" and the Off Broadway revue "A . . . My Name Is Alice." She was recently elected president of the Society of Stage Directors and Choreographers.


Japanese Warn U.S. Not to Act Rashly on Trade
In a bluntly worded warning to President-elect Bill Clinton, a panel of influential Japanese business leaders said in a Government-sponsored report today that the United States was focusing on "its own narrow national interests" in economic matters.
The executives urged the passage of "necessary and appropriate emergency response measures" by the Japanese Government that would deter unilateral American actions to resolve trade disputes.
In the report, commissioned by Japan's Foreign Minister, the business leaders did not describe the emergency measures they had in mind.
But they were widely interpreted as calling for laws that would enable Japan to place high tariffs on American or European goods -- or to block their entry -- if the same actions were taken abroad against its products.


Computer Research Inc. reports earnings for Year to Aug 31


Compumed Inc. reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


New Jersey Bell Wins Approval for Fiber Optics
State regulators today approved a $1.5 billion plan by New Jersey Bell to replace its entire network with fiber optics by the year 2010.
The decision opens the way for New Jersey to become the first state with border-to-border fiber-optic telecommunications.
Such a network would give telephone customers access to vast amounts of information, establish two-way links between physicians and patients or teachers and distant classrooms and allow the reception of hundreds of television channels.


Refs Get a Settlement
Two former referees, JOHN R. FETTE and FREDERICK J. SILVA, will divide $67,500 in back pay under a settlement over age discrimination reached by the National Football League and the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, agency officials announced at a news conference yesterday in Manhattan.
Under the consent decree, the N.F.L. also agreed to abandon a policy requiring older officials to retire or shift to jobs off the field.


Malvin P. Sevin; Oil Executive, 74
Malvin P. Sevin, a leader in the home-heating oil industry, died on Saturday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 74.
He died of lymphoma, said Joseph P. Cavanaugh, a senior vice president of the Petroleum Heat and Power Company.


Corrections
A report in the Company News col umn in some copies of Business Day on Tuesday about earnings of the Great Atlantic and Pacific Tea Company misstated the company's third-quarter sales.
They were $2.38 billion, down 8.9 percent.


Calvin H. P. Pava, 39, Expert on Office Design
Calvin H. P. Pava, an expert on adapting working conditions to make the best use of computers and other technological equipment, died last Thursday at Stanford University Hospital in Palo Alto, Calif.
He was 39 and lived in Portola Valley, Calif.
He died of a brain tumor, said a spokesman for Paul Lawrence, a retired Harvard professor and former colleague.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Warrior Soul, Bushmon and Collision  The Limelight


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.06
2.97
4.50
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.15
3.19
3.82
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.28
3.29
3.91
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.37
6.31
6.46
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.35
7.34
7.50
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.39
8.39
8.65
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.40
6.40
6.71
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


PARENT &amp; CHILD
CHILDREN receive mixed messages about how friendly they should be.
We encourage them to be outgoing, polite and sociable.
But at the same time, we warn them to be suspicious, self-protective and not to talk to strangers.
That apparent contradiction confuses some children.
"There's a fine line between making your children inappropriately frightened and helping them become appropriately wary," said Dr.
Linda Dunlap, an assistant professor of psychology at Marist College in Poughkeepsie, N.Y.
Knowing how to give children the information they need to be safe without scaring them too much requires that parents understand how children think at different stages of their development.
And parents and children must also recognize where the real risks lie.


BRIEFS
Debt  *
Farmington, N.M., is offering $46 million of tax-exempt pollution control refunding revenue bonds due in 2002 and initially priced at par to yield 6.40 percent through Morgan Stanley &amp; Co.
The bonds are for the Public Service Company of New Mexico and other projects and insured by the Ambac Indemnity Corporation giving the issue a triple-A rating by both Moody's Investors Service and the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation.
*
Ford Motor Credit Co., a unit of the Ford Motor Co., has filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for a shelf offering of up to $3 billion.


Barnwell Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Murder Indictments for 3 Youths In Killing of Brooklyn Principal
Three youths were indicted yesterday on murder charges in the shooting death of Patrick Daly, a popular school principal who was caught in the crossfire of an apparent drug dispute last week at a housing project in the Red Hook section of Brooklyn.
Neighborhood residents expressed outrage at the slaying of Mr.
Daly, the 48-year-old principal of Public School 15, who was killed on Dec. 17 when he went to the Red Hook Houses to make sure that a child who had been in a fight had returned home safely.


Prosecutor Finds Office Fades His Aura
After a full day of work, sniffling from a cold, Charles J. Hynes slumped at a lectern, judging a mock trial at Brooklyn Law School.
But even in the after-hours world of student court, there was no respite from the borough's racial consciousness.
The case was simple burglary, the students told only that the suspect was 17 years old, no word about his skin color or ethnicity.
Yet within minutes, the young woman playing the defense lawyer was arguing that her innocent client had fled the scene because as a black man he had reason to fear the police.


Review/Music; New View of Christmas, By Boston Camerata
Nearly everything we associate with the folk culture of Christmas -- snow and chimneys and hung stockings and evergreen trees and a white-bearded gentleman carrying a full bag of gifts -- comes late to the holiday.
Christmas began, as Joel Cohen reminded listeners at Gould Hall on Tuesday night, in the Mediterranean desert, a world "inhabited by high-strung, passionate, God-intoxicated Semites." In honor of the holiday, Mr.
Cohen led the Boston Camerata in a program titled "A Mediterranean Christmas," filled with music that was far indeed from the crooning of Bing Crosby or the "comfortable, inviting rites of Anglo-Saxon folkways."
It was an attempt to provide a glimpse of Christmas music during a period when it was still full of the Mediterranean spirit that gave birth to Christmas, but had already been transformed and Latinized by the church.
Most of the songs came from southern Europe during the 12th and 13th centuries, from Tuscany, Limoges and Catalonia.


YELTSIN APPROVES HIS NEW CABINET
President Boris N. Yeltsin today approved a Cabinet put together by Prime Minister Viktor S. Chernomyrdin that with a few exceptions is a replica of the much-maligned Government led by Yegor T. Gaidar, the young reform-minded economist.
In holding together the core of the Gaidar team, Mr.
Yeltsin has accomplished a goal set with great flair last weekend when he abruptly cut short a trip to China and returned to take charge of the appointments.


Rimage Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Saztec International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Research Unit Is Postponing Major Projects
The hiring of a private company to run the Federal center for foreign animal diseases here, undertaken last year to cut costs, has gone so awry that it is not only undermining safety but eroding research efforts, according to newly released documents.
The documents show that because of rising operating costs, spending for research has dropped 20 percent this year.
A report by the Agriculture Department, which runs the research effort here, concluded that a "massive cost overrun" had forced the "postponement of important agricultural research projects."


Corrections
A caption in Science Times on Tuesday with a photograph of a mosquito antenna misstated an affiliation of Dr.
Gregory Paulson, the scientist who took the picture.
He is on the faculty of Washington State University, not the University of Washington.


Calendar: Kwanzaa Decorations and Tours
African Cultures
American Museum of Natural History, Central Park West at 79th Street; (212) 769-5100.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
As more and more corporate retirees lose health benefits, critics accuse Primerica and other big companies of using a new accounting rule as an excuse to shirk their obligations to former employees.  [ Page A1. ]
The U.S. accused Kidder, Peabody of age discrimination, in a Federal suit that says the firm illegally dismissed 17 senior executives, all of whom were paid $100,000 or more a year.  [ A1. ]
Wal-Mart denied accusations that some of its Asian suppliers had used illegal child labor, but it acknowledged that imported clothing had been displayed as domestic merchandise.  [ D1. ]
Time Inc. will manage most American Express magazines, under an agreement that includes the publications Travel &amp; Leisure, Food &amp; Wine and L.A.
Style.  [ D1. ]
Drug makers' stocks took a headlong dive after a securities analyst lowered her estimates of 1993 earnings for the pharmaceuticals industry.  [ D3. ]  A jury recommended a $25 million award to a woman who said she developed an auto-immune disease from silicone-gel breast implants made by a Bristol-Myers unit.  [ A13. ]
Comptronix expects to report losses this year and for each of the previous three years.
The company recently disclosed that former senior managers had been inflating profits.  [ D3. ]
Pacific Bell will not offer Caller ID service, citing costly regulations and California customers' penchant for privacy.  [ D4. ]
Honeywell's chief financial officer resigned.  [ D4. ] The Economy
Clinton's "new enterprise" tax cut proposal has broad support.
The idea is to stimulate the entrepreneurial side of the U.S. economy by increasing the rewards for venture capitalists and individual investors in start-up companies.  [ D1. ]
The economy crept gingerly ahead in November, the Government said, as slack aircraft demand hurt factory orders and consumers dipped into their savings before Christmas.  [ D2. ]
Sales of cars and light trucks surged by more than 16 percent for the 10 days in mid-December.  [ D3. ]
International France's two leading aircraft makers plan a partial merger.
Aerospatiale, a member of the Airbus consortium, and Dassault, best known for it Mirage fighter planes, have both been hit hard by declining orders.  [ D1. ] Markets
Blue-chip stocks fell, led lower by a selloff in drug issues in otherwise quiet trading.
The Dow Jones industrial average fell 7.56 points to close at 3,313.54.  [ D6. ]
After its two-day rally, the bond market fell back.  [ D12. ]
The dollar advanced in a dull pre-holiday session. Gold rose slightly.  [ D13. ]
Coffee futures prices sagged after a government forecast for higher Brazilian coffee production.
Oil futures were higher.  [ D13. ] Today's Columns
Clinton should look at tobacco taxes to pay for health care, an antismoking coalition is likely to advise the President-elect.
Peter Passell: Economic Scene.  [ D2. ]
Smugglers?
Simply the latest complication for Ross Cosmetics, in its episodic financial drama.
Kurt Eichenwald: Market Place.  [ D6. ]
Only more day of crassness, in a holiday ad season that plunged to new depths this year.
Stuart Elliott: Advertising.  [ D16. ]


Review/Film; Deneuve As Symbol Of Colonial Epoch
Catherine Deneuve reigns in "Indochine." That is, she presides over its second-rate fiction with the manner of an empress who knows her powers are constitutionally limited but who continues to take her duties seriously.
She can't change the course of the film, but her lofty presence keeps it from flying apart.
She plays Eliane who, when first met in 1930, divides her time between a mansion near Saigon and a successful rubber plantation, which she oversees with (sometimes for) her widowed father.
Miss Deneuve has her work cut out for her, since the new French film, made on location at great expense and with attention to historical accuracy, intends to be nothing less than epic.
"Indochine" is the story of the last 25 years of French rule in Indochina as reflected by the events in Eliane's life.
The subject is potentially rich, but the screenplay, whomped up by three screenwriters in collaboration with Regis Wargnier, the director, has neither the conviction of fact, the sense of revelation found in good fiction, nor the fun of trashy literature.


So Far, Enthusiasm for Plan Runs Low
The way many of the Jets and the Giants greeted the prospect of comprehensive free agency yesterday, they sounded more like owners than emancipated players.
"I don't think there's going to be a lot of switching teams," said Jets strong safety Brian Washington.
"People are set in their ways, and I don't know if guys want to change in their fifth, sixth or seventh years."


Czechoslovak Colleges Fight the ABC's: Apathy, Bureaucracy, Communism
In his history class at Charles University, Karel Kubis befuddles his students with questions like: Was the American Revolution a real revolution?
Was the French Revolution?
And was the French Revolution devalued by the terror that followed it?
Most perplexing for the students is that there are no longer right or wrong answers: Mr.
Kubis wants a debate, an exercise in critical thinking, evidence that history can be analyzed from several points of view.
He is pleased when, in response, the class wants to question Czechoslovakia's own "Velvet Revolution" of 1989.


Companies Reducing Benefits Promised for Their Retirees
At least 23 large companies have abandoned the health benefits that they were providing to thousands of retired employees.
Dozens more have announced that they will not provide coverage for future retirees, and most employers who still offer the benefits are reducing their share of the costs, which have been climbing steeply.
The companies are rushing to shrink these obligations before Jan. 1, when a new accounting rule goes into effect.
The rule forces employers to subtract from their profits the future costs of providing benefits to retirees.


Leyland Is Not Bitter Over Drain of Talent
When you get right down to it, Jim Leyland didn't really ask for a lot.
All the Pittsburgh Pirates' manager really wanted for Christmas was his two front-line players.
But a wickedly competitive baseball economy left little more than lumps of coal where Barry Bonds and Doug Drabek used to be.
And as everyone knows, in Pittsburgh and points east in Pennsylvania the bottom fell out of the coal and steel markets there a long time ago.


RESULTS PLUS
HOCKEY  Lemieux Ends Drought With Two Goals
Mario Lemieux scored two goals, his first in four games, and Tom Barrasso stopped 20 shots for his third shutout of the season as the Pittsburgh Penguins defeated the Flyers, 4-0, last night in Philadelphia.
Pittsburgh, now 9-0-4 in its last 13 games with the Flyers and 3-0-0 in the last nine days, has won five of its last six over all (5-1-0).
Philadelphia has dropped eight of its last nine games.
Barrasso earned his league-leading 22d victory and 18th career shutout, second among active goalies behind Montreal's Patrick Roy (19).
Lemieux got his league-leading 36th goal at 2 minutes 9 seconds of the second period.
He came off the bench as an extra attacker as a delayed penalty was being called and broke in alone on the Flyers goal. (AP) Whalers 3, Lightning 1: Patrick Poulin scored twice in a 2:05 span of the second period and Sean Burke stopped 19 shots to help the Whalers beat Tampa Bay at Hartford.
Poulin, who has seven goals in his last 10 games, had his second two-goal game of the season.
He broke a 1-1 tie with a power-play goal at 15:47 of the second period and added his 10th of the season at 17:52.
Geoff Sanderson had his team-leading 16th goal for the Whalers, who extended their home unbeaten streak to six games (4-0-2). (AP)


Where People Live: Asian-Americans


Age Bias Case Cites Brokerage in 17 Dismissals
In what Government lawyers said was the first major age-discrimination case against a brokerage and securities firm, a Federal agency yesterday accused Kidder, Peabody of unlawfully dismissing 17 senior executives, all of whom were paid $100,000 or more a year.
The Federal Equal Employment Opportunity Commission asserted in a lawsuit filed in Manhattan that the executives had been dismissed since January 1990, apparently as part of a youth movement in the firm's upper echelons and to fill their jobs with lower-paid employees.
The ages of the former employees, who held the titles of managing director, senior vice president and vice president, ranged from 43 to 60 at the time of their dismissals. 'Younger, Cheaper Staff'
"There was a movement at Kidder to open up positions for younger executives," said James L. Lee, the commission's chief lawyer in the New York metropolitan area.
"They apparently were trying to get a younger, cheaper staff."


Indoor Or Outdoor Whimsies
ARTHUR GANSON makes whimsical machines that move, that have bellows that fill with air or wheels that gyrate at a controlled, wobbly speed.
Allan Wexler builds unconventional furniture.
For a picnic table he built a wooden floor and joists on the ground, and in an act that might be an architect's equivalent of origami, cut a bench and a table out of the floor and added legs to them.


Hampton Handed A Ticket To Hawaii
The decline of the Giants (6-9) and the Jets (4-11) was reflected today when the two teams produced only one Pro Bowl player: running back Rodney Hampton of the Giants.
In the voting by National Football League players and coaches for the American Conference team, no Jets player was chosen for the second straight season.
The only Jets who have made the Pro Bowl over the last four seasons were safety Erik McMillan after the 1989 season and quarterback Ken O'Brien after 1991, and O'Brien went only after three other quarterbacks withdrew because of injuries.
The Jets had no viable candidates this year.
Last year, the only Giant chosen was center Bart Oates.


Standing Firm for Open Skies
Sadly but wisely, the Bush Administration has rejected a proposal by British Airways to invest $750 million in USAir.
This quasi-merger would have benefited U.S. travelers modestly.
It might also have had a much stronger benefit, advancing the Administration's strategy for prying open foreign business for American carriers.
But the British Government wouldn't go along and so, in the end, Mr.
Bush was right to say no.
Air travel between the U.S. and Europe is swathed in restrictive agreements that prevent strong U.S. carriers from competing head to head with foreign airlines.
That means high prices and few flights.
To protect their coddled national carriers, the European Community countries have refused to negotiate for "open skies." So last summer the U.S. adopted a bold strategy of picking off one country at a time.


INSIDE
U.N. Ponders Bosnia Moves
The Security Council has become bogged down on what stand to take next on the civil war in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Page A8.
China Shuts French Offices
China ordered France to close its consulate in Guangzhou, as punishment for the French sale of 60 fighter planes to Taiwan.
Page A6.
Questions for Czechs
In Czechoslovakia, professors are getting their students to question everything, including the democratic revolution of 1989.
Page A8.


Quick &amp; Reilly Group reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 27


U.S. COURT DELAYS WELFARE CUTBACK
A Federal judge has temporarily blocked California from paying lower welfare benefits to poor women and children who move here from other states, a policy that is a linchpin of Gov.
Pete Wilson's effort to cut spiraling welfare costs and balance the budget.
Under the two-tiered benefit system, aid to newcomers would be limited for 12 months to the amounts they received in their former states.
The policy was approved by the Legislature this fall and went into effect on Dec. 1, when the state received a Federal waiver.


If You've Waited This Long To Buy Gifts, This Is for You
Just in time for the last shopping day before Christmas, a psychologist has an analysis of those who procrastinate in buying presents.
Very different psychological motives, from thrill-seeking to perfectionism, can lead people to wait until the last minute to shop, a report says in this month's issue of the Journal of Personality and Individual Differences.


Review/Music; Modernist Works, With Illustrations
Leon Botstein, the music director of the American Symphony Orchestra, had his work cut out for him on Sunday afternoon.
Not only did he conduct a challenging program of American modernist compositions in Carnegie Hall, but he gave miniature slide lectures between pieces, comparing the music to contemporaneous visual art.
Amid the interdisciplinary fireworks, the performances suffered from hasty preparation and sometimes uncertain leadership at the podium: in some cases, Mr.
Botstein simply did not give the music its due.
But the music itself cast a very strong spell.
"The Abstract and Geometric Tradition in Music and Painting, 1930-1975" was the theme; while his visual analogies tended to be glib, Mr.
Botstein succeeded in linking some of the finest American compositions of the period, tragically obscure music that makes no concession to the classical marketplace or to passing trends.
Whatever doubt might fall on the conductor's virtuosity, the project as a whole was brave and essential.


Level Sales Tax Field
To the Editor:
Your Dec. 9 report about New York State tax authorities stalking New York cars in New Jersey shopping mall parking lots points up the ludicrous discrepancies between state sales tax laws.


Impairments Detailed in Abuse Trial
Over more than 10 years, the 21-year-old woman at the center of the Glen Ridge sex assault trial has been variously described by psychiatric experts as "neurologically impaired," "severely retarded" and having "a high level of functioning that precludes mental retardation."
The diagnoses, made by school psychiatrists, pediatricians and other educational and psychological experts, were revealed during cross-examination of a psychiatrist who was a prosecution witness.
The psychiatrist, Dr.
Gerald Meyerhoff, has concluded that the young woman is "mentally defective," and he said he used information in the various reports from the woman's school years to assist him in his evaluation.


Nichols Research reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Home Video
Promoting Reconciliation
When the documentary "Liberators: Fighting on Two Fronts in World War II" was shown last Thursday at the Apollo Theater in Harlem, many in the audience of 1,200 were moved to tears.
Afterward, some of the black and Jewish leaders in attendance, among them the Rev.
Jesse Jackson and Mayor David N. Dinkins, recommended that the film be distributed widely as a prime example of interracial cooperation.


Sybil Andrews Printmaker, 94
Sybil Andrews, a printmaker, died on Monday in a nursing home in Victoria, British Columbia.
She was 94 years old and had lived in Campbell River, British Columbia, since immigrating to Canada from England in 1947.
She died of heart failure, said Laurence Hovde of the Mary Ryan Gallery, the artist's New York representative.


Thousands Mourn the Death of Mother Hale


Edward Pessen, 71, Jacksonian Scholar And Author, Is Dead
Edward Pessen, an expert on American history, died on Tuesday in Miami.
He was 71 years old, and his permanent home was in Brooklyn.
He died of a heart attack, his family said.


No Tie, No Gift and No Leetch for the Rangers
Roger Neilson got the really bad news before the game started.
Brian Leetch, his left arm weakened by a stretched nerve in his neck, will be out for at least four weeks.
Gone is the Rangers' best defenseman.
Gone is the lynchpin to Neilson's power play.
Gone is the guy who is perhaps the Rangers' most effective when it comes to balancing the need to create offense with the responsibility to protect his own zone.
Did Herb Brooks feel any sympathy?
Not likely.
His Devils were mortified on Monday by a Leetch-less set of Rangers on New Jersey ice.
His offense has been non-existent, the 21st-worst out of 24 teams in the league.
Clearly, he has his own problems to worry about.


Plan to Reorganize CUNY Would Penalize People of Color
To the Editor:
Chancellor W. Ann Reynolds's plan to reorganize the City University of New York, based on her advisory committee's report (news article, Dec. 8), is seriously flawed.
Not only would the plan weaken individual colleges while strengthening a huge, impersonal bureaucracy, but it would also have particularly negative consequences for people of color.


Holiday Tomorrow
Christmas is tomorrow. Here are holiday schedules. NEW YORK
GOVERNMENT OFFICES -- Closed.
POST OFFICE -- Express Mail and special delivery only; main post office open at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue.


Judge and Hearing Await N.F.L. Labor Plan
Negotiators for National Football League players and owners are optimistic that they will complete by Monday the tentative settlement of a labor agreement announced Tuesday that will feature a wide-ranging free agency plan.
After the two sides complete their work, certain steps must be taken before the settlement can be put into effect.


Words for Inauguration
To the Editor:
Martin Filler is right to urge the President-elect (and those following him in office) to return to tradition and hold inaugurations in front of the facade of the Capitol facing east toward the morning sun (Op-Ed, Nov. 25).
There are compelling historical reasons to do so: the function of the Rotunda and the decoration of the entrance to the Capitol.


New York High Court Upholds Tax on Other States' Residents
New York State can continue to tax out-of-state commuters at a rate based on their total family income, rather than just on what they earn in New York, the state's highest court has ruled.
A New Jersey couple, Lawrence and Barbara Brady of Aberdeen, had filed suit, contending that it was unconsitutional for New York to tax them at a rate based on the family's joint income because Mrs.
Brady works in New Jersey.


Asuncion Journal; Remember Paraguay? It Is Rejoining the World
Eager to make an impression in his first command post, Col.
Luis Catalino Gonzalez Rojas uncovered a stolen-car ring operating in his border zone last summer and promptly denounced the crime to his Army superiors.
Those officers smiled indulgently and suggested he forget it.


Continental Bank Canada reports earnings for Year to Oct 31


Home Improvement
VINYL flooring often receives unintentional abuse, perhaps because it looks more durable than it is and because the claims in advertisements that it has a high-gloss surface or that it needs no wax are misunderstood to mean that it also requires little care.
Weekly damp-mopping with water and a mild liquid detergent will keep ordinary-gloss vinyl flooring clean in most areas of a home.
For high-gloss and no-wax flooring, and in areas like kitchens that receive a lot of dirt, use a liquid cleaner specially made for vinyl floors.


Corrections
An article yesterday about Yale University referred incorrectly to the status of several positions in the administration.
The positions of provost and dean of the graduate school have both been filled.
The undergraduate school, Yale College, has an acting dean.


Garden Q.&amp; A.
Perennial Christmas Trees
Q.
I am using the holidays as an excuse to buy myself a live evergreen to serve as a Christmas tree first.
What care does it need? -- Victoria Trevor, Chicago.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  HOMELESS RULING TO CUT CROWDING
A state judge, ruling that New York City has illegally sheltered 1,200 homeless men in two dangerous, overcrowded armories, one in the Bronx and one in Brooklyn, ordered the city to cut the number of men there by two-thirds and upgrade fire safety.
A1.
THE CHANGING FORTUNES OF CHARLES HYNES
Five years ago, after prosecuting four white men for chasing a black man to his death in Howard Beach, Charles J. Hynes became a celebrity.
But his stardom has waned in a relentless stream of high-profile, often violent, bias cases.
Now, a new case threatens to entangle the Brooklyn District Attorney in a divisive racial dispute.
A1.


Communication Cable Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Coleman Latest to Join Nets' Injury Brigade
When the Nets travel to Cleveland for Saturday's game against the Cavaliers, they should perhaps consider taking several Red Cross volunteers to help with the wounded.
As if the emotional baggage from a tough loss to Boston on Tuesday wasn't enough, New Jersey now faces the problem of being a banged-up team with one of the most difficult parts of the schedule just around the corner.
The biggest casualty is forward Derrick Coleman.
He didn't practice yesterday after further straining his right knee in the 106-104 loss to the Celtics.
Coleman originally hurt the knee on Dec. 4 and it has never completely healed.
Yesterday no one seemed to know whether Coleman would definitely play against the Cavaliers or whether he might rest the knee.
Not even Coleman seemed to know for sure.


Saztec International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Venture Capital: Looking for Stars
Richard Kramlich invests in fledgling companies that he says typically start out as "three guys and a dream." He is one of America's leading venture capitalists, and while the entrepreneurial dreams he backs are risky, the successful ones can be incubators of new technology and new jobs.
When Mr.
Kramlich and his colleagues at New Enterprise Associates, a San Francisco-based partnership, put money in a company, it stays there for five years or more.
They sit on the boards of the companies they invest in.
They help with marketing plans and product designs -- they even interview job applicants.


Turncoat Ex-Colonel Emerges in Manila To Sign Cease-Fire
After four years in hiding, the Philippines' most wanted rebel soldier, Gregorio Honasan, a former lieutenant colonel, came forward today to sign a cease-fire agreement with the Government of President Fidel V. Ramos.
Mr.
Honasan, who led several attempts to overthrow Mr.
Ramos's predecessor, President Corazon C. Aquino, signed the truce in a private meeting with Government emissaries held at a conference hall on a university campus in suburban Manila.


Rimage Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Drug Stocks Take a Dive On a Report
Drug stocks took a headlong dive yesterday after a securities analyst lowered her estimates of 1993 earnings for the pharmaceuticals industry.
Christina Heuer at Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Company said 1992 "was full of disappointments" for the drug makers "and 1993 could be another difficult year."
The declines were led by Bristol-Myers Squibb, down $3.875, to $67.375, on the New York Stock Exchange.
The company was also hit yesterday with $25 million in damages in a lawsuit in Texas involving a silicone gel breast implant made by the Medical Engineering Corporation, a Bristol-Myers Squibb unit.
The company said it would appeal.  [ Page A13. ]


Hazards Still Fester At an A-Bomb Plant
Eight years after Government experts first said catastrophic explosions were possible at million-gallon waste tanks at a nuclear bomb plant in Washington State, the Department of Energy still does not know just what is in the tanks or how risky they are.


Intermagnetics General reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 29


AT HOME WITH/Robin Williams; Good for a Laugh, Not a Bad Listener
IT is 7 P.M., and Robin Williams has just returned home from taping "The Arsenio Hall Show." His two younger children are scampering and laughing in the hallway, and Mr.
Williams, wearing a black shirt and baggy pleated pants, steps into the living room and sits wearily on a footstool.
His wife, Marsha, brings him a Coke.
He tries to stifle a yawn.
He has jet lag from a London flight earlier in the day, and he has barely had time to unpack.


A 900-Million-Year Reprieve for Life on Earth
Life on Earth may be doomed but not for at least a billion years, two scientists suggest.
This new estimate gives Earth's creatures a tenfold increase in life expectancy over a span proposed earlier.
The latest estimate, by Dr.
Ken Caldeira, a geochemist, and Dr.
James F. Kasting, an atmospheric scientist, both of Pennsylvania State University, is based on a complex mathematical representation of interactions in the environment.


BSN Corp. reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


Executive Changes
AIRBUS SERVICE CO., Washington, named Clyde Kizer president and chief operating officer.
BRISTOL-MYERS PRODUCTS, New York, a unit of Bristol-Myers Squibb Co., named Peter R. Dolan executive vice president for sales, marketing, operations and finance.


Thomas K. Cureton Jr.; Physical Fitness Expert, 91
Thomas K. Cureton Jr., a pioneer researcher in the study of physical fitness, died Dec. 18 at his home in Urbana, Ill.
He was 91.
Professor Cureton, who taught at the University of Illinois from 1941 to 1969, lectured at physical fitness institutes around the world.
He wrote or was the co-author of 50 books and many articles.
He was also research director of the national Aquatic Congress of the Y.M.C.A. for 25 years.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Lee Ranaldo, Ikue Mori and Zeena Parkins  Roulette


Anchor Lamina reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


CLINTON PLANNING TO NAME A WOMAN FOR JUSTICE DEPT.
President-elect Bill Clinton is prepared to name Zoe Baird, senior vice president and general counsel for Aetna Life and Casualty in Hartford as Attorney General, transition officials confirmed tonight.
Ms.
Baird would be the first woman to hold the post.
News of Ms.
Baird's nomination came barely 48 hours after she came here to be interviewed by Mr.
Clinton and at the end of a day in which other candidates' names rose and fell within hours of each other.


Karl Seymour Nash, Newspaper Editor, 84
Karl Seymour Nash, the editor of The Ridgefield (N.J.) Press for 50 years and president of Acorn Press newspapers, died Tuesday at his winter home in Cocoa Beach, Fla.
He was 84 and also lived in Ridgefield.
Mr.
Nash had pancreatic cancer two years ago, said Sally Sanders, a spokeswoman for Acorn Press.


Mary Green; Dance Administrator, 82
Mary Green, a dancer, an actress, a writer and a longtime assistant to Agnes de Mille, died on Dec. 16 at St.
Luke's Hospital in New York City.
She was 82 years old.
She died of pancreatic cancer, said Miss de Mille, who announced the death yesterday.


CHRONICLE
A Christmas horribilis for Queen ELIZABETH II?
As if she had not had a tough enough year, someone divulged the text of her annual Christmas message to a newspaper two days before she was to deliver it, prerecorded, on nationwide television.
The Christmas message has been delivered annually by the reigning monarch since 1937.
The text of this year's message appeared yesterday morning on the front page of The Sun.


Louisiana Must Consolidate Its Universities, Judge Rules
In another of many attempts to desegregate Louisiana's public colleges and universities, a Federal district judge today ordered the end of a setup that has been widely seen as strengthening historically black colleges.
"Simply put, the dubious ideal of 'separate but equal,' whether endorsed by whites or blacks, is an anachronism that our society no longer tolerates," Judge Charles Schwartz wrote in ruling that the four boards that currently govern Louisiana's public colleges and universities must be consolidated.


Frederick W. Franz, A Religous Leader, Dies in Office at 99
Frederick William Franz, a biblical scholar and president of the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society, better known as the Jehovah's Witnesses, died on Tuesday at his residence in the society's headquarters in Brooklyn.
He was 99 years old.
An eight-member board of directors is selecting his successor at the organization's new residential tower in Brooklyn Heights.
Founded in 1879, the Jehovah's Witnesses is a Christian denomination that believes the end of the world is near and advocates door-to-door evangelism.
It claims 4.4 million believers worldwide.


Champions Sports reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Managed Care Prompts Doctors to Do Less
To the Editor:
Some managed-care health plans withhold 10 percent to 15 percent of the doctor's fee for a visit.
This is a serious deficiency.
The reserve fund is distributed to physicians at the end of the year after certain medical expenses for the subscribing patients have been met.


Market Place; Ross Cosmetics: Drama Continues
UNLIKE many ho-hum business tales, the saga of Ross Cosmetics Distribution Centers is a virtual running drama, the "All My Children" of the corporate set.
So sit back, relax and get ready for the latest episode.
When our story began, Ross was a cheery perfume and cosmetics company with good prospects and stock trading in the low 20's.
But in June troubles visited the company, based in Duncan, S.C., when it disclosed that it had been secretly controlled for years by its largest supplier -- a revelation that caused its stock to plunge 66 percent and its chairman to resign.


South of Marrakesh, A New/Old Casbah
AN invitation to Luciano Tempo's casbah is not a line out of an old grade B movie.
But a visit to Kasbah Tamadot, a splendid villa in the mountains south of Marrakesh, is an opportunity to experience the richness of Moroccan style and hospitality.
Casbahs are to Morocco what castles were to medieval Europe: fortified dwellings for nobility, with high, crenelated walls, towers and interior courtyards.
Ruined casbahs, some deserted and some inhabited by squatters, dot the landscape, especially here in southern Morocco.


Cognos Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Vehicle Sales 16% Higher In Midmonth
Sales of cars and light trucks built in North America surged by more than 16 percent for the 10 days in mid-December compared with last year's period, auto makers reported yesterday.
But analysts cautioned against reading too much into the year-over-year comparison, because sales last December were so sluggish.
Nevertheless, the improvement in sales, which was much more pronounced for light trucks than for cars, continues an upward trend that began more than a year ago.


The Price of Gas
To the Editor:
With all the discussion about imposing a hefty tax rise on gasoline to increase government revenues, it occurs to me that motorists are already paying a not-too-subtle "tax" that is unfairly increasing the revenues of the major oil companies.


Life Full of Toys, Antiques and Deer
ARCHIE AND EMMA STILES are busy these days. Everyone wants to borrow their deer.
They have dutifully walked their youngest, a five-month-old named Chelsea, to a town Christmas party, entertained busloads of nursery school students and committed themselves to bring a deer or two to visit hospitals and nursing homes on Christmas Day, with Mr.
Stiles dressed as Santa.


Nichols Research reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


The Endless Quest for a Daughter's Killer; A Queens Detective's Mission: To Find Answers for a Grieving Mother
It was a two-by-three-foot blowup, a haunting photograph of a beautiful, fresh-faced young girl smiling slightly.
It leaned against a small stand where four lighted candles on a wreath of Christmas pine stood.
And beyond that was the altar where a memorial Mass in her honor was offered.
It was a photo of Laura Gossmann, who was found slain three days before Christmas on a Sunday morning last year, not far from her home and in a gully between the Brooklyn-Queens Expressway and Conrail tracks in Woodside, Queens.
A Friend He Never Met
Among those who gathered Tuesday night for the Mass at St.
John's Preparatory School in Queens, where she had gone to high school, played varsity basketball and served as a spiritual retreat counselor for other students, were her mother, Susan Gossmann, and about 50 relatives and friends.


Tidewater Club Sold by Mets
The Mets announced yesterday that they have sold their Class AAA International League farm club, Tidewater, for more than $7 million to a group led by Ken Young, a Tampa, Fla., businessman.
The team, the highest in the Mets' minor league chain, will play in a new 12,000-seat stadium in Norfolk, Va., under a working agreement with the Mets.
It will be called the Norfolk Tides, a change from the Tidewater Tides, who were owned by the Mets since 1969, when New York's top farm club was moved from Jacksonville, Fla.


Quick &amp; Reilly Group reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 27


Aspin's Aid to Businesses Questioned
Six years ago, Representative Les Aspin saw a way to channel some of the Pentagon budget to his constituents in Wisconsin.
Why not help local business by creating a nonprofit organization in his home district?
The organization would use contributions from local companies and military contractors, as well as Federal money, to help Wisconsin companies bid for Pentagon contracts.
To insure that voters did not forget who was trying to help Wisconsin get a piece of the Pentagon pie, it would be named the Aspin Procurement Institute.
Mr.
Aspin would serve as the honorary chairman.


Where Once Was Coal, Now Is Play
EVEN the murkiest basement space can have another life. All it takes is money.
At 1125 Park Avenue, a co-operative apartment building in Manhattan, a 1,900-square-foot coal bin has been transformed into an exercise room, a half-size basketball court and a 500-square-foot playroom for small children.


Fleet Aerospace Corp. reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


Editorial Notebook; Mother Hale's Lasting Gift
Luminaries and public figures like Representative Charles Rangel and the Rev.
Al Sharpton gathered in a large hall at Riverside Church in Manhattan to pay their respects.
Others chose a more intimate setting: the small chapel nearby where Clara McBride Hale, known to all as Mother Hale, could be seen for the last time.
They filed silently by the open casket, gazing at a peaceful woman clad in a simple green and black dress.
A few broke down in tears.
"Such a good person. Such a good person," whispered one mourner, who would only identify herself as a member of Mother Hale's extended family.
"She could never give us enough."


AMERICAN IS KILLED IN SOMALIA BY MINE PLANTED BY CLANS
A civilian employee of the United States Army was killed in the interior of Somalia today when the vehicle in which he was traveling hit a mine.
The death was the first in the American-led force that arrived here two weeks ago.
Three State Department security officials also in the vehicle were wounded when it hit the antitank mine outside Bardera, 200 miles west of here in the Somali bush.
The military said the four men were preparing for the arrival of 1,000 marines in Bardera on Thursday.


General Computer reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Getting Into Shape Is the Biggest Job for a Skier
Despite good intentions, most people never get around to doing the exercises that can make skiing easier and safer.
Although the ski season is under way, fitness experts and doctors say even a modest training program now is better than doing nothing at all.
They caution, however, that people should consult their physicians before they start, and those with medical conditions, knee injuries or back problems should be sure they are able to do exercises without causing further injury.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-8  AMERICAN KILLED IN SOMALIA


TV's Star Dims On Holidays
There is heartening news for those who fear that Christmas has turned into another media event.
According to a report by N. W. Ayer, the advertising agency, the biggest drop in television viewing all year comes on Christmas Eve, when the number of households with their sets on drops an average of 34 percent.
On Christmas Day, Ayer found, television viewership drops 22 percent.


Jordan Goes to High Gear And Scores 57 in Victory
Bulls 107, Bullets 98
CHICAGO, Dec. 23 (AP) -- Michael Jordan, warming up for a Christmas showdown with the Knicks, scored a season-high 57 points tonight, leading the Chicago Bulls to a 107-98 victory over the Washington Bullets.
Jordan, whose career best is 69 points, matched Reggie Miller of Indiana for the high in the National Basketball Association this season.
Jordan, who has 29 career 50-point games, scored 54 in an overtime game against the Los Angeles Lakers on Nov. 20.


Let U.N. Assembly Elect Security Council
To the Editor:
"The World's Only Other Cop" (editorial, Dec. 8) identifies a central obstacle to a wider international role for the United Nations when it points out that the five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council "still reflect power 1945-style: the United States, Britain, France, Russia and China."


Bernard Frawley; Actor, 63
Bernard Frawley, an actor, died last Thursday at St.
Vincent's Hospital.
He was 63 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of throat cancer, said his wife, Maureen.


CHRONICLE
MALCOLM-JAMAL WARNER had planned to celebrate New Year's Eve in Los Angeles but was asked by the U.S.O. last week to go to Somalia to visit troops there over the holiday.
He leaves on Monday and will be the first entertainer to go to the East African country under the auspices of the U.S.O. since American forces were sent there two weeks ago.
"This is not a trip you can be totally gung-ho about," the 22-year-old actor said yesterday.
He was invited because he is in the same age group as many of the troops, said Kevin McCarthy, executive producer of entertainment for the U.S.O.


For Shutting Out the Noisy World
INNER peace can be attained not only through meditation, but also, to some extent, through architecture, specifically by building a soundproof room.
For those who want to block out unwanted noise -- from loud music, neighbors, children or spouse -- a soundproof room is a luxury that seems like a necessity.
You can retreat to the room, shut the door and escape the noise.
Or conversely, you can go into the room and make a lot of noise of your own, knowing that you're disturbing no one else.


Donations to Neediest Cases Running Behind Last Year's
The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund passed the $2 million mark yesterday, but it is still falling significantly behind last year's record campaign, which raised more than $5 million.
Despite numerous donations from people like Emanuel A. Sprung of Manhattan, who sent $10 for his 47th contribution in a row, the fund has taken in about $200,000 less than it had by this date in 1991.
Arthur Gelb, president of The New York Times Company Foundation, which administers the fund, said he was hopeful that a surge of post-holiday donations would make up the shortfall before the campaign ends on Feb. 28.
But officials at the seven charities assisted by the fund fear that if contributions do not pick up, they may have to curtail or even eliminate programs that are helping thousands of people who lack food, clothing, shelter and health care.


U.S. Plans a Transfer
With the American-led relief operation here described as being more than three weeks ahead of schedule, the United States field commander said today that he was preparing to transfer the relief effort to a multinational force under United Nations control.
"We're beginning to actually plan for how the U.N. would come in to replace us," the officer, Lieut.
Gen.
Robert B. Johnston, said in an interview.
He did not give a date when the changeover might occur.


Oracle reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


HOME VIDEO: NEW VIDEO RELEASES
Boomerang  1992.
Paramount. $94.95.
Laser disk, $34.95. 1 hour 58 minutes.
Closed captioned.
R.
Meet Marcus (Eddie Murphy), smirky marketing man, womanizer, cliche.
Marcus beds lots of women and this is fun and all until the day he himself falls under the spell of a sleek feline destroyer named Jacqueline (Robin Givens).
Sort of a female Marcus, Jacqueline ravishes the fellow and leaves him a lovesick wreck whining about her insensitivity.
Eartha Kitt is a garish cosmetics doyenne and Grace Jones portrays a startlingly vulgar celebrity, but Marcus and his sex-role confusion is the lone fillip in Reginald Hudlin's film.
Fortunately, wrote Janet Maslin in The Times, "Mr. Murphy happens to be playing this role, so Marcus becomes a lot more likable than he deserves to be." Edward II  1992.
New Line. $92.95. 1:31.
R.


Howard Hageman, 71, President of Seminary
The Rev.
Howard G. Hageman, a former national leader of the Reformed Church in America and a retired seminary president, died on Sunday at St.
Peter's Hospital in Albany.
He was 71 and lived in New Baltimore, N.Y.
He died of esophageal cancer, his family said.


Taking a Nap as His Santa Does Her Shopping


Books of The Times; Coast to Coast in an Ecologist's Dream With Wheels
Solo  Life With an Electric Car  By Noel Perrin  191 pages.
W.
W.
Norton &amp; Company. $18.95.


Foreign Affairs; Who Did Good
People actually do do fine and noble things.
I mention that only because we pundits hardly ever mention that.
Except at this time of year, when our normal grumpiness seems abnormal.
So allow me to interrupt the usual flow of complaints and howls and give these holiday bouquets to those whose good works expose words as mere words.


At Grand Central, a Conductor of a Different Sort


Oyster Bay Residents Unite Against Bigotry
For the first time, the menorah has taken its place here beside the traditional creche and town Christmas tree in a show of solidarity against the recent appearance of anti-Semitic and racist literature in this North Shore village.
The three holiday symbols light up a small park in front of Town Hall, where children gather each year to decorate the Christmas tree with oyster shells and sing carols.
This year, the tradition was expanded to include Jewish children who lighted a menorah and sang Hanukkah songs.


These Days, You Make Up Holidays as You Go Along
SO you're depressed.
It's Christmas Eve.
No one close to you is coming home.
Your son is gay and will be vacationing in Borneo with his lover.
Your daughter has converted to Judaism and lives 1,500 miles away.
You can't go to your mom's house because she is too busy with her expanding New Age bric-a-brac business to entertain guests.
Your dad is in Aruba with his second wife, and your ex-husband, a recovering alcoholic, has just remarried. (You didn't really want to see him anyway.) The one bright spot is that you have only one day off from work, so soon you will be rushing back to all that safe, unemotional office stuff -- it can be complicated but, hey, you
know
you can handle it.


BENEFITS GRANTED TO GAY PARTNERS
Two of the country's leading universities have extended health insurance, tuition benefits, library privileges and other fringe benefits to the gay and lesbian partners of faculty and staff members and students.
Stanford University and the University of Chicago, acting independently and without arousing much controversy, voted earlier this month to give gay and lesbian domestic partners the same benefits that have been available to married couples.


Classical Music in Review
Sharon Robinson  and Ilana Vered
Cellist and Pianist  92d Street Y


Sports of The Times; Free Agency: A New Open Door Policy?
THE final push for labor peace in the National Football League came last week in Dallas.
That was when the owners offered their negotiating team an extra nudge and told them to close the deal.
In part, that action led to the joint announcement Tuesday that the players and the owners had reached a tentative settlement on a new working agreement that would include the N.F.L.'s first comprehensive free-agency plan.


Hondo Oil &amp; Gas reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


Cash-Poor New York Given 22,000 Acres In the Adirondacks
The public will gain access to 22,000 acres of evergreen forest and white-water river in the northwest Adirondacks under a plan announced today that includes the largest gift of land in the 100-year history of the Adirondack Park.
Much of the land is wilderness for which the state once planned to pay as much as $6 million, but will now get free.
The land donation by the International Paper Company represents a rare but major environmental breakthrough for New York, whose wilderness preservation program has been all but stymied in recent years by budget shortfalls and voter rejection of a $2 billion environmental bond act in 1990.
The tract, along the Raquette River near the village of Tupper Lake, was at the top of virtually every list put together by state officials and environmentalists of areas that should be protected for future generations.
Warning About Wilderness
But as he praised the gift, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo said it also emphasized that the state had no money to buy land, a situation he has unsuccessfully sought to remedy with the creation of an environmental trust fund.


CHINA SAYS FRANCE MUST CLOSE OFFICE
China ordered France today to close its consulate in the southern city of Guangzhou, as punishment for the French sale of 60 fighter planes to Taiwan.
The action was the latest sign of the growing strains between China and the West over contacts with Taiwan.
The closing was apparently a warning to other countries -- including the United States, Germany and the Netherlands -- that are considering arms sales to Taiwan.


Why Rush to Pardon Weinberger?
Friends of former Secretary of Defense Caspar Weinberger continue to press for a Presidential pardon.
Mr.
Weinberger is accused of lying to Congress in the cover-up of the Iran-contra affair.
His friends cite his age, 75, and his long record of public service -- but rarely the crimes of which he is accused.
The charge is that Mr.
Weinberger, though an opponent of the plan to ransom American hostages with weapons, concealed his knowledge of the scheme from a Congressional inquiry.
His trial begins in Washington on Jan. 5, and until then the charge remains unproven.
But an advance pardon would assume that the charges were baseless or insignificant, something that Mr.
Weinberger has not demonstrated.


Davstar Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Companies Reducing Benefits Promised for Their Retirees
At least 23 large companies have abandoned the health benefits that they were providing to thousands of retired employees.
Dozens more have announced that they will not provide coverage for future retirees, and most employers who still offer the benefits are reducing their share of the costs, which have been climbing steeply.
The companies are rushing to shrink these obligations before Jan. 1, when a new accounting rule goes into effect.
The rule forces employers to subtract from their profits the future costs of providing benefits to retirees.


J.W.T. Executive Starts His Own Shop
Richard J. Kostyra, one of the agency world's best-known media executives, is leaving J. Walter Thompson after 33 years to go into business for himself.
Mr.
Kostyra, executive vice president and United States director of media services at J. Walter Thompson North America, said yesterday that he would leave to open a media planning, buying and consulting company called Media First International Inc. in New York.


Bill Planned on Deposits
A United States Representative said yesterday that he would propose a bill barring Federal confiscation of neglected deposits in failed savings and loan institutions.
The Representative, Barney Frank, a Massachusetts Democrat who is a member of the House Banking Committee, said his bill would make unclaimed deposits at savings and loans taken over by the Federal Resolution Trust Corporation the property of states.


Yugoslavia Plans Defense
The Yugoslav Army's top general warned in an interview published here tonight that his forces had made plans to resist any international armed intervention against Bosnia and Herzegovina's Serbs.
"Although any foreign intervention on the territory of the former Socialist Federated Republic of Yugoslavia would be extremely illogical and carry with it the risk of spreading the flames of war across the whole continent of Europe and beyond, the Yugoslav Army has for a long time been ready to turn its armed forces against eventual aggression," the army's Chief of Staff, Gen.
Zivota Panic, said in an interview with a Belgrade daily, Borba.


3 Remotes and a Converter? Maybe Not for Much Longer
Sometime in 1994 or 1995, zapper-wielding couch potatoes who now have multiple remote controls should be able to throw away all but one of them, no longer needing one for the television set, another for the videocassette recorder and a third for the cable converter.
In fact, they may no longer need a converter.
The remote-control devices that come with the VCR should change the channels on the television, and the remote control for the television should change the channels on the VCR.
And the television will probably unscramble scrambled cable channels.


Wal-Mart Disputes Report on Labor
Wal-Mart Stores Inc. yesterday rejected accusations that some of its Asian suppliers had used illegal child labor, but it acknowledged that imported clothing had been displayed as domestic merchandise in some of its 2,000 stores.
The accusations were made in a report on Tuesday night on the NBC News program "Dateline." The program was seen in nearly 14 million households and drew the highest rating for the program since the weekly news magazine was first broadcast last March.


Thousands Celebrate Mother Hale As 'Lady of Inner-City Royalty'
Several thousand friends, admirers and family members filled Riverside Church yesterday to celebrate the life and to mourn the death of Clara M. Hale, the woman who sheltered and raised hundreds of abandoned and orphaned children in her home.
The service, an afternoon of heart-felt tributes, seemed to offer solace to those who were most touched by her example.
Mother Hale, as she was widely known, died last Friday of complications from a stroke.
She was 87 years old.


Vans Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 29


Craftmatic/Contour Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


3 Officers Wound Themselves In Two Days
A 23-year-old New York City police officer shot a man twice and himself in the wrist during a fight outside a bar in the Bronx early yesterday, the police said.
It was one of three episodes since Tuesday in which police officers wounded themselves.
In the other incidents, a correction officer's gun discharged when he was adjusting his holster, and an officer wounded himself at a precinct in the Bronx, the police said.


Barnstorming Islanders Bag Another Trophy
Once again, the Islanders beat a first-place team.
Once again, they did it on the road.
Once again, they are one game below .500.
Still, they remain 1 point behind the fourth-place Devils in the chase for the final playoff berth in the Patrick Division.
But the worst of their road schedule is behind them now and they are seven games short of the midseason mark.
They have won five of their last six and are still muttering about the one that got away.
With 12 of their next 18 games at home, they seem like a team on the move, with upward mobility a real possibility.


Sculpturing a Bridge of Steel and Air
A MANHATTAN sculptor has been chosen to design a new bridge in St.
Paul, but even he won't know until February which of his three proposals will be used.
The sculptor, James Carpenter, was chosen from more than 60 contestants to design a replacement for the Wabasha Street Bridge across the Mississippi River.


Home Furnishings for Beginners
THE walls are hot pink, the shelves and counters orange, and the prices low.
Dom, a store devoted to home furnishings and clothes, which opened in SoHo on Halloween, is designed to enable young people just starting out to sit on chairs instead of milk crates and to eat from pottery instead of paper plates.


Bush Offers Clinton Team Holiday Greetings


5 Hospitals Agree to Tentative Pacts With Nurses
Administrators at five hospitals in Queens and Brooklyn have agreed to a tentative contract with nurses, after a day in which it had appeared that one of the hospitals would reject the agreement.
Four of the hospitals -- Brookdale Hospital Medical Center and St.
Mary's Hospital in Brooklyn and St.
John's Queens Hospital and St.
John's Episcopal/South Shore Division in Queens -- signed the agreement early yesterday morning.


Last of Seven Production Unions Reaches Tentative Pact at Times
A tentative agreement between the paperhandlers and The New York Times was announced yesterday by the newspaper.
The agreement, which is subject to ratification by the union's members, is the last of a series of labor agreements The Times has reached with its seven production unions involved in the opening of The Times's new color plant in Edison, N.J.


Corrections
Articles last Thursday and on Saturday about race relations in Crown Heights, Brooklyn, referred incorrectly to Rabbi Shmuel Butman.
He is the director of the Lubavitch Youth Organization and a spokesman for the Crown Heights Jewish Community Council.
The Lubavitch World Headquarters says he does not speak for the Lubavitch movement.


An American Heroine for Troubled Film Industries Abroad
For some, it's the spotted owl or the dolphin.
For the actress and producer Rita Gam, it's foreign film that tops the list of endangered species.
"The film industries of other countries are an endangered species," she said.
"They have to be protected and cherished."
For the past two years she has been filming what she calls "sort of an ecological series" called "World of Film," whose half-hour segments paint a portrait of the film industry in a particular country, through interviews with prominent directors and actors, film clips and archival film.


Pacific Bell Will Forgo Caller ID Service
Pacific Bell, citing poor profit potential because of costly regulations and customers' penchant for privacy, has decided to forgo offering Caller ID, a service that allows customers to see a caller's phone number on a special display.
Since 1990, 33 states have approved Caller ID or similar services within their borders.
Pacific Bell, California's largest phone company, with nine million customers, is one of the only companies to decline to offer the controversial service after receiving regulatory approval.
Company officials say California has imposed the most stringent privacy protections of any state in the country.
Regulatory Environment Blamed
The move surprised industry analysts, because new services and technology are seen as a principal source of revenue and earnings growth for regulated phone companies.


Yields Are Higher for Money Market Funds
Yields offered by tax-exempt and taxable money market funds were higher in the latest week, pushed up by seasonal factors.
Analysts at IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report, which surveys fund rates, said one reason for the upward pressure on rates at this time of year is that some investors sell holdings for cash.


Intermagnetics General reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 29


Hawks' Wilkins Is Out
The Atlanta Hawks placed DOMINIQUE WILKINS on the injured list and signed point guard STEVE HENSON from LaCrosse (Wis.) team of the Continental Basketball Association.
Wilkins, who broke a bone in his right hand last week, is not expected to return until mid-January.
Placing him on the injured list Tuesday was a formality necessary to sign Henson.


Seasonal Messages That Appeal or Annoy
ONE more day! One more day!
That is not the joyful chant of children eager to see what Santa Claus will leave under the tree, nor of workers anticipating a long weekend.
It is the grateful cry of American consumers, counting the hours until Christmas arrives, bringing to an end the annual spate of coarse, crass and overcommercialized Christmas ad pitches.


Machine Technology reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Finance Chief Surprises Honeywell by Leaving
Honeywell Inc. said today that Christopher J. Steffen, its chief financial and administrative officer, had resigned to "pursue other interests."
The departure of Mr.
Steffen, which will take place immediately, was unexpected.
The 50-year-old executive was extremely popular on Wall Street and was credited with playing a major role in restructuring the Minneapolis-based electronic controls company into a more profitable concern.


Miami Signs Erickson To Contract Extension
Last week, DENNIS ERICKSON said he intended to coach the Miami Hurricanes for many years to come.
Yesterday, the school had it in writing.


Christmas Coal
This is the time when millions of children think about stockings.
Big stockings.
Huge stockings.
Stockings grand enough to hold an orange, a few nuts and a cascade of small presents.
But please, no lump of coal.
The lump of coal, fans of folklore will recall, was Saint Nicholas's gift to bad children.
No statistics exist, nor have they ever, giving the percentage of American children presented with hunks of anthracite on Christmas morning.
But whatever the numbers, they are too many.


Critic's Notebook; Branagh's Hamlet as a Young Conservative
When Kenneth Branagh opened in "Hamlet" at the Royal Shakespeare Company this weekend, The Observer reviewed it on the front page, likening Mr.
Branagh's Prince to the beleaguered Prince Charles.
Need one say more about how bland Mr. Branagh's Hamlet is?


No Headline
This is a tremendous day for the Adirondacks.
ERIC SIY of the National Audubon Society.  [ B4:6. ]


Transactions
Baseball  American League
SEATTLE MARINERS -- Signed Mackey Sasser, catcher, to a two-year contract.
Eastern League
WEST HAVEN -- Named Charles J. Dowd Jr. general manager.


Pioneer Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


DECREASES ORDERED AT 2 BIG SHELTERS FOR THE HOMELESS
Ruling that New York City has illegally sheltered 1,200 homeless men in two dangerous and overcrowded armories, a state judge ordered the city yesterday to cut the number of men housed there by two-thirds and to upgrade fire safety in the sprawling spaces where the men sleep cot to cot.
It was the second time in a month that a judge ordered tough steps to remedy what she described as the city's failure to shelter the homeless adequately.
Last month another judge, Helen E. Freedman of State Supreme Court in Manhattan, found high-ranking officials in the Dinkins administration in contempt of court for allowing homeless families to sleep in city offices while they waited for the city to find places to put them.


Judge Orders White Officers to Stand Trial in Detroit Beating Death
A judge ordered three white officers to stand trial in the fatal beating of a black motorist but dismissed felony charges against the black sergeant accused of allowing the beating to occur.
District Judge Alex J. Allen dismissed an involuntary manslaughter charge against Sgt.
Freddie Douglas, above, saying the prosecution had not shown that Sergeant Douglas's failure to stop officers from beating Malice W. Green caused the Detroit man's death last month.
Sergeant Douglas reacted to the decision in Detroit. (Associated Press)


Interface Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Louisiana Must Consolidate Its Universities, Judge Rules
In another of many attempts to desegregate Louisiana's public colleges and universities, a Federal district judge today ordered the end of a setup that has been widely seen as strengthening historically black colleges.
"Simply put, the dubious ideal of 'separate but equal,' whether endorsed by whites or blacks, is an anachronism that our society no longer tolerates," Judge Charles Schwartz wrote in ruling that the four boards that currently govern Louisiana's public colleges and universities must be consolidated.


ProGroup Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 21


ProGroup Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 21


Essay; Switching The Goal Posts
Bill Clinton's selection of Tony Lake and Sandy Berger to head the Conceptual Frameworkers Union down in the White House basement sends an unmistakable signal to the world: The foreign policy of the United States will be a far cry from the one denounced on Oct. 2 by candidate Clinton in Milwaukee.
In that speech, which might have been titled "It's Foreign Policy, Stupid," Governor Clinton attacked a Bush "policy that embraces stability at the expense of freedom" and called for one "that lights fires in the hearts of millions of freedom-loving people around the world."


Ex-Rockette's Kin Find Relief in Ruling
The day after a mentally ill homeless man was ruled unfit to stand trial, for now, in the widely publicized murder of a former Rockette on West 69th Street, her family tried to read finality into a situation that is not quite settled.
But the family of the defendant regretted what they considered a lost opportunity.


U.N. Undecided on Action To Halt Fighting in Balkans
With Slobodan Milosevic, Serbia's nationalist president, now apparently assured of victory in Sunday's elections, the United Nations Security Council has become bogged down over what to do next about Belgrade's support for Serbian militias in neighboring Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The United States, Britain and France believe the time is approaching when the Security Council should enforce its ban on military flights over Bosnia and Herzegovina to show that its orders must be obeyed and to demonstrate to Mr.
Milosevic and other Serbian leaders the council's determination to end the fighting.


Spoleto Festival U.S.A. Announces '93 Season
The 1993 Spoleto Festival U.S.A., in Charleston, S.C., is to open on May 28 with an orchestral concert conducted by Steven Mercurio, the festival's new music director, and is to run through June 13.
There are to be three opera productions, including the world premiere of "The Singing Child," a new children's opera by Gian Carlo Menotti, the festival's founder and artistic director.
The other new productions are a double bill of Ravel's "Enfant et les Sortileges," directed by Moses Pendleton, the United States premiere of Zemlinsky's "Birthday of the Infanta," directed by Mr.
Menotti, and a staging of Rossini's "Comte Ory."


Barbara Rollock, 70, Library Administrator
Barbara Rollock, an authority on children's literature who worked for 32 years with the New York Public Library, died on Sunday at Kingsbrook Jewish Medical Center in Brooklyn.
She was 70 years old and lived in Brooklyn.
She died of colon cancer, said her son David.


Time Inc. to Run Magazines For American Express Co.
Time Inc. has agreed to assume management responsibility for the American Express Company's two main magazines, the companies said yesterday.
The agreement, about which the magazine industry has been speculating for months, involved two American Express magazines, Travel &amp; Leisure, with a circulation of 1.1 million, and Food &amp; Wine, with a circulation of 803,000.


Comptronix Adjusts Books And Sees 4 Years of Losses
The Comptronix Corporation, rocked last month by the disclosure that former senior managers had inflated profits through improper accounting, announced yesterday that it expected to report losses this year and for each of the previous three years in which the fraud took place.
The company said it expected a pretax loss for this year of between $500,000 and $1.5 million on sales of about $140 million to $145 million.
The company's earnings before interest, income taxes, depreciation and amortization are expected to be in the range of $9 million to $10 million.


Review/Music; S.E.M. Evokes John Cage as Teacher
Where there is a well-defined school in music, there must be a great teacher.
Music from the Viennese Classical period, even the early Romantic, bore the stamp of Haydn.
Earlier in this century, Arnold Schoenberg spread the 12-tone catechism throughout Europe and America.
And John Cage, who himself studied briefly with Schoenberg, formed his own topsy-turvy academy in the late 1950's.
He taught students and colleagues alike how to be free, and also subtly impressed upon them the importance of self-imposed systems.
On Tuesday night at the Paula Cooper Gallery, 155 Wooster Street in SoHo, the Brooklyn-based S.E.M.
Ensemble brilliantly re-created the atmosphere of those years.
With the aid of two original participants (Mr. Higgins and Jackson Mac Low), Petr Kotik, the director of S.E.M., followed the letter of the scores without seeming to dryly re-enact them.
He restored the past to the extent that it looked like a possible future.


Buffton Corp. reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


COMPANY BRIEFS
MCDONNELL DOUGLAS CORP., St.
Louis, received a $122 million Air Force contract for initial parts and material for 72 F-15XP's for Saudi Arabia.
SAAB-SCANIA A.B.,Stockholm, received an additional order for 20 Saab 340B aircraft from the American carrier American Eagle.


Oracle reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Yields Up as Bidders Seek Bargains
After a two-day holiday rally, the bond market gave back a little of the cheer yesterday as prices fell and yields increased.
But the bidders at the Treasury auction of five-year notes were the true tight-fisted holiday shoppers, paying as little as they could for the new notes and pushing the yield much higher than expected.


Carol Fitzgerald, 51, Bibliography Specialist
Carol Bondhus Fitzgerald, head of readers' services at the Mina Rees Library of the Graduate School and University Center of the City University of New York, died on Tuesday in Mount Kisco, N.Y.
She was 51 and lived in Bedford Hills, N.Y.
Professor Fitzgerald died of cancer at Northern Westchester Hospital Center, said Christy DeBoe Hicks, a City University spokeswoman.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Borbetomagus and Rudolph Grey  CBGB's Gallery


Where to Learn White House Organization
To the Editor:
President-elect Bill Clinton has let it be known that he intends to avoid Jimmy Carter's error of overloading the Washington policy agenda and to emulate Ronald Reagan in pressing for a few initial major accomplishments.
But the early signs of how he intends to organize his associates for such purposes suggest he may be in danger of reliving the failures of previous Presidents.
His offhand promise to cut the White House staff by 25 percent suggests he has given more attention to the symbolism of White House operations than to the record.


Bridge
One of the most famous families in England for the past six centuries is that of Cavendish, and its members acquired various titles including that of Duke of Devonshire.
The Devonshire Club in London is connected with the family, and is associated with bridge.
The Devonshire Club Cup, a most unusual hybrid of duplicate and rubber bridge, is played there annually.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Eastern Rebellion  Village Vanguard Through Sunday


Actrade International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Sprinter Is Suspended
British track officials yesterday suspended sprinter JASON LIVINGSTON for four years for failing a drug test.
Livingston, 21, was sent home from the Barcelona Olympics in Spain last August after failing a random, out-of-competition test before the Games.
The test showed he had been taking the anabolic steroid Methandianone.


Henry C. Mills; Educator, 91
Henry C. Mills, an educator who held the second highest post at St.
John's University, died on Sunday at the Baltimore County General Hospital in Ran dallstown, Md.
He was 91 and lived in Sykesville, Md.
He died of congestive heart failure, said his daughter, Elizabeth Koehn.


Machine Technology reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Durables Down


Marilyn Horne Cancels
Marilyn Horne has withdrawn from her three scheduled performances in Rossini's "Semiramide" at the Metropolitan Opera because of "artistic differences," the Met's general director, Joseph Volpe, said yesterday.
The mezzo-soprano will be replaced as Arsace on Jan. 7, 13 and 16 by Gloria Scalchi, who made her Met debut in the role this season.


Corrections
Because of a photo processing error, a picture in The Times Magazine on Dec. 6 with an article about the pianist Yevgeny Kissin was printed in mirror image.
Mr.
Kissin actually stood at the left of the piano.


Interface Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Jet Makers In France Plan Link
In a further sign of the difficulties of the world's military and aerospace industries, the two leading French aircraft makers, Aerospatiale and Dassault Aviation, today announced significant steps toward merging their activities and said they were open to partnerships with other European manufacturers.
Aerospatiale, which is completely state owned, has a 37.9 percent stake of Airbus, the European commercial aircraft consortium.
Dassault is also state controlled, and is best known for its Mirage fighters.
Both have been hard hit by declining orders.
Earlier this month, for example, Northwest Airlines canceled or delayed orders worth $6.2 billion from Airbus.


Washington Awaits Era of a Hotter Date
DEBBIE COHEN realized on election night that young Democrats would soon flood into Washington, and it pleased her.
Not only would the economy improve, she reasoned, but she might also finally get a good date.
"People my generation can relate to are coming to town," said the 24-year-old staff assistant to Senator John Glenn (D-Ohio).
"I mean, these are the people who played Fleetwood Mac at their convention."


Mubarak Visits Tourists To Lift Chill of Assaults
Concerned by the strong blow dealt to Egypt's tourist industry by the killing of a British tourist by fundamentalist Muslims a few weeks ago, President Hosni Mubarak visited the ancient ruins here today and spent much of the day shaking hands with French, South African and British visitors.
Later he joined tourists relaxing in the lounges and swimming pools of this ancient Pharaonic city's many five-star hotels, asking several, "Do you feel safe here?"


Hazards at Nuclear Plant Festering 8 Years After Warning
Eight years after Government experts first said that catastrophic explosions were possible at million-gallon waste tanks at a nuclear bomb plant in Washington State, the Department of Energy still does not know just what is in the tanks or how risky they are.
The tanks, filled with radioactive waste and toxic chemicals, are the most pressing environmental problem that the Clinton Administration's Department of Energy will inherit, despite optimistic talk on the campaign trail about energy efficiency and fuels that pollute less.


Last of Seven Production Unions Reaches Tentative Pact at Times
A tentative agreement between the paperhandlers and The New York Times was announced yesterday by the newspaper.
The agreement, which is subject to ratification by the union's members, is the last of a series of labor agreements The Times has reached with its seven production unions involved in the opening of The Times's new color plant in Edison, N.J.


Polish Prime Minister Vows Firm Stand Against Strikers
Prime Minister Hanna Suchocka said today that her Government would stand firm against striking coal miners and rail workers, and hinted that her Government was ready to import coal if necessary.
Miss Suchocka said in a meeting with foreign journalists that satisfying the wage demands would undo three years of progress in Poland's transition to capitalism.
The country this year became the first among the former Communist nations to show growth in industrial production.
"There will be no subsidies," Miss Suchocka said, adding:


Review/Dance; An Ailey Premiere Raises the Question: Is It Real or Is It Video?
What hath MTV wrought?
One answer comes from the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater, which presented the equivalent of a live music video in a premiere entitled "Frames" on Tuesday night.
The work is the first that Dwight Rhoden, one of the company's leading dancers, has created for the troupe.
But he has previously choreographed several music videos, and the spillover in style and structure is striking, for better or for worse.


Permanent Groceries (and More)
A woman unpacks her groceries, and an idea is born.
This fall, Liz Cenedella, a Manhattan artist and quilt-maker, went shopping for fresh produce.
At home she unloaded her apples and oranges, grapes and kumquats, tomatoes and mushrooms onto a green table.


War Foe Set to Oversee Military Panel
Ronald V. Dellums, almost certain to be the new chairman of the House Armed Services Committee, came to Congress in 1971 at age 35 opposing the Vietnam War.
When the committee brushed off his demand for an investigation of war crimes, he conducted his own informal hearings.
Two years later, Mr.
Dellums became a member of the committee.
And soon the 57-year-old California Democrat from Oakland will be in a position to hold any hearings he wants.


Wounded Officer Contradicts Others' Accounts
A plainclothes transit police officer who was shot and critically wounded last month said yesterday that his gun was in its holster when his fellow officers opened fire on him without warning.
He said the officers began shooting even after he fell into a fetal position to protect himself.
In his first public statement since the shooting, the officer, Derwin Pannell, contradicted the account given by the other officers, who have said they fired only after they called out 'Police!
Don't move!' and he turned toward them, gun in hand.
Their account has been supported by a woman Officer Pannell was holding as a suspected fare beater outside a Brooklyn subway station when the other officers came upon the scene.


Vans Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 29


Pirates Breeze by Without 2 Starters
Maybe the score would have been closer if Seton Hall had played in the second game at Walsh Gymnasium tonight, the Pirates' annual alumni contest.
In the main event, however, the seventh-ranked Pirates scored a one-sided 85-56 victory over Division II Adelphi even though they were without starters Jerry Walker (concussion) and Bryan Caver (ankle injury).
With the victory, Seton Hall improved to 9-1, its best start since the 1988-89 teeam that started off 13-0 and went to the National Collegiate Athletic Association title game.


Economic Scene; Doing Well By Doing Good
MESSAGE to Bill Clinton: Looking for an easy $40 billion to $50 billion a year to pay for expanded health insurance coverage, or perhaps all those ambitious plans to increase productivity?
Look again at tobacco taxes.
That is what a coalition of antismoking groups led by the American Medical Association is likely to advise the President-elect when it meets next month in Washington.
And while the economic case for a radical increase in tobacco levies -- say, to the Canadian level of more than $3 a pack -- is a bit problematic, the politics and, arguably, the morality are alluring.
"It's a case of doing well by doing good," concludes Kenneth Warner, an economist at the University of Michigan's School of Public Health.


Lethal Violence Rises in Israeli-Occupied Territory
Israel's deportation of 415 Palestinians to Lebanon last week has led to a surge of unrest in the occupied territories and, with it, a sharp rise in the number of Palestinians shot to death by soldiers.
Israeli Army officers insist that they have not changed standing regulations in a way that allows soldiers in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip to open fire more readily than before.


Now Kids, That's the Way to Use Your Heads!
The Portanovas of Caldwell, N.J., held a family summit last summer, put aside their fears of serious injury, and decided to allow 9-year-old Chris to play both youth football and soccer.
That was the theory, anyway.
But the North Caldwell football team that Chris joined often had trouble fielding a full team, and the boy was enjoying soccer more, anyway.


Redmen Are Pushovers for the Hoosiers
The distance between the St.
John's Redmen and the elite of college basketball, which not so long ago could be measured in bounces and inches, now appears to consist of light years.
Maybe tonight's 105-80 victory by Indiana over the Redmen at Assembly Hall was little more than a case of St.
John's, in a transition period under first-year coach Brian Mahoney, being in the wrong place, against the wrong team, at the wrong time.


Law; At the Bar
Come what may over the last decade, Bruce and Nancy Young of Minneapolis have tithed -- that is, given 10 percent of their income to their church.
They gave in the good times, when business at their electrical contracting business was brisk.
And they gave in the bad times, when Mr.
Young's heart attack and the recession led them into bankruptcy.
But when the Youngs mark Christmas today at the Crystal Evangelical Free Church in nearby New Hope, they may reflect on Federal judges as well as the Wise Men, statutes as well as the Star of Bethlehem.
The Book of Deuteronomy has run right into the Federal Bankruptcy Code.


Corrections
A report in the Food Notes column of The Living Section on  Wednesday about wild venison sold by the Ojibwa tribe of northern Wisconsin misstated the telephone number for information.
It is (715) 879-5636.


Miracles in the Sky and on the Road
A miracle is in the eye of the beholder, thought Hisako.
She'd just seen a westbound jet fly nearly across the sky and then, with a sudden turn, fly back to the east.
When the jet flew out of sight, she sat down at a table in her small living room.
Fifteen years earlier, shortly before her second husband died, one of her daughters had given her the table.
Hisako lived in one of the best Japanese retirement homes in Los Angeles; the management let you keep your own things.
A commercial came on the television as she tapped a pen on a pad of paper.
A dog dressed as Santa Claus started singing and kittens in green caps danced around him.
A couple of blocks over, hundreds of homeless and drug addicts sat on the sidewalks, but here in Little Tokyo Hisako felt insulated.
Except to see her doctor, she never left the area unless one of her kids or grandkids came to pick her up.


Click, Click, Click: The Year in Gaffes
Oh baby, whoa Nellie, holy cow -- another year in TV SportsLand, one with cash-machine Mike Tyson out of the pay-per-view ring and into the pokey, Warner Wolf outta New York, NBC and Cablevision bereft of sanity in mounting the Olympics Triplecast, Al Unser Jr. absent from ABC's cameras as he won the Indianapolis 500 and Tim McCarver and Paula Zahn looking like teen-agers on a two-week blind date as the evening hosts of CBS's Winter Olympics telecasts.
Bob Costas was tops at the Summer Olympics in Barcelona, Spain.
So was Charles Kuralt at the Winter Olympics.
I've known Terry Bradshaw for three weeks, and nobody has fun like him.
Wait.
I'm starting to sound like Larry King.
Help!


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-14, A20  BLEAK CHRISTMAS IN SARAJEVO


Looks Like America
In a Cabinet designed to look like America, Zoe Baird, the Attorney General-designate, has the bearing and credentials of what America would like to look like.
Personable and smart, experienced in the ways of the Justice Department and White House, Ms.
Baird more than vindicates President-elect Clinton's determination to put a woman at the head of the Federal legal establishment.
After weeks of churning, Mr.
Clinton has succeeded in assembling a Cabinet of rare, welcome diversity.
Just how rare can be judged by comparing it with President Bush's performance.
Of 16 positions in the Cabinet, 11 are now held by white men, 3 by women, 1 by a black man and 1 by a Hispanic man.
Of 16 nominees to Mr.
Clinton's cabinet, 7 are white men, 4 are women, 4 are black (1 is a black woman) and 2 are Hispanic.


Double Eagle Petroleum &amp; Mining Co. reports earnings for Year to Aug 31


Marines Reach Bardera, But Not Famine Victims
In the early morning, the only sound in some feeding centers here is the uninterrupted crying of children.
Some just sit on the ground, covered with flies and so thin that their skin falls in wrinkles around their bones.
As meal time approaches, they are joined by hundreds of women with their children, plastic bowl or soot-blackened kettle in hand, who wait in line for their morning handout of steaming, high-protein gruel.
Once served, they squat in the dirt, scooping up their gruel with their hands.


No Headline
"In granting these pardons today, I am doing what I believe honor, decency, and fairness require." PRESIDENT BUSH.  [ A22:3. ]


International Absorbents reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Topics of The Times; The Christmas Coach
Yesterday morning, passengers on a certain Manhattan M-10 bus were greeted on boarding by the sounds of Bing Crosby and the Andrews Sisters.
The token box was wreathed in fake holly and topped by a tiny tree.
There were cheerful cutouts on the windows and glittery ropes crisscrossing the ceiling.
And the driver was dressed -- from beard to boots -- as Santa Claus.
There was something else as well: a male passenger who complained loudly every time a new rider (and this was just about all of them) paused to greet Santa or express delight over this unexpectedly festive trip uptown.
"Move along," he'd order, and "Let's get this bus rolling."


Executive Changes
POCKET BOOKS, New York, a unit of Paramount Communications Inc., appointed Gina Centrello, vice president and associate publisher, to the additional duties of publisher for the company's young adult and Star Trek publishing programs.
RYDER SYSTEM INC., Miami, named Dwight D. Denny president of Ryder Commercial Leasing and Services and Gerald R. Riordan president of Ryder Consumer Truck Rental.


David Hare, Sculptor and Photographer, Dies at 75
David Hare, a sculptor, painter and photographer who was a prominent figure among the first generation of New York School artists, died on Monday in Jackson Hole, Wyo.
He was 75 years old and lived in Victor, Idaho.
He died after an emergency operation for an aortic aneurysm, said his family.


Clinton's Last Selections for the Cabinet Reflect His Quest for Diversity
Bruce Babbitt
Secretary of the Interior


American Complex reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


National Medical Enterprises Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Williams (W.W.) Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Mediq Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Angeion Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Tyrex Oil Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Most Extraordinary Fella
One looks for turning points.
How is it that he has come this far, this way?
Maybe it was the time when Jim Abbott was 5 years old and came home from school, angry and tearful, and held up the steel hook a doctor had recommended he use for a right hand.
"I don't want to wear this anymore," he told his parents.
Other children were afraid to play with him and, in the way that small children can be cruel, called him names like "Mr. Hook." Even then he struggled not to appear different.
He never wore the hook again.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Carolco Pictures announced an agreement with M-G-M and Carolco's three biggest investors that would give the struggling Hollywood production company cash to pay its debts and start making movies again.  [ D1. ]


Corrections
A report in the Food Notes column of The Living Section on  Wednesday about wild venison sold by the Ojibwa tribe of northern Wisconsin misstated the telephone number for information.
It is (715) 879-5636.


Memphis Journal; When Santa's Reindeer Just Aren't Fast Enough
It is almost 1 A.M. on Christmas Eve, and quiet has settled over this river city, save for the late-night bars, 24-hour gas stations and a bustling microcosm at the Memphis International Airport known as the Federal Express Super Hub, where 5,000 workers are putting Santa's elves to shame.
Standing shoulder to shoulder inside a maze of whirring high-speed conveyor belts, men and women sort the hundreds of thousands of last-minute catalog orders and Christmas packages that have flooded the Memphis-based air-freight company.


Technical Communications reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


Montclair Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Clinton's Last Selections for the Cabinet Reflect His Quest for Diversity
Mike Espy
Secretary of Agriculture


The President as Pardoner: A Calculated Gamble
As he begins to edge offstage, George Bush is taking a calculated gamble with his place in history.
Having spent a good deal of his energy in the last few days on grand global problems of the kind that have always engaged him, he has now ventured into the cockpit of domestic politics by pardoning six of the leading figures in the Iranian arms deal and the diversion of profits to Nicaraguan rebels.


Crown Andersen reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows, performances and art exhibitions in the New York metropolitan region that are to close soon: Closing This Weekend
"ALL ABOUT MANKIEWICZ," Film Forum 2, 209 West Houston Street, South Village.
Screenings of films written, directed or produced by Joseph L. Mankiewicz.
Through tomorrow.
Admission: $7.50 to each screening, including double features.
Information: (212) 727-8110.


Acqua Group reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Corrections
A chart on Wednesday summarizing free agency in the major professional team sports referred imprecisely to a guideline in baseball for players who have previously been free agents.
The top 50 percent of players, classified primarily by field position in an annual statistical ranking, must wait five years before they can again become free agents, able to negotiate with any team.


Regal Commun. reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


No Standing at the Corner, Watching Receivers Go By
When Mike Brim joined the Jets last season as a Plan B free agent from Minnesota, left cornerback was a trouble spot for the club.
The incumbent, Tony Stargell, a third-round pick out of Tennessee State in 1990, wilted under the pressure put on him by opposing quarterbacks.


Judge Rebuffs Opponents Of Incinerator In Brooklyn
An administrative law judge has removed one of the final hurdles to building a trash incinerator in the Brooklyn Navy Yard, recommending that the state Department of Environmental Conservation grant the necessary permits without holding any more hearings on the plant's environmental impact.
In a lengthy decision, signed on Wednesday but not released until yesterday, the judge, Robert P. O'Connor, ruled that none of the issues raised by environmentalists, elected officials and residents who have for years fought the $450 million incinerator warranted further study.


Wang Laboratories reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Resource America reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Techmire Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Robert E. Marshak, 76, Ex-Head of City College
Robert E. Marshak, a former president of the City College of New York and an expert on theoretical physics, died Wednesday while vacationing with his family in Cancun, Mexico.
He was 76 and lived in Blacksburg, Va.
Professor Marshak and his wife, Ruth, and their family had gathered in Cancun to celebrate the couple's 50th wedding anniversary.


CleaveTrust Realty reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Mark's Work Wearhouse reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 24


Convergent Solutions reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Keep in Mind
"THE SNOW QUEEN," a movie adaptation of the Hans Christian Andersen fairy tale in which the Queen abducts a young boy and his friend tries to find him.
Tomorrow and Sunday at 2 P.M., at the Walter Reade Theater, 165 West 65th Street, Lincoln Center.
Tickets: $7; $4 for children.
Information: (212) 875-5600.
"THE NUTCRACKER," a one-hour production by the New York Theater Ballet, for toddlers and preschoolers in an intimate setting.
Tomorrow through Thursday at Gould Hall, 55 East 59th Street, Manhattan, daily at 1 and 3:30 P.M.
Tickets: $17.50; $12.50 for children.
Information: (212) 307-7171.


For Connecticut, the Stakes Are Not Just on the Tables
By proposing casinos for Hartford and Bridgeport, two large companies, Mirage Resorts and Harrah's Casino Hotels, are asking Connecticut to bet on legal gambling as a growth industry for the 90's.
The state's decision, in the end, is likely to come from the gut, like a poker player's when a long night comes down to a final hand.
Like it or not, Connecticut already has such a large stake in legal gambling that rejecting casinos will almost certainly bring financial pain, though allowing them will not add greatly to the state's revenues.


Langer Biomechanics reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 28


Dodgers Get Wallach
The Los Angeles Dodgers acquired third baseman TIM WALLACH from the Montreal Expos yesterday for minor league shortstop TIM BARKER.
Wallach, 35, hit .223 with 9 home runs and 59 runs batted in in 150 games with the Expos last season.


Sasser Is a Mariner
Free agent MACKEY SASSER, let loose by the Mets, has signed a two-year contract with the Seattle Mariners.
The total deal was worth about $1 million. (AP)


Black Swan Gold reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Scandal Sets Back a German Cabinet Official
A growing political scandal has set back the chances that Economics Minister Jurgen W. Mollemann will become leader of the junior coalition party in Chancellor Helmut Kohl's Government next year.
Even some members of Mr.
Mollemann's Free Democratic Party called for his resignation this week.
But Mr.
Mollemann rejected all such demands on Tuesday, before heading for a Christmas holiday in the Caribbean, and is expected to return Jan. 6 to contest the party leadership with Foreign Minister Klaus Kinkel.


International Testing Services Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Review/Film; Big Labor's Master Of Manipulation
IN his 1960 book, "The Enemy Within," Robert F. Kennedy, soon to be the Attorney General of the United States, wrote about his first face-to-face meeting with the man he had sworn to send to prison, James R. Hoffa, the powerful president of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters.
Kennedy was surprised by how short the labor leader was, "only five feet five and a half."
Anyone who knows anything about Hoffa's rise and fall will be similarly surprised by how much he's grown in "Hoffa," the riveting, almost impressionistic new film biography, written with mean brilliance by David Mamet and directed by Danny DeVito in a splashy style best described as Las Vegas Empire.


Art in Review
'The Living Tradition' 'Contemporary Yixing Teapots' and Ah Leon  Garth Clark Gallery 24 West 57th Street Manhattan Through Jan. 9


Germany Goes Too Far in Bans on Parties
To the Editor:
Chancellor Helmut Kohl, describing the banning of a second neo-Nazi party in Germany, said, "Germany is a democracy that can defend itself, and we will prove it now" (news article, Dec. 11).


Aca Joe Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Salem Sportswear reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Birth of a Scandal and Mysteries of Its Parentage
Some say the scandal began sometime in the mid-1980's, as President Ronald Reagan grew so emotionally involved with the plight of the American hostages held in Lebanon that he began letting his aides know he would pay almost any price to see them freed.
Others date the beginning of the Iran-contra affair more precisely, saying it started in a London row house near Hyde Park on Dec. 8, 1985.
There, several American officials and operatives running the covert sales of arms to Iran went over the books and discovered they had about $750,000 left over from the last transaction.


BUSH PARDONS 6 IN IRAN AFFAIR, ABORTING A WEINBERGER TRIAL; PROSECUTOR ASSAILS 'COVER-UP'
Six years after the arms-for-hostages scandal began to cast a shadow that would darken two Administrations, President Bush today granted full pardons to six former officials in Ronald Reagan's Administration, including former Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger.
Mr.
Weinberger was scheduled to stand trial on Jan. 5 on charges that he lied to Congress about his knowledge of the arms sales to Iran and efforts by other countries to help underwrite the Nicaraguan rebels, a case that was expected to focus on Mr.
Weinberger's private notes that contain references to Mr.
Bush's endorsement of the secret shipments to Iran.


Technology Solutions reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Monmouth Real Estate Investment reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Clinton's Last Selections for the Cabinet Reflect His Quest for Diversity
Federico F. Pena
Secretary of Transportation





Rangers' Prima Donnas Lose Edge at Blue Line
Yes, it would be nice if the Rangers hadn't lost Brian Leetch, their top defenseman, for another month.
Leetch, the Rangers announced Wednesday, is expected to miss at least an additional four weeks as a result of the stretched nerve in his neck and left shoulder.
His absence will be sharply felt on the sagging Rangers' defense.
But one of the main problems with the Rangers' defensive effort is not one that Leetch's presence could solve -- or even help.
Who's playing bad defense on this team?
Forget the guys behind the blue line for a moment, and take a long, hard look at the Rangers' forwards.


Bush and Yeltsin May Meet in January
President Bush and President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia have agreed to hold a summit meeting in the Black Sea resort of Sochi early in January if an arms control treaty can be completed by then, the White House said today.
Mr.
Bush called Mr.
Yeltsin this morning to discuss the accord.
Afterward, a senior Administration official said that Secretary of State Lawrence S. Eagleburger would leave Washington on Sunday for a meeting in Geneva with Foreign Minister Andrei Kozyrev to try to thrash out the remaining differences.


Restaurants
One could make a persuasive argument that New York City needs another northern Italian restaurant about as much as its needs a few more tons of tiramisu.
Follonico, a four-month-old establishment in Chelsea, attempts to rise above the pack in several ways, and to a limited degree it succeeds.
Follonico is a town in Tuscany where the restaurant's chef and owner, Alan Tardi, spent time earning his culinary stripes.
In Manhattan, he also worked at Lafayette, Chanterelle and Les Madri.
The food at his new venture is more homespun than at those establishments, and prices are gentler.


N.D.L. Products reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Sounds Around Town: On New Year's Eve
POP AND ROCK Dr. John


You May Call It Art, But Some Call It Dessert
WHEN you're trying to build something as colossal as a castle, it takes an incredible amount of drawing and planning, not to mention real inspiration.
It takes careful staging of all the materials.
It takes vision and an artisan's touch.
And it takes an awful lot of icing.
Also cookies, crackers and cardboard.
And an oven preheated to 350.
"Any time you begin something of this scale," warns Walt Wanner, "you've got to be very careful and creative." You've also got to have a spouse blessed with saintly patience.


Snake Bite in Somalia? See Soldier's Guide
Say you're an American soldier in Somalia, you encounter a Somali clansman and you want him to halt.
What do you do?
Whip out your "Soldier Handbook," turn to "Key Somali Words and Phrases," and shout, "Joogso!"
If, as might be more likely in a place where fever and diarrhea are common, you're feeling under the weather, consult the medical phrases.
"Aad baan u bukaa" means, "I feel very ill."


A Sheriff's Officer and 6 Others Are Accused of Robbing a Bank
After a wild chase through Westchester County on Wednesday, seven men, including a lieutenant in the Orange County Sheriff's department, have been arrested and charged with stealing $76,000 from a White Plains bank, the authorities said.
The lieutenant, Peter Schmick, who was driving the white Lexus that served as a getaway car, momentarily eluded several Federal agents outside the Bank of New York on Aqueduct Road, the authorities said.
The agents chased the car about 10 miles north on the Bronx River Parkway before intentionally slamming into it near the Kensico Dam in Valhalla, the authorities said.


Black Swan Gold reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


COMPANY BRIEFS
UTOTROL CORP., Glendale, Wis., and Osmonics Inc., Minnetonka, Minn., announced an agreement to merge.
The companies make water-treatment equipment.


International Absorbents reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Palestinians in Purgatory
Outraged by the cold-blooded killings of its soldiers, Israel last week struck back by expelling 415 Palestinians suspected of being Islamic terrorists.
But Lebanon won't accept the deportees, who are now trapped in a desolate Israeli-controlled "security zone" in southern Lebanon.
The longer this impasse continues, the greater the publicity given to the deportees, and the more likely that they will be seen as heroes and martyrs, which is definitely not what Israel intended.


Mr. Bush's Unpardonable Act
Of all the President's powers, the power to pardon may be the most awesome because it is not shared or checked by any other branch of government.
The abuse of that ultimate power may be the ultimate abuse of office.
With his Christmas Eve pardon of Caspar Weinberger and five other defendants in the Iran-contra scandal, President Bush committed that ultimate abuse.
If Mr.
Bush had rested his pardon of Mr.
Weinberger on the former Defense Secretary's health alone, he might deserve credit for compassion.
But he went on to lecture Lawrence Walsh, the independent prosecutor, against what he called "the criminalization of policy differences."


Demitri Shimkin, 76, An Anthropologist
Demitri Boris Shimkin, professor emeritus of anthropology at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, died Tuesday at the Carle Foundation Hospital in Urbana.
He was 76.
Professor Shimkin died of complications from cancer, Mary Creswell, a university spokeswoman, said.


Guard Injured in Payroll Theft At Hotel by La Guardia Airport
An off-duty housing police officer moonlighting as a security guard was shot three times and seriously wounded when four gunmen hijacked the $25,000 payroll he and another off-duty officer were delivering to a motel in Queens, the police said last night.
The two guards were stripped of their guns by the masked robbers, who opened fire when one guard, Officer Martin Bailey, resisted.
The bandits fired more than 20 shots during the robbery, which took place at the Ramada Inn near La Guardia Airport, the authorities said.


Christmas Blessings for Parishioners and Their Friends


Advanced Tissue Science reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Woman in the News; Clinton Completes Cabinet And Points to Its Diversity: Getting Things Done -- Zoe Baird
Like generations of successful male lawyers, Zoe Baird, President-elect Bill Clinton's choice as Attorney General, has repeatedly attracted the attention of influential lawyers who sped her on to better things.
It was at the Justice Department Ms.
Baird has been chosen to lead that she was noticed by Lloyd M. Cutler, the first of several mentors who were impressed with her intellect and a talent for getting things done with little fuss.
A Reluctant Admirer
Mr.
Cutler, who was White House counsel to President Jimmy Carter, recalled today how he had met Ms.
Baird.
The Administration was preparing to hand out political patronage jobs for the 1980 Census, but Ms.
Baird, then a Justice Department official, had written a legal opinion saying that would be against the law.


International Testing Services Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


INSIDE
Bush and Yeltsin Agree On a Black Sea Summit
President Bush and President Yeltsin of Russia will meet in the Black Sea resort of Sochi next month if an arms control treaty is completed by then, the White House said.
Page A20.
The Sound of the Hungry
Although the cries of hungry children echo at Bardera's feeding centers, the troops there have not yet seen the heart of the crisis.
Page A10.
Paying for Hospital Quality
The Cuomo administration will propose linking its reimbursements to hospitals to their quality of care, in a plan called the nation's first.
Page B1.
Challenges Surmounted
Jim Abbott, the pitcher acquired by the Yankees, can look back on a lifetime of achievement.
Page B7.


Softech reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 27


On Being a Catholic
To the Editor:
In "The True Meaning of Being a Catholic" (letter, Dec. 5), Msgr.
Daniel S. Hamilton recommends to Pamela J. Maraldo that she "needs a refresher course on being an authentic Catholic" because she dissents from some of the moral positions taken by the Pope.


Langer Biomechanics reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 28


Jets Have a Gift for Byrd
The Jets had a gift today for Dennis Byrd as he continues rehabilitation at Mount Sinai Hospital from a broken neck that has left him partly paralyzed.
"We're having a Christmas party today and we're making a video of all the players and their kids for Dennis," said Jets Coach Bruce Coslet.
"Then we're shipping it over there with a VCR for him to play it on."


Music Tops Holiday List Of Events
Here is a sampling of holiday events in New York City this weekend, including Christmas music programs in churches and concert halls.
Admission is free unless otherwise noted (churches accept donations).
Today
ST.
BARTHOLOMEW'S CHURCH (Episcopal), Park Avenue at 50th Street.
Poston's "Jesus Christ the Apple Tree"; Willcocks's "Rocking Carol"; Dupre's "In Dulci Jubilo"; Bach's "In Dulci Jubilo"; Daquin's "Noel Etranger." Choir; James Litton, organist and director. 10:30 A.M.
Information: (212) 751-1616, extension 226.


Assix International reports earnings for Year to June 30


Tide Player in Hospital
Alabama's second-leading tackler, linebacker MICHAEL ROGERS, was hospitalized in serious condition at Baptist Medical Center in Montgomery, Ala., yesterday after a car in which he was a passenger hit a culvert in the pre-dawn hours and rolled over.


David Hare, Sculptor and Photographer, Dies at 75
David Hare, a sculptor, painter and photographer who was a prominent figure among the first generation of New York School artists, died on Monday in Jackson Hole, Wyo.
He was 75 years old and lived in Victor, Idaho.
He died after an emergency operation for an aortic aneurysm, said his family.


Advanced Tissue Science reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Proposal Ties Hospital Reimbursement to the Quality of Care
The Cuomo administration said yesterday that it would propose linking payments to the state's hospitals to the quality of care the hospitals provide.
The plan, which state and hospital officials said was the first of its kind in the country, is part of a broader package of proposals intended to curb health-care costs and increase access to primary care.


Civil War Enemies Begin to Work Together to Solve El Salvador's Problems
One day not long ago, a rich Salvadoran industrialist who had survived multiple kidnapping attempts by leftists got together with a guerrilla heroine who used to plot such kidnappings and looked at what they could do for their country.
They traveled to the heart of what used to be guerrilla territory, and the businessman ended up promising that a foundation he heads would provide expertise to help a struggling cooperative of followers of the former guerrillas put itself on a profitable footing.


A Carpenter Is Suspected In 4 Killings
A 48-year-old carpenter from Livingston, N.J., has been accused of killing an 80-year-old relative last December and is suspected of killing three other elderly people he had known for years, law-enforcement officials said today.
The handyman, Frank Masini, was arrested Tuesday and charged in Ocean County with stabbing Angelina Ialeggio of Lavallette, a distant relative by marriage.
A stolen ring belonging to Mrs.
Ialeggio was found in Mr.
Masini's home, officials said.
Judge Peter J. Giovine of Superior Court in Toms River ordered Mr.
Masini held in $1 million bail.


Police Charge Daly In Domestic Dispute
JOHN DALY, the 1991 P.G.A. champion, has been arrested and charged with third-degree assault in Castle Rock, Colo., in an incident that occurred in his home early Sunday morning.
During the incident, police charge, Daly threw his wife against a wall.


Medicus Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Clinton to Focus on Helping U.S. Airlines
Helping the nation's airline industry recover from its $8 billion tailspin since 1990 is a top priority for both President-elect Bill Clinton and the new Congress, according to Government and industry officials,
Proposals under study, they say, include tax incentives, regulatory relief, global partnerships and revisions of the bankruptcy laws to bolster the troubled industry.


Waterhouse Investors Services Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 27


Valley Forge Scientific Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Diner's Journal; The Changing Scene
OPEN: Brasserie Pascal, at 35 West 64th Street, near Lincoln Center, (212) 769-9696.
It is owned by the pastry chef Guy Pascal, who has Le Salon de The at Henri Bendel in Manhattan. . . .
Mesa Verde, 531 Hudson Street, between Charles Street and West 10th Street, in Greenwich Village, (212) 206-7093, serving Southwestern cooking. . . .
Silverado Bar and Grill, 99 East 19th Street in Manhattan, a Southwestern-style restaurant owned by Richard Krause, formerly of Rose Cafe on Fifth Avenue, (212) 505-5500. . . .
Vong, a Thai restaurant at 200 East 54th Street, Manhattan, (212) 486-9592, owned by Jean-Georges Vongerichten, who also has Lipstick Cafe in the same office building, and Jo Jo on East 64th Street in Manhattan.
Vong occupies the site of the former Toscana.
Vong serves dinner only, from 6 to 11 P.M., Monday through Saturday.
CLOSED: Eldorado Petit, 47 West 55th Street, Manhattan, a branch of the Barcelona restaurant by the same name.


Corrections
An article and a picture caption in Business Day yesterday about the finances of the Comptronix Corportion referred incorrectly to the company's interim chairman and chief executive.
He is Townes Duncan.


Military Computer Contract Is Once Again in Question
A lucrative Air Force computer contract that was supposed to set an example for streamlined Government procurement was delayed yet again today, and possibly killed, when an administrative panel upheld the latest protests from unsuccessful bidders.
The so-called Desktop IV contract, which had an estimated value of $740 million and had been awarded to the Zenith Data Systems Corporation, is now in limbo.
Although the General Service Administration's Board of Contract Appeals upheld protests filed in September by the Compuadd Corporation of Austin and several other losing bidders, it did not specify the next step in the contract process, which has now been delayed more than a year.


Canadex Resources reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Paracelsian reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


Corrections
An article yesterday about the trial of four young men accused of sex assault in Glen Ridge, N.J., misidentified the client of Alan Zegas, a defense lawyer.
The client is Bryant Grober.


Law; Ku Klux Klan Replaces Destroyed Cross


CleaveTrust Realty reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Crown Andersen reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Film; Robert Downey Jr. in Charlie Chaplin Life Story
"Chaplin," the screen biography of Charlie Chaplin, is the film you might have seen in your fearful mind's eye when it was announced as the next project for Richard Attenborough, the English director of "Oh! What a Lovely War," "Young Winston" and "Gandhi."
"Chaplin" is thorough.
It begins when Charlie is 5 in a London music hall and plows through the rest of his life, ending shortly before his death in Vevey, Switzerland, on Christmas Day 1977, at the age of 88.


Agencies on Homeless Try to Meet Deadline
The day after a judge's order to cut the number of homeless men in two armories drastically, the head of New York City's new agency for the homeless said it would be "extremely difficult" to move so many so quickly.
Wednesday's court order gave the city 60 days to find new shelters for more than 800 homeless men.


Sound Advice reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Forest Signs American
BRAD FRIEDEL, a goalkeeper on the United States Olympic soccer team, has been purchased by Nottingham Forest of England's Premier League from the Dallas Sidekicks of the defunct Major Soccer League for a reported $450,000. (AP)


On Stage, and Off
Looking for the Brass Ring
The thunderous success of "Carousel" at the National Theater in London was the catalyst of nearly all the Christmas-week buzz in the theater world.
What will happen to Nicholas Hytner's production when it closes at the National's Lyttelton Theater on March 28?


Art in Review
Lois Conner  Laurence Miller Gallery 138 Spring Street SoHo Through Thursday


Jamaica's Coffee Makes Japan a Jealous Lover
On the steep mountainsides overlooking Kingston, the afternoon air is renowned for two things: the coolness that reliably descends the slopes while the capital still swelters below, and the aroma of roasting coffee beans.
While other developing countries may rue the economic "cures" from Washington that urge them to produce ever more of their commodities, seemingly forcing prices inexorably downward, Jamaica has happily established its Blue Mountain coffee as one commodity that seems always in demand across the world.


Art in Review
Karel Appel  Andre Emmerich Gallery 41 East 57th Street Manhattan Through Thursday


Like the Coach, Anderson Is Uncertain About His Future With Giants
As the Giants approach Sunday's finale of a disastrous season, some of their players know this may be their last game as a Giant, maybe the last of their pro football careers.
At age 35, Ottis Anderson, the oldest Giant and the oldest running back in the game, says he doesn't know if this is the end of anything for him.
In last Saturday's 35-21 upset victory over the Kansas City Chiefs, Anderson made a rare appearance.
He carried 8 times for 24 yards, made several big blocks and gallivanted like a youngster.
But he has carried only 10 times for 31 yards all season, rushed only 53 times for 141 yards last season, and his 14-year pro career is certainly winding down, if not out.
Then again, he says, there may be more left.


Acqua Group reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


A Christmas Meal for the Needy


Trade Warriors Don't Understand Pups
To the Editor:
"Next Trade War Target May Be Dogs" (Business Day, Dec. 2) reports that Canada is preparing regulations to bar importing dogs younger than 8 months because they are deemed more susceptible to disease.
How would the measure safeguard buyers of dogs older than 8 months?


Singapore Fund reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Wake Forest Hiring
JIM CALDWELL, an assistant coach at Penn State, has reportedly been chosen to become Wake Forest's head football coach.
Caldwell would be the first black head football coach in the 40-year history of the Atlantic Coast Conference.


Adrift, Taiwan Loses Urge for Firmer Footing
The people of Taiwan might like to attach a huge outboard motor to the end of their island, rev it up, and move Taiwan several hundred miles farther away from the Chinese mainland.
That would reduce the risk of a Chinese attack and give Taiwan more options for deciding its future.
But while physical relocation is impossible, there are signs that Taiwan is drifting politically and socially farther from the mainland.


Yuletide Spirit Prevails in Homeless Skyline


In All the Heavens, One Bright, Shining Star
THE night sky for which New York City is known is a galaxy of flickering neon, lights waxing in apartment towers and waning in offices, and the festive spectrum atop the Empire State Building.
The heavens haven't a chance.
Under the best conditions, only the moon and a rare point of starlight, usually a neighborly planet or two, manage to shine through the terrestrial competition.
Which is one reason the city has a place where people can sit indoors and, through the artifice of technology, surround themselves in a fantasy of celestial vistas.
This is the Hayden Planetarium at the American Museum of Natural History in Manhattan.
Its holiday show this year, "The Star of Christmas," is a delightful excursion back 2,000 years in an attempt to discover what was that wondrous heavenly light that, in the story of Christmas, led the Wise Men to the manger in Bethlehem.


Computertime Network reports earnings for Year to July 31


Uncovered Short Sales Down Slightly on Nasdaq
The number of over-the-counter shares sold short and not yet covered dipped slightly between mid-November and mid-December, the National Association of Securities Dealers said yesterday.
Short interest in all Nasdaq securities totaled 455.8 million shares in the period, down less than 1 percent from the previous period's level of 458 million.
But the number of companies in which shares were sold short in the period grew to 3,728 from 3,650.


Miami Court Decision Shifts Political Power to Minorities
A Federal judge has ended a six-year legal dispute over the makeup of metropolitan Miami's regional government by approving a proposal that is expected to result in the transfer of political control to Hispanic and black voters.
The decision, handed down Wednesday by Judge Donald Graham of United States District Court in Miami, replaces the county's at-large system with a plan for single-member districts.
The proposal was intended to increase Hispanic and black representation, but because those two groups together make up 70 percent of the county's population, the plan could give them effective control.


Giving an Edge to 'The Nutcracker'; A Victorian Classic Strikes a Campy 60's Note in Brooklyn
It is Christmas in New York City.
It is the season when starry-eyed little girls in velvet dresses and satin bows line up at Lincoln Center to see Tchaikovsky's sentimental holiday classic, "The Nutcracker."
But this is New York City.
Starry-eyed little girls in leather biker jackets and black leggings also line up for an avant-garde, campy version of the ballet, "The Hard Nut" by the choreographer Mark Morris, at the Brooklyn Academy of Music.


Washington Scientific Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 29


5 Men Attack Hasidic Artist In Crown Hts.
A Hasidic artist painting a peace mural at a Brooklyn housing project was beaten by five black men on Wednesday in what the police classified as a possible bias crime.
The beating posed the first major test of New York City's new policy of moving more cautiously in classifying such incidents as bias crimes so that relatively minor episodes do not quickly symbolize racial tension.


Agencies on Homeless Try to Meet Deadline
The day after a judge's order to cut the number of homeless men in two armories drastically, the head of New York City's new agency for the homeless said it would be "extremely difficult" to move so many so quickly.
Wednesday's court order gave the city 60 days to find new shelters for more than 800 homeless men.


Corrections
An article last Friday about the dispute over the New York City curriculum known as Children of the Rainbow misstated the date that the appointment of a director of multicultural education became public.
The appointee, Leslie Agard-Jones, was introduced at a Board of Education meeting on Dec. 2; the disclosure was not made on Dec. 17.


Panhandle Royalty reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


TVWeekend; Lincoln's Words, Brady's Photograph
The idea for "Lincoln" began with the photographs, and they remain the strongest elements in a four-hour documentary that only occasionally reaches its potential.
It is a family enterprise.
Frederick Hill Meserve began collecting Civil War photographs in 1897, and much of his collection was passed down to his grandson, Philip B. Kunhardt Jr., who worked with his two sons, Philip B. 3d and Peter W., to turn them into the new pictorial biography ("Lincoln," published by Alfred A. Knopf) and this weekend's television documentary.
To their probable annoyance, the television project inevitably invites comparison to "The Civil War," Ken Burns's rich PBS series, which made use of similar material to more rewarding effect.


Deal Made To Revive Carolco
Carolco Pictures Inc. announced an agreement today with Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Inc. and Carolco's three biggest investors that would give the struggling Hollywood production company a much-needed infusion of cash to pay its debts and start making movies again.
Under the restructuring agreement, Carolco will receive a total of $120 million from M-G-M and the investors, and M-G-M will become the exclusive distributor of Carolco's films in the United States and Canada for five years, starting in 1994.


2 Rivals Spar in Seeking G.O.P. Nod for Governor
With little in the way of a warm-up, the campaign for the Republican gubernatorial nomination has opened with a slugfest between the two top contenders.
To the delight of Democrats and to the consternation of some Republicans, the rivalry between the candidates, W. Cary Edwards and Christine Todd Whitman, escalated into an all-out war of words this week.


Tranzonic Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Oakland's Green and Gold Entice McGwire to Stick Around
Mark McGwire, the last big name among free agents, has decided to stay with the Oakland Athletics.
The power-hitting first baseman signed a five-year contract yesterday that will pay him a total of $28 million.
The deal includes a signing bonus of $7 million, second only to the $9 million bonus David Cone received when he signed with the Kansas City Royals.
McGwire will receive salaries of $2.6 million, $1.6 million, $5.5 million, $5.6 million and $5.7 million.


Microsemi Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 27


Weather Emergency Is Declared After Day of Subfreezing Winds
The New York metropolitan area was enfolded in the icy grip of winter this Christmas morning as high winds and low temperatures combined to drag the wind-chill factor toward zero.
The New York City Health Department declared a cold weather emergency as evening fell and temperatures dropped below freezing, and the New York City Police Department said that officers were prepared to take homeless people to shelters.


THE TRANSITION: Physician and Physicist; Dr. Joycelyn Elders -- Surgeon General
In 1987, when Dr.
Joycelyn Elders was appointed by Gov.
Bill Clinton to be director of the Arkansas Department of Public Health, she was asked at a news conference if she intended to distribute contraceptives in public schools.
"Well," she replied, "we're not going to put them on their lunch trays, but, yes."


Transactions
Baseball  American League
OAKLAND ATHLETICS -- Signed Mark McGwire, first baseman, to a five-year contract.
National League
LOS ANGELES DODGERS -- Acquired Tim Wallach, third baseman, from the Montreal Expos for Tim Barker, shortstop.


Moorco International reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Ontario's Socialists Falter After 2 Bitter Years
In elections a little over two years ago, the 10 million people of Ontario, Canada's richest and most populous province, voted for their first taste of democratic socialism.
Trade unions, social-action groups and other supporters on the left of the political spectrum rejoiced at the surprise victory of the New Democratic Party and proclaimed Ontario a leader in fashioning a more just society, economically and socially.


Medicus Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Lithuania Will Evaluate Pardons in Nazi Collaboration Cases
Lithuania's newly elected President says he is ready to review pardons issued to Nazi collaborators by the previous Government, and has invited a delegation of Israeli Nazi-hunters to visit Vilnius in January.
"There are cases where certificates of rehabilitation have already been canceled," the new President, Algirdas Brazauskas, said in an interview.
"I am looking forward to the arrival of the Israelis. They will see that my Government wants to do everything possible to resolve this problem."


CHRONICLE
JEAN S. HARRIS, the former girls' school headmistress who is serving 15 years to life in prison for murdering Dr.
Herman Tarnower, the cardiologist and diet doctor, has been hospitalized after complaining of chest pains.
James Flateau, a spokesman for the New York State Department of Correctional Services, said yesterday: "She went to the infirmary on Wednesday evening at about 9:15 complaining of pressure on her chest, was examined and taken to Northern Westchester Hospital Center in Mount Kisco by prison vehicle. She is in stable condition." He would not answer any questions about Mrs.
Harris's condition.


Review/Film; Hey, They're Firemen, You Thugs, Not Cops!
"Trespass" is an outlandishly melodramatic, all-male morality fable about two white firemen from Arkansas who go hunting for buried treasure in an abandoned, exceptionally photogenic factory in East St.
Louis, Ill.
In the course of their search, they are discovered by the members of a gang of black hoodlums who, thinking the off-duty firefighters are on-duty policemen, set out to capture and murder them.
Most of the violent cat-and-mouse game takes place inside the factory within one day that seems 96 hours long.
The movie was written by Bob Gale and Robert Zemeckis, best known for the "Back to the Future" comedies, and directed by Walter Hill ("Southern Comfort," "The Driver," "48 Hours"), whose hand has never been heavier.
The cast is headed by Bill Paxton and William Sadler, who play the firemen (one good guy and one bad guy), and Ice-T and Ice Cube, the rap performers who appear as the two principal gang members.
Art Evans gives the film's most interesting performance as a homeless black man who lives in the factory and whose routine is disturbed by the warring interlopers.


Question for the Holidays: To Tip or Not to Tip?
The thousands of people that make life in New York City more livable by opening doors, parking cars, delivering mail and walking dogs often perform their tasks with an unassuming professionalism throughout the year.
But as Christmastime rolls around, many New Yorkers seeking to thank these same people on whose assistance they depend see only a bewildering blur of open palms.
Members of the city's service force, from doormen to exercise trainers, say that holiday tipping is a tradition that they have come to depend on.
But for those expected to do the tipping, the season's ritual of outstretched hands and thinly veiled suggestions not only proves expensive, but confusing.


From the Neediest, Presents for Children
The children at the Anna Lefkowitz Day Care Center in the South Bronx could not bear the wait.
They fidgeted and squirmed and wriggled and every few seconds some of them let out high-pitched screams, as if the antsy energy were forcing its way out.
"O.K.," said their teacher, Blanche Perry.


Abroad at Home; Challenge Of Justice
The choice of Zoe Baird to be Attorney General is the most inspired stroke of Bill Clinton's Cabinet-making.
She is the first woman in the office, which matters.
But it matters more that she has the wisdom, the professional respect and the determination needed to take on what may be the most daunting job in government.
The Department of Justice, once so revered, has become a symbol of Americans' loss of faith in government.
In the Nixon years it harbored criminality at the top.
After a revival in the Ford and Carter Administrations, it has sunk into a mire of politicking and malfeasance.


Security Programs to Be Expanded in Housing Projects
The New York City Housing Authority plans to expand its security programs next month in public housing projects throughout the city, officials said yesterday.
The plan includes increased police enforcement, expanded tenant patrols and better lighting, fencing and lock systems, said Timothy Sullivan, a Housing Authority spokesman.


Headache Remedy Recalled Over Fatal Tampering
The Food and Drug Administration today announced the recall of an over-the-counter headache remedy after the cyanide poisoning death last month of a 51-year-old Tennessee man who had taken medicine that had been tampered with.
The agency said the manufacturer, Goody's Manufacturing Company of Winston-Salem, N.C., was withdrawing all packages of its headache powder, which is distributed nationwide, but is found mostly in the Southeast.


Fronteer Directory reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Momentum Could Swing At Knicks-Bulls Dance
A victory over the Bulls on Christmas would provide further evidence for the Knicks that they have closed the gap between themselves and Chicago -- if a gap exists at all.
"Beating the Bulls at home last month was nice, but it shouldn't have been a big deal," said guard Doc Rivers, one of eight first-year Knicks who were acquired to help New York challenge the Bulls for a championship.
"We're supposed to beat them at our place. But beating them there is a big deal, and that's what we want to prove we can do."


Clinton's Last Selections for the Cabinet Reflect His Quest for Diversity
Mickey Kantor
Trade Representative


Clinton Completes Cabinet And Points to Its Diversity: Corporate Lawyer, a Woman, Gets Justice Dept.
President-elect Bill Clinton finished assembling his Cabinet today, appointing more women and blacks to his inner circle than any previous chief executive and straddling his party's ideological fault lines.
In selecting Zoe Baird, a 40-year-old Connecticut corporate lawyer, to be the the first woman to serve as Attorney General, Mr.
Clinton concluded a sometimes hectic selection process in which he named four blacks, three women and two Hispanic men to Cabinet jobs.
Two other women were named to positions that Mr.
Clinton has pledged to elevate to Cabinet level.


90's Collection of Three Wise Persons and the Brave Gifts They Bring
Merry Christmas, Gerard Papa.
This is the keeper of the Flames' 19th season with his Bensonhurst-based basketball league.
He seems to have mostly recovered from a savage police beating six years ago.
The $76 million judgment he won against the city of New York is still under appeal.
But the Flames are burning bright.


A Nostalgic Look At Fun and Games
PARCHEESI, it can now be revealed, causes stomach flu.
I know this because in my childhood every single time I stayed home from school because I had turned green, the Parcheesi board was found next to my bed, plus crackers, warm ginger ale, at times tepid tea and sufficient Kleenex to blip the stock of the Kimberly Clark Corporation. (Never mind the battered pot always within emergency reach.)


Doctors Today Learn Greater Awareness
To the Editor:
"Teach Us How to Be Good Doctors" (editorial, Dec. 11) is on target: It is easier to teach students and young physicians to resuscitate than to have honest, forthright discussions with patients and families.
Especially if the situation is virtually hopeless, and if the patient is young.


They Keep the Supply Funnel to Somalia Open
Staff Sgt.
Richard Olivella has things like toilet paper and batteries on the brain, along with an appreciation for his role in the American-led operation in Somalia.
"As a supply sergeant, you're the heartbeat of the unit," said Sergeant Olivella, who is responsible for feeding and provisioning 250 of the 8,000 soldiers the Army's 10th Mountain Division is sending here from Fort Drum, N.Y.
"Everything for that unit comes from you, so if you miss something it's your fault."


Christmas in Sarajevo: Prayers and Anguish
The 400,000 residents of this frozen, dispirited city prepared today to celebrate Christmas as they have passed so many other days in the eight-month siege, without electricity, home heat or running water, and with artillery and machine-gun fire beating out a nearly ceaseless tattoo.
In what for Sarajevo was a relatively quiet day, United Nations officers estimated that about 400 artillery, tank and mortar shells exploded, some as people headed out into the midafternoon twilight for the only Christmas Eve Mass that any of the dozens of churches in the city dared to hold.


Sports of The Times; For Those Who Have Everything
THE CHALLENGE of choosing gifts for people who seem to have it all -- in this case, professional athletes -- is that their lives are often filled with material items.
In many cases the thing most wanted cannot be purchased, and the most cherished gifts are often not found in stores.
So, in the spirit of giving, this column celebrates Christmas and the New Year by putting imaginary or otherwise unobtainable gifts under selected trees.


Corrections
An obituary yesterday about Karl Seymour Nash, editor of The Ridgefield Press for 50 years and president of Acorn Press newspapers, misstated the location of the newspaper.
It is in Connecticut, not New Jersey.


THE TRANSITION: Physician and Physicist; Dr. John H. Gibbons -- Science Adviser
Dr.
John H. Gibbons, named yesterday as President-elect Bill Clinton's science adviser, is a nuclear physicist who has specialized in environmental problems for nearly four decades.
As head of the Congressional Office of Technology Assessment, Dr.
Gibbons made the best of a small budget, often taking strong public stands against policies and practices he deemed harmful to the environment.
Last year, for example, he declared that the Department of Energy had "neither the capability nor the credibility" to deal with a 30-year accumulation of radioactive waste from nuclear weapons plants.


No Headline
Christmas  NEW YORK
GOVERNMENT OFFICES Closed.
POST OFFICE Express Mail and special delivery only; main post office open at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue.


Suppliers Support Wal-Mart in Ads
Is this some big Buy America anniversary?
A coordinated salute to booming Christmas sales at Wal-Mart?
Readers of perhaps dozens of newspapers may have been wondering the last few days.
But instead, the flurry of pro-Wal-Mart newspaper ads is a loosely coordinated show of support by the retailers' longtime suppliers of goods like General Electric lights, Remington shavers and Brinkmann outdoor products in the wake of the NBC News program "Dateline" on Tuesday night.
The program raised questions about Wal-Mart's putative preference for American-made goods.


Networked Picture reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Synercom Technology reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Convergent Solutions reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Mark's Work Wearhouse reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 24


For Children
'The Wise Men of Chelm'
Open Eye New Stagings
270 West 89th Street  Manhattan  (212) 769-41431  Recommended ages: 6 and up  Through Jan. 3


The Spoken Word
POETRY READING, Cornelia Street Cafe, 29 Cornelia Street, Greenwich Village.
Leonid Zavalniuk, a Russian poet, will read from his poems in Russian, with English translation by Magda Bogin and John Berger, writers.
Sunday at 7 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 662-9434.
SLIDE SHOW AND WALKING TOURS, Lower East Side Tenement Museum, 97 Orchard Street.
"The Streets Where We Lived," a walking tour that examines how different ethnic groups shaped the character of the Lower East Side from the 1800's to the present, Sunday at noon, followed by "House of Heritage," a slide show and lecture about the museum's history, at 1 P.M.; "It's Tough to Make a Nickel," a musical by Nick Scarim about immigrant children at the turn of the century, at 2 P.M., and "How We Lived: Life in a New York Tenement," a lecture and tour of a museum exhibition, also at 2 P.M.
Slide shows and lectures: $4.
Walking tour: $12; $10 for students and the elderly.
Musical: $10; $8 for the elderly; $5 for students.
Information: (212) 431-0233.


Computertime Network reports earnings for Year to July 31


Uncovered Short Sales Down Slightly on Nasdaq
The number of over-the-counter shares sold short and not yet covered dipped slightly between mid-November and mid-December, the National Association of Securities Dealers said yesterday.
Short interest in all Nasdaq securities totaled 455.8 million shares in the period, down less than 1 percent from the previous period's level of 458 million.
But the number of companies in which shares were sold short in the period grew to 3,728 from 3,650.


From Fists to Fines
Detroit's BILL LAIMBEER was fined $6,500 and Charlotte's ALONZO MOURNING was fined $5,000 by the National Basketball Association yesterday for their parts in an altercation during Wednesday's game between the Pistons and Hornets in Charlotte, N.C.


New York Labor Talks Move Ahead (Slightly)
The Dinkins administration has made a subtle but significant modification of its position in labor talks with a coalition representing most of New York City's civilian workers, prompting intense negotiations over the last few days.
A union official said the talks had produced "significant progress," but left both sides still far from an accord.


Kushner-Locke Co. reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


BRIEFS
Debt  *
Crown Cork and Seal Co., Philadelphia, filed for a shelf offering of up to $600 million in debt securities.
*
Pacific Lumber Co., Houston, a unit of Maxxam Inc., filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for a public offering of $215 million in senior notes due 2003 through Salomon Brothers.
Preferred Stock


Kushner-Locke Co. reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


Ask Episcopal Church About Women Priests
To the Editor:
My old friend Rembert Weakland, Roman Catholic Archbishop of Milwaukee, seems to read the Catholic Church amiss in "Out of the Kitchen, Into the Vatican" (Op-Ed, Dec. 6), his plea for admitting women to the priesthood.
I suspect this is due to his overweening romanticism regarding modern culture -- political, academic, economic, journalistic.
The program he advocates for his church is to embrace this culture, learn from it and follow it.


Sandy Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Motorcycles Are Noisy for Safety of Riders
To the Editor:
Re "Motorcyclists May Be Wonderful People, but Oh! That Noise!" (letters, Dec. 5), this biker would like to offer an explanation why many motorcyclists alter their exhausts.
Safety!
Unfortunately, the average American cruising around in his or her sound-insulated, climate-controlled, multiple-speaker living-room-on-wheels often does not notice us.


Mahoney's Challenge: Rebuilding Redmen
With each game of his first season as the head basketball coach at St.
John's, Brian Mahoney realizes that the extent of the rebuilding job he must oversee is growing large enough to approach the size of the expectations he has inherited.
Beginning Monday night, when the Redmen will meet Manhattan College in the E.C.A.C.
Holiday Festival, St.
John's will enter a period that may well establish the direction of its season.


What Separation Means
To the Editor:
Although I share Hans Koning's misgivings in "What the U.S. Isn't Besides 'Christian' " (letter, Dec. 7), about Gov.
Kirk Fordice's premise that we are a Christian nation, certain of his assertions should not go unchallenged.
For instance, Mr.
Koning states that the separation of church and state "means that religion is never to enter politics," and he cannot think of one public deed in this country "where Christian love (or Judaic ethics) won out."


Robotic Vision reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


Art in Review
Harriet Korman  Lennon, Weinberg Inc. 580 Broadway (near Prince Street) SoHo Through Thursday


American Complex reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Socanav reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Memories of Living Grandly on the Hudson
To the Editor:
"What Is a 24,000-Square-Foot White Elephant?" (news article, Nov. 29), on Campagna House in the Riverdale section of the Bronx, brought back special memories.
In World War II that lovely house was home for six months to about 32 young women (and another contingent after us) under a Navy program at New York University to train engineering aides for the aircraft industry.


Aca Joe Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Canadex Resources reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


New York Teamster Leader Agrees to Suspension
Barry Feinstein, one of New York City's most politically influential labor chiefs, has agreed to give up his union posts for one year and pay a $65,000 fine in a compromise agreement to resolve charges that he misused $500,000 in teamsters' union funds, Government and union officials said yesterday.
But the officials said the proposed settlement would allow Mr.
Feinstein to return after the suspension to his chief job, the presidency of a powerful municipal employees union, Local 237 of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters.
And even during the suspension, he will be permitted to continue as the local's chief negotiator with the city and municipal agencies in their current talks, said a union spokesman, Frank Mazza.


Solar Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Fronteer Directory reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


The Art Market
A Word for the Modern
Europe may be getting at least one new museum of contemporary art, possibly two.
But at this stage, both projects are little more than pipe dreams.


Topics of The Times; Questions for Mr. Molinari
Did Guy Molinari, the Staten Island Borough President, or his staff, fabricate information submitted to Justice Department investigators?
The question lingers following the recent release of a letter to Mr.
Molinari from Deputy Attorney General George Terwilliger.
The letter, made public to Mr.
Terwilliger's apparent chagrin by U.S.
Attorney Otto Obermaier, conveys the findings of a lengthy F.B.I. review of material submitted by Mr.
Molinari's office in an effort to exonerate a Federal immigration agent convicted of civil rights charges.
The agent, Joseph Occhipinti, was sentenced to 37 months in prison in June 1991 for violating the rights of Hispanic shopkeepers by conducting illegal searches and filing false reports.


On My Mind; Zones Of Freedom
Now that Bill Clinton has his foreign policy team in place he owes himself, the country and the world one thing more: a foreign policy that will strengthen and extend the zones of freedom.
It is in the zones of freedom that people can walk free, talk, worship and vote free.
That condition of life would be sufficient reason for the United States to adopt more and stronger zones of freedom -- also known as human rights and democracy -- as its foreign policy goal.


Double Eagle Petroleum &amp; Mining Co. reports earnings for Year to Aug 31


Presenting the 60,000 Lights of 'Mr. Christmas'
Mervin Whipple's left thumb is sore.
More than 1,500 people a night have been winding their way through his Christmas wonderland in the last three weeks and he has clicked every one of them off on the tiny counter he keeps in his coat pocket.
Occasionally, he pulls the counter out and holds it the way a child holds a lucky marble, kneading it in his hand.
"Look at that," he said at 6 P.M. one recent day, grinning at the number 640.
"That's how many so far. And we've only been open an hour."


Vincent Fourcade, 58, Decorator Known for His Ornate Interiors
Vincent Fourcade, a New York-based decorator known for opulent Victorian interiors that epitomized the lavish style of the 1980's, died on Wednesday at his home in Paris.
He was 58.
He died of AIDS, said his partner, Robert Denning.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.75
3.38
4.50
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.15
3.15
3.82
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.29
3.28
3.91
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.36
6.37
6.46
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.36
7.35
7.50
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.39
8.39
8.65
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.40
6.40
6.71
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Arabs' Ouster Dashes Hopes In Bethlehem
This year was supposed to conjure up the spirit of Christmas past, with more lights and merry-making than has been considered acceptable since the Palestinian rebellion against Israel started draping the holiday in black five years ago.
But that was before Israel deported 415 Palestinians to Lebanon last week, setting off days of anger and commercial strikes across the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip.


Angeion Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Assix International reports earnings for Year to June 30


Hamburg Journal; Germany's March Into New Century: A Troubling Vision to Ex-Chancellor
Helmut Schmidt's eyes and his hearing may not be as sharp as they used to be when he was Chancellor of West Germany 15 years ago, but his vision is.
He worries about the future of this country now more than he ever did then, at the height of the cold war.
"The soul of the German people is in danger," he said in his office at the weekly journal Die Zeit, where he is one of the principal editors.


CHRONICLE
"Some people like drinks before dinner," JUDD HIRSCH said.
"What I'm doing is called marriage before dinner."
That was Mr.
Hirsch's roundabout way of saying that he was being married last night to BONNIE CHALKIN at a party at HERB GARDNER'S home in New York.
The ceremony was performed by Rabbi Judith Lewis of Temple Israel in New York.
Mr.
Gardner was the best man.


3Com Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


William Pierce Archer Sr., Antiques Dealer, 82
William Pierce Archer Sr., a former antiques dealer, died Dec. 9 at Lawrence Hospital in Bronxville, N.Y.
He was 82 and lived in Scarsdale, N.Y.
Mr. Archer died of a stroke and a heart attack, said his wife of 52 years, Eugenia.


Old Weapons Are Plants' New Work
The steel hulls of 12 big Chinook cargo helicopters on the assembly line of the Boeing Company's helicopter factory here have been sanded and burnished so that the silvery metal looks new.
But small numbers stenciled in black on the hulls tell a different story.
"O22," one says, documenting that this was the 22d Chinook ever built, in 1961.
None of the hulls is less than 15 years old.
Like so many military contractors, Boeing Helicopter is increasingly en gaged in the rebuilding and upgrading of old weapons instead of building more expensive new ones.
The conversion of old weapons into more modern versions -- rather than simply overhauling them periodically as the Air Force does with the B-52 bomber -- now appears to account for more than half the military hardware manufactured in America, and the percentage keeps growing.


Review/Film; Conflicts And Laughs At English Reunion
"Peter's Friends," a cheerfully derivative comedy about a group of old friends enjoying a house-party reunion, borrows so blatantly from "The Big Chill" that it takes a while to realize this film has some life of its own.
Once again, the principals are brought together to reconsider the courses of their lives.
Once again, these decisions are made to the tune of an ebullient rock soundtrack.
Once again, thoughts of mortality lend substance to what otherwise would look like lighthearted fun.
The setting this time is a grand English manor house, which Peter (Stephen Fry) has recently inherited in one of the film's more conspicuous coming-of-age touches.
A decade earlier, the principals were college chums joining forces to stage a giddy New Year's Eve musical revue.
But they are now at a more serious stage in their lives.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  HOMELESS AGENCIES ASSESS RULING


WHITE REPRISAL IN SOUTH AFRICA
South Africa's chronic political violence took an ominous new turn today when white gunmen opened fire on two mini-buses full of black passengers, killing a driver and wounding three other people.
No group took responsibility for the shootings, which took place in a rural area of the Orange Free State.
But the attacks indicated that right-wing whites, enraged by a spate of terrorist attacks on whites in recent weeks, were seeking retribution in a manner that evokes South Africa's worst nightmares of race war.


Namic USA reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 27


Albany Fans Warned
The owner of the Continental Basketball Association franchise in Albany has warned that the team will move to another city at the end of this season unless attendance doubles.
"If we can average around 3,000 fans for our remaining games, the team will definitely stay," the owner, JOSEPH O'HARA, said on Thursday.
"If not, then we will simply have to look at a new location for next season."


A Matter of Interest: A Growing Family Pays Less for More
After the birth of their second son, Steven and Susan Handel of Levittown, L.I., decided they had outgrown their house.
They bought it in 1986, when their income was lower and interest rates were high.
They considered adding on to the old house, but when they received an offer close to their asking price, they decided to sell.
Lower interest reates and a 15-year mortgage will reduce their interest debt, and help them afford a larger house in the same community.
Increased future earnings will offsert slightly larger mortgage payments.


English Seasonal Music
The Ensemble for Early Music is to present "Christesmas in Anglia," a program of secular and sacred music of England and Scotland dating from the 12th to 17th century, tonight at 8 and tomorrow at 3 P.M. in the St.
James Chapel of the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine, Amsterdam Avenue at 112th Street, Morningside Heights.
The program celebrates the 100th anniversary of the laying of the cathedral's cornerstone.
Tickets are $20.
Information: (212) 749-6600.


12 Months; 18 Indelible Exploits
By all the measures that years in golf are remembered by, 1992 was exceptional.
It gave us lightning strikes of brilliance in winning shots by Corey Pavin and John Cook, and springtime explosions like those of Fred Couples, Davis Love 3d and Lee Trevino.
It contained the sustained excellence of Nick Faldo and Dottie Mochrie, and a landmark achievement by the remarkable Raymond Floyd.
It saw highly regarded veterans like Tom Kite and Patty Sheehan elevate into the game's royalty, and obscure professionals like Shelley Hamlin and Eddie Pearce rise above adversity.
It featured a Cinderella in senior golfer Larry Laoretti, and a version of the '69 Mets in the European women who won the Solheim Cup.
And it projected a vision of future greatness in the continuing exploits of 16-year-old Eldrick (Tiger) Woods.


Yesterday, Christmas. Today, Kwanzaa.


Helen Joseph Dies in South Africa; Early Foe of Apartheid Was 87
Helen Joseph, a white dissident who was repeatedly detained and harassed by the South African Government in a long struggle against apartheid, died today in a hospital here.
She was 87.
She died of complications from a stroke she had suffered two weeks ago, news agencies reported.


The Down Side of High Interest
Ten years after the last controls on interest rates were dismantled, the nation's financial system is still coping with the huge, and in many cases unexpected, consequences of those changes.
For consumers, the end of controls was a chance to earn more interest on deposits and to keep up with an inflation rate that peaked at more than 10 percent annually in 1979 and 1980.
For banks and savings and loan associations, the higher interest rates meant being able to compete for deposits with the rapidly growing money market mutual funds.


PROSECUTOR SHIFTS ATTENTION TO BUSH ON IRAN ARMS DEAL
Deprived of his primary targets by Presidential pardons, the independent prosecutor in the Iran-contra affair said today that his investigation would now focus on President Bush himself, specifically on whether Mr.
Bush improperly withheld his personal diary to conceal a cover-up of the arms-for-hostages swap.
The final thrust by the prosecutor, Lawrence E. Walsh, may lead to one last confrontation between Mr.
Walsh and the President.
Mr.
Walsh is almost certain to seek an interview with Mr.
Bush, probably after he leaves office next month.


In the Spirit of Giving on Christmas


Waiting for Clinton
To the Editor:
"Clinton's Quagmire" (letter, Dec. 9) by Daniel Segal indicates our Founding Fathers set Jan. 20 as Inauguration Day.
The original day was March 4, four months after Election Day.
The date was changed to Jan. 20 during Franklin D. Roosevelt's first term.
He was the first President to be inaugurated on that date, in 1937, following his re-election.


Moscow Journal; Where Values, as Well as Buildings, Fall Into Decay
A year after the end of the Soviet Union, anything goes in Moscow.
In front of the "Artistic Salon" on Dimitrova Street, where paintings and other works of art are offered for sale in three large rooms with huge picture windows visible to all passersby, signs "categorically" forbid the freelance sale of art or artistic materials outside, by order of the Moscow City Council.


CHRONICLE
ROSE HAMBURGER can't count the number of races she has seen in her 101 years; after all, she said the other day, "I have been a racegoer since 1915." On Monday, she will watch a race at Aqueduct that will be named the "Happy 102d Rose" purse, in honor of her 102d birthday on Tuesday.
After the race, she will go to the winner's circle to present a trophy to the triumphant jockey and trainer.
Mrs.
Hamburger grew up in Baltimore and lived there for 60 years before moving to New York.
Her passion for horse racing began at Pimlico, where her father belonged to the Members' Clubhouse.
She saw her first Preakness Stakes in 1915, and she said proudly the other day: "I have seen 73 of them. Of course 102 are a lot of years." She has also seen all 11 of the Triple Crown winners.


Split Israeli Cabinet Bars Red Cross Passage of Aid to Exiled Arabs
A seriously divided Israeli Government today rejected a Red Cross request to bring relief supplies to 415 deported Palestinians through an Israeli-controlled buffer zone in southern Lebanon.
If aid is to reach the exiles in their tent camp, it will have to pass through territory under Lebanese control, the Government said, because as far as it is concerned the Palestinians are not its responsibility, but Lebanon's.


Stressing the Lighter Side of Jesus; A Bronx Church Seeks to Combine Laughter and Salvation
The Gospel of St.
Matthew holds that some two thousand years ago three wise men cast their eyes to the sky and with a star as their guide made their way to Bethlehem, to pay homage to the infant Jesus.
On Christmas Eve, some parishioners of St.
Ann's Episcopal Church also looked heavenward for guidance as they filed into the landmark South Bronx church for Mass.
Instead of spotting a shining star, they looked no farther than the steeple and beheld a drawing of Christ -- the long hair and beard were familiar, but the hearty laugh and smile that creased His face were not.


Jordan Feels Change Within As Muslims Pursue Agenda
Haifa Melhes, the highest-ranking woman in Jordan's Education Ministry, sits in her large office with not much to do except light one cigarette after another.
In 1989, after Mrs.
Melhes's 23-year career brought her to the position of the ministry's director of cultural affairs, the Muslim fundamentalist who had been named to head the ministry gave her job to a male colleague because, he told her, he opposed "women holding leadership roles" in society.


Woman Shot on Grand Central Parkway
A Queens woman was shot and critically injured in her car on the Grand Central Parkway last night when a driver, apparently angry at having been cut off, pulled alongside and opened fire, the police said.
The woman, Pamela Mascaro, 32 years old, was hit once in the head, said Sgt.
Anthony Barlanti, a police spokesman.
She was in critical condition last night at Mary Immaculate Hospital in Jamaica, he said.


METRO DIGEST
FREE MARKET IN ACTION OR CRIME?
Ticket scalping has been very good to Kevin Thomas, and he makes no apologies.
He sees himself as a classic American entrepreneur: a high-school dropout from the Bronx who taught himself a trade, works seven nights a week, earns $40,000 a year, and at age 26 has $75,000 in savings, all by providing a public service outside New York's theaters and sports arenas.
But he has been arrested many times.
But while New York and New Jersey officials are cracking down on scalpers, economists tend to see them as performing a valuable function.
Page 1.
NEW YORK CITY
TEAMSTER HEAD SEEN AS BOUNCING BACK


From Precious Pennies, Aid for Neediest
George Ginsberg keeps a box in his bedroom filled with stamped envelopes addressed to his favorite charities.
When he has an extra dollar or two, he reaches into the box with his eyes closed, grabs an envelope and mails the money.
This year he has donated about $100 in these little fragments.
Mr.
Ginsberg, a 93-year-old retired photographer who lives in Springfield, N.J., says he is uncomfortable saving his money to send to a single charity.
Though he cannot afford to give much, he does not want to turn his back on the many organizations that he wants to support.


Review/Dance; Don Bellamy in Lead Of 'The River,' by Ailey
It is easy not to pay due attention to dancers like Don Bellamy, quietly skillful performers whose contributions are consistently high-level though often muted.
But Mr.
Bellamy came into his own in a lead role in "The River," presented by the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater on Wednesday night at City Center.
It was not that his dancing was flashy in the opening "Spring" section or the closing "Twin Cities" section.
That was the shining virtue of it: Mr.
Bellamy seized attention and held it with the sensitivity and implacable strength of his performance.
The classically rooted look of Mr.
Bellamy's torso, his limbs lyrically expanding beyond it, had all the excitement of virtuoso tricks, as did the traditional modern-dance sense of weight that he brought to each move and gesture.
Although he is a very different, much earthier dancer than the Ailey star Dudley Williams, Mr.
Bellamy had a similar purity and concentration dancing the theme of "Spring" and partnering Elizabeth Roxas in the yearning "Twin Cities" -- as well as the charismatic warmth of a rough-hewn matinee idol.
Both qualities made this Ailey ballet, danced to music by Duke Ellington, a good deal more nuanced and memorable than it sometimes looks.


New Theater for Pixie Judy Troupe
The Pixie Judy Troupe, one of New York City's oldest companies offering theater for children and families, will give its holiday performances at the Church of the Heavenly Rest in Manhattan after a contract dispute with a commercial theater.
Last week, the group, which has led a vagabond existence since its founding in 1965, announced regularly scheduled performances in the 300-seat Playhouse 91, at 316 East 91st Street, Manhattan.
On Dec. 18, the troupe opened its season there with a performance of "The Littlest Clown," with Joyce Dinkins, the Mayor's wife, as host.


Jets Make Wrong Turn Into Walton Territory
No one with the Jets will admit that the team has taken a step backward this season.
But there should be little argument that they haven't moved forward.
An overload of injuries to starters and an inexperienced quarterback have conspired against the Jets.
Perhaps even more distressful were the losses of defensive end Dennis Byrd, who broke his neck in a game on Nov. 29 and remains partly paralyzed, and receiver Al Toon, who retired because of lingering effects from a concussion.


The Somalia Christmas
This will be remembered as the Somalia Christmas.
Moved by haunting images of starving children, Americans have given overwhelming support to a rescue by air and sea.
Tough marines trained to kill find themselves trucking sacks of food to remote outposts.
And on a day meant especially for children, Somali mothers, clutching their precious but ragged bundles, convey a poignant echo of the Nativity.
Still, these images, in their very power, oversimplify and may even mislead.
Viewers might understandably conclude that famine, drought, war and overpopulation are permanent scourges of the third world, especially Africa.
They might conclude that over time, little can be done to improve the lot of the world's poorest children.
That's far from true, as can be seen by consulting "The State of the World's Children, 1993," the heartening report of Unicef, the United Nations Children's Fund.
In fact, writes its executive director, James Grant, more progress has been made in the last 50 years than in the previous 2,000:


Star Quality Has Jones In Line for Title Fight
He was not a high roller.
He was not even a big-city politician in search of a photo opportunity.
But at a recent fight night in Atlantic City, Roy Jones Jr. got to sit next to Donald Trump, right there at ringside, relegating the woman who had been at the millionaire's right elbow to a seat at the end of the row.
Jones, the boxer, and Trump, whose name is attached to everything but the beach in the seaside gambling town, whispered into each other's ears as if they were sharing secrets.
Just good friends, right?


CHRONICLE
ROSE HAMBURGER can't count the number of races she has seen in her 101 years; after all, she said the other day, "I have been a racegoer since 1915." On Monday, she will watch a race at Aqueduct that will be named the "Happy 102d Rose" purse, in honor of her 102d birthday on Tuesday.
After the race, she will go to the winner's circle to present a trophy to the triumphant jockey and trainer.
Mrs.
Hamburger grew up in Baltimore and lived there for 60 years before moving to New York.
Her passion for horse racing began at Pimlico, where her father belonged to the Members' Clubhouse.
She saw her first Preakness Stakes in 1915, and she said proudly the other day: "I have seen 73 of them. Of course 102 are a lot of years." She has also seen all 11 of the Triple Crown winners.


For Maloney, a New Arena, but the Same Style
The day could not have been drearier.
Gray skies.
Intermittent rain.
Chilly winds.
Yet Carolyn B. Maloney was bouncing around like a teen-ager on spring break.
"Can't you just feel your heart beating faster around here?" she said, heading toward the Rayburn office building for a quick lunch between meetings.
This was Ms.
Maloney's first day in Washington after nearly a week attending seminars at Harvard for new Democrats in Congress.
A member of the New York City Council for 10 years, she was the upset winner last month over Bill Green in New York's expanded Silk Stocking District to join the 103d Congress in the House of Representatives, and now the spoils of victory were all about: the majestic Capitol, the Mall, the Washington Monument and the one-bedroom apartment less than three blocks away that she rented for a song, compared with New York prices.
"I can walk to work," she said.


Storm Points Up Problem of Elite L.I. Beaches
To the Editor:
Too many communities on the South Shore of Long Island insist on "privatizing" their beaches, either legally and structurally (walls and fences) or through parking regulations.
Yet, when such storms as that of Dec. 11 hit (front page, Dec. 12), these communities demand public money for restoration and repair.


Age, County by County


Union Chief Keeps Power, Experts Say
The allegations against Barry Feinstein, one of New York City's top municipal-employees union leaders, looked overwhelming when they were made public in September.
Bluntly put, he was accused in noncriminal administrative charges of embezzling and misusing $500,000 in union funds to finance a lavish personal life style.
But three months later, labor and political experts say, Mr.
Feinstein has emerged relatively unscathed and remains a potent union official and political figure.


Unstated Goal Of Jobs Plan: Open Unions
Construction unions in New York City that have long been criticized for excluding members of minority groups have agreed to recruit 25 percent of their new apprentices from the overwhelmingly black and Hispanic graduating classes of the city's vocational high schools.
State and city officials describe the agreement as the most promising effort ever made in New York City to give young blacks and Hispanics a chance of working in construction jobs that traditionally have been reserved for the sons and grandsons of the white union members who make up most of the industry.


As Foreign Investment Rises, Vietnam Wants the U.S. Back
At a meeting in November with a delegation of American Senators, Vietnamese officials interrupted the conversation to offer their guests a glass of what is now Vietnam's most popular soft drink: Coca-Cola.
The Senators took small sips.
The Vietnamese gulped it down.
In a sign of how the free market has begun to take hold here -- and of the willingness of Vietnamese to embrace even the most potent symbols of American capitalism -- Coca-Cola, Pepsi, 7-Up and Sprite are being sold openly almost everywhere in Vietnam, north and south, city and countryside, smuggled in across the porous border from Cambodia.


At Grand Central, the Homeless Honor Friends Who Have Died


American Troops Bear Gifts on a Human Scale
For many of the American troops in Somalia, the mission has been more a test of nerves in ostensibly friendly but uncertain territory than a simple matter of dispensing food to the starving.
But today, the Americans celebrated Christmas in a Muslim land, and made small but special efforts that may have satisfied themselves as much as they helped the Somalis.


When the Bitter Slowly Surrenders to the Sweet
The photo album that chronicles Ramon Ramos Jr.'s 1989 car crash and its endless aftermath is kept in a living-room bookcase here.
For Ramon Ramos Sr. and his wife, Iluminada, the album is in many ways a personal bible, a book full of lessons about faith, rich in hope and wonder and miracles.
It is also an album full of horrors, complete with pictures of twisted metal, a broken son, ruined promise.
The album is presented to visitors without either awkwardness or eagerness.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Thursday about the Federal center for foreign animal diseases on Plum Island, L.I., misstated the total to be spent on construction and renovation projects.
It is $80 million.


Review/Music; 2 Ensembles Join the Holiday Preoccupation With Bach Concertos
Bach wrote plenty of music specifically for the year-end holiday season, as a visitor to Holy Trinity Lutheran Church on Central Park West was reminded on Christmas Eve, when the church's choir performed the Cantata No. 191, adapted for Christmas Day from the Gloria of the B-minor Mass.
But in recent years New York musical institutions have for some reason fastened on Bach's concertos as seasonal fare, evidently finding in them an all-purpose festiveness perhaps enhanced for the occasion by Bach's well-known religious devotion.
Bargemusic is embarked on a full set of the "Brandenburg" Concertos, and the New York Chamber Symphony begins its annual series of same tomorrow.
What's more, every seasonal concert attended this year, but for a couple of all-consuming "Messiahs," included at least one Bach concerto.
The most recent such programs were the Aulos Ensemble's, in its back-to-back Christmas concerts on Tuesday in the Medieval Sculpture Hall of the Metropolitan Museum of Art, and the New York String Orchestra's, in its pair of concerts in Carnegie Hall, the first of which began at midnight on Christmas Eve.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a front-page article on Thursday about District Attorney Charles J. Hynes of Brooklyn misstated the outcome of the trials in the shooting death of a black teen-ager during a mob attack in Bensonhurst.
One of eight defendants was convicted of murder, four were convicted of lesser charges and three were acquitted of all charges.


Young, Gifted And Benched
Todd Marinovich was shivering in the 60-degree haze.
Considering he surfs in the nude, he should have been able to persevere, but he left the Raiders practice field recently bundled in a hood, its drawstring pulled to the extreme.
All that was uncovered was his sunburned face, with lips so chapped they bled, and his pointy red goatee.
Visible, too, was a green flannel navigator's cap, protruding from his hood, with the inscription "Notre Dame" taped to it.
"Ah, I lost a bet to Tim Brown," said Marinovich, glum that his alma mater, Southern California, recently fell flat to his buddy Brown's Fighting Irish.
"Whoever lost had to wear the other's hat all week. I wouldn't be caught in this otherwise."


One Course Does Fit All
This weekend's Wendy's 3 Tours Challenge, a taped, made-for-television event that will air on ABC, successfully created a level playing field for a select and elite group of players from the regular PGA, Senior and L.P.G.A. tours.
David Eger of the United States Golf Association used the distance of a standard 7-iron approach shot (159 yards for the touring men, 157 for seniors and 149 for women) in setting up the course at the New Albany Country Club in Columbus, Ohio.


A Wider Passport Scandal
Credit William Barr, the lame duck Attorney General, with obtaining a special prosecutor to investigate the Bush Administration's passport scandal.
He did so just before last week's expiration of the law authorizing court-appointed independent prosecutors.
But give him no credit at all for the broad powers conferred on the prosecutor, Joseph diGenova.
That credit belongs to the Federal court in Washington that made the appointment at Mr.
Barr's request.
Mr.
Barr asked only for an inquiry into whether the White House political director, Janet Mullins, committed crimes like lying to State Department investigators.
Alertly, the court broadened the charter to include "all matters and individuals whose acts may be related" to whatever Ms.
Mullins did.


It Takes Years to Get to J.F.K.
New York City's three airports -- La Guardia, Newark and particularly Kennedy -- have long needed rapid transit links to Manhattan, and planners have come up with one proposal after another.
But each has foundered for lack of money.
Now there's going to be money, from the new $3 ticket tax.
What's still missing is a sensible plan.
The Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, which operates the three airports, has just proposed building an automated people-mover line stretching 20 miles from J.F.K. to La Guardia to the Manhattan end of the Queensboro Bridge on the Upper East Side.
Separately, the Authority and New Jersey Transit are working on plans to connect Newark Airport with an existing rail line into Manhattan's Penn Station.


Review/Television; Angela Lansbury Takes a Holiday From Murder
Mrs.
Harris is a cockney, in case you might miss the point of the title "Mrs. 'arris Goes to Paris." Everything about this CBS movie, tomorrow at 8 P.M., is underlined -- twice.
This is the kind of movie that, as they say, isn't being made anymore.
And it wouldn't be made now except for the considerable clout of Angela Lansbury, star of CBS's sturdy top-10 hit "Murder, She Wrote." CBS wants to keep Ms.
Lansbury around, and she gets what she wants.
That includes, obviously, this old-fashioned title-role star vehicle, adapted reverently by John Hawkesworth ("Upstairs, Downstairs") from a story by Paul Gallico.


A Vision of Capitalism In the Ex-Soviet Bloc
As president of the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, Jacques Attali has a grand vision for financing the emergence of vibrant capitalist economies in Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union, leading eventually to a vast pan-European market.
"We should be a go-between between East and West," the ebullient 49-year-old Frenchman said in an interview at the bank's headquarters here.


After Crash, a Bystander's Widow Wonders Why
When her husband was late coming home from work one night last May, Jeri Bell almost guessed the reason.
A television news program had reported that traffic was tied up because a drunken driver being chased by the police had struck and killed a motorist at an intersection.
It was only when the police telephoned her that she learned that the victim was her 55-year-old husband, Theron P. Bell 3d.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-5  ISLAM'S EMBRACE OF JORDAN
Using the politics of accommodation, Muslim fundamentalists are changing the face of Jordan's schools, politics and even the monarchy.
Unlike their armed brethren in Egypt, they are building a social edifice that they hope will "ripen" until the nation falls into their lap.  1


Alaska Journal; Reality Destroys a Fairy-Tale Image
Reindeer farms and petting zoos lure tourists.
A pet reindeer, Star IV, won the designation "official civic attraction," and leads two children's parades each year.
But Alaskans also enjoy their reindeer in snack form: reindeer-burgers are popular at luncheonettes, and pizza parlors substitute slices of reindeer for pepperoni.
In a state that depends on wildlife for sustenance and as a mainstay of the tourism economy, reindeer are regarded in much the same way as whales, walruses or wolves.
A hedge of laws and regulations protects them much of the time.
But this is no fairy-tale land.
Reindeer can cause problems.
And when that happens, the solution is not always pretty.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The economy is staggering out of the recession, but people who are getting jobs again tell a sobering story.
The good jobs of the past, with strong wages and benefits, are largely giving way to unstable and mediocre positions.
That makes this recovery different from any other.
And with corporate giants like G. M. and I.B.M. planning to shed tens of thousands of workers next year, the resilience of the recovery is in some doubt.  [ Page 1. ]
Most merchants' holiday business improved this year despite ups and downs caused by unusually nasty weather and more layoffs and revampings among top companies.
"People have shopped this year like there really is a Christmas," an analyst said.
While retailers will not post holiday sales numbers until Thursday, a few experts estimate sales grew 8 or 9 percent from a year ago.  [ 1. ]


Stastny's Holdout May Prove A Blessing
Peter Stastny's holdout early in the season, when games are of less significance, may pay dividends for the Devils now and in the spring.
Stastny reported to training camp earlier than most last year, but he faded toward the end of the regular season, registering just 1 point in the final 12 games.


FOOTBALLL: Notebook; Got the Coach Right Here, but His Name's Not Clear
The questions surrounding Coach Ray Handley of the Giants have centered on when, precisely, he will become a former head coach.
Whenever that happens, a replacement must be named.
Following is a slate of candidates and an unofficial line, with the best bet listed first:
BILL PARCELLS (4-5) -- He knows the players, the organization and the territory.
He has won with the Giants.
He can motivate players, something his successor has not been able to do.
He enjoys being a television analyst, but he is still a coach at heart.
As one friend said: "He always liked coaching and he wants to coach again. His health is good. He wants to come home." But will General Manager George Young forgive him for quitting the job in 1991 so late in the spring?
He probably will.


Review/Theater; Out-of-Body Experiences In a Cabin in Vermont
"Them . . . Within Us," a situation comedy masquerading as a science- fiction comedy, asks the audience to care about a 30-something couple on the brink of either a breakup or a marriage.
The play, by Todd Davis Ross, is at Theater Row Theater (formerly South Street).
While visiting the woman's younger brother and his fiancee in their Vermont cabin, the two principal characters find themselves confronted by unseen extraterrestrials who take over their bodies.
We know that the characters have been inhabited by E.T.'s when they suddenly speak pompously and stand up straight as if they have boards on their backs.
When not possessed, they slump and exchange coy dialogue.
This means that the actors playing the leads, Bonnie Black and Patrick Barnes, each have two voices.
In contrast, Steven Sennett and Marceline Hugot, as the other couple, are limited to one-dimensional roles.
Were this a fairy tale, they might be called Chirpy and Loony.
The play is dopey.


CHRONICLE
ROSE HAMBURGER can't count the number of races she has seen in her 101 years; after all, she said the other day, "I have been a racegoer since 1915." On Monday, she will watch a race at Aqueduct that will be named the "Happy 102d Rose" purse, in honor of her 102d birthday on Tuesday.
After the race, she will go to the winner's circle to present a trophy to the triumphant jockey and trainer.
Mrs.
Hamburger grew up in Baltimore and lived there for 60 years before moving to New York.
Her passion for horse racing began at Pimlico, where her father belonged to the Members' Clubhouse.
She saw her first Preakness Stakes in 1915, and she said proudly the other day: "I have seen 73 of them. Of course 102 are a lot of years." She has also seen all 11 of the Triple Crown winners.


Critic's Notebook; 'Messiah' Around Town in Its Many Permutations
One of the little moral questions that come around every Christmas has to do with music: does God rejoice in amateur voices raised in cracked sincerity, or does God want His joyful noises done up right?
It's the old conflict between splendid churches and Quaker meeting houses, but now transposed to the world of sound.
Is beauty, in other words, a seducer, something that leads us to confuse sensuous pleasure with devotion?
Or is it a catalyst, religion's persuasive advocate?
A lot of blood has been shed over that one in the last 1,000 years.
The practical side of the argument says that great music performed by experts puts Christians in the right frame of mind.
A number of churches putting on Handel's "Messiah" this week seem to have thought along those lines.
Orchestras were hired, and in most cases paid choir members found themselves joined by paid extras.
Three "Messiah" presentations were at Episcopal parishes, all evidently with affluent memberships.
"We have sophisticated parishioners; they have come to expect music well done," said one singer in a choir he described as "99 percent professional." With orchestra rehearsals and top-of-the line soloists, productions like this can run about $30,000.


'Maxed' Charge Cards And Other Red Flags
"DO you know what the No. 1 sport in America is?" Jerry Mason, a professor of consumer economics at Texas Tech University in Lubbock, likes to ask.
"Football," says one student. "Baseball," says another.
"No, it's going to the mall," Dr.
Mason replies.
"People want that lift they get from buying something."


Alarmed by Deaths in Car Chases, Police Curb High-Speed Pursuits
Increasingly alarmed by high-speed pursuits that are killing hundreds of people every year, police departments around the country, as well as state and Federal lawmakers, are clamping down on the wild, Hollywood-style chases that sometimes involve caravans of speeding cruisers.
Their efforts are meeting resistance from some officers who say criminals must be given the message that they will always be pursued.
And limits on high-speed chases also challenge what some experts say is an aggressive, get-your-man ethos in police departments.


Newark Fire Kills 3 Men In Power Plant
Trapped by fire and dense black smoke, three workers at a Newark power plant suffocated in a noxious cloud yesterday morning after they failed to crash through thick windows to safety.
The victims monitored the operation of the O'Brian Newark Cogenerating Plant, at 35 Blanchard Street, from a second-floor control room, officials said.
One was completing a night shift and two had begun a day shift.
The police identified them as Joseph Eley, 41 years old, of Boa Place in Hillside, N.J.; Michael McLoughlin, 23, of Ridgefield, N.J., and Andy Motichka, 25, of Wallington, N.J.


Beliefs
Recently, Melonie Morris, who is 17 and lives in the South Bronx, has been mulling an idea.
Maybe she should become a pastor.
It is an idea that doesn't go away at a time like this, when Melonie has been spending almost as much time at St.
John's Evangelical Lutheran Church as the Rev.
John Heinemeier, its pastor.
On Friday night a week ago, for example, she and Pastor Heinemeier and a couple of mothers led a group of pilgrims accompanying Mary and Joseph from Nazareth to Bethlehem.


Congress Plans Inquiry on Pardons
Congress will probably investigate the pardons granted by President Bush to Caspar W. Weinberger and five other men involved in the arms-for-hostages scandal, Congressional aides said today.
No one here doubts that Mr.
Bush had constitutional power to issue the pardons, which aborted two pending trials and erased the effects of four convictions obtained by Lawrence E. Walsh, the independent prosecutor.
But many in Congress are eager to insure disclosure of information that would have come out at Mr.
Weinberger's trial.


No Headline
I look at scalping like working as a stockbroker, buying low and selling high.
If people are willing to pay me the money, what kind of problem is that? -- KEVIN THOMAS, who resells tickets in New York.  [ 1:3. ]


Ex-Rep. Richard Ichord, 66, Dies; Led Un-American Activities Panel
Former Representative Richard H. Ichord, a fervent anti-Communist who crusaded against the peace movement during the Vietnam War and served as the last chairman of the House Un-American Activities Committee, died yesterday at a hospital in Nevada, Mo.
He was 66.
He died of complications from a heart attack on Dec. 18, said his daughter, Pam Ichord Ehlers.
He had divided his time in recent years between Washington and a cattle ranch in Waynesville, Mo., she said.


Tickets? Supply Meets Demand on Sidewalk
Ticket scalping has been very good to Kevin Thomas, and he makes no apologies.
He sees himself as a classic American entrepreneur: a high-school dropout from the Bronx who taught himself a trade, works seven nights a week, earns $40,000 a year, and at age 26 has $75,000 in savings, all by providing a public service outside New York's theaters and sports arenas.
He has just one complaint.
"I've been busted about 30 times in the last year," he said one recent evening, after making $280 at a Knicks game.
"You learn to deal with it -- I give the cops a fake name, and I pay the fines when I have to, but I don't think it's fair. I look at scalping like working as a stockbroker, buying low and selling high. If people are willing to pay me the money, what kind of problem is that?"


Pope Condemns Violence in Bosnia in His Christmas Day Message


Will D'Amato Learn?
To the Editor:
In the last session of Congress, Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato of New York blocked amendments to the national flood insurance program that would establish minimum setbacks for new and rebuilt construction along eroding shorelines.
That legislation was based on recommendations of a committee of the National Research Council, on which I served.
The House of Representatives adopted a similar bill in May 1991.





Another Town Is Secured
American and French forces secured the town of Hoddur, 200 miles northwest of the capital, today as the first phase of military efforts to take control of the famine-stricken centers of Somalia neared an end.
The town was the sixth of eight that the Pentagon said American-led troops will occupy.


Jobs Without Hope -- A special report; Solid Jobs Seem to Vanish Despite Signs of Recovery
The nation's economy is staggering out of the recession, say most of the gauges that measure it, but people who are getting jobs again tell a sobering story.
Many good factory jobs and white-collar office jobs with good wages and benefits are giving way to unstable and mediocre jobs.
That makes this recovery different from any other.


Markets Closed
Because of the Christmas holiday yesterday, the stock, bond, currency and futures markets in much of the world were closed.
In Asia, Tokyo was the only major market open.


How to Decide if Car Leasing Is for You
Car leasing has joined Santa Claus as a fixture of life: expectations about its gifts may be excessive, but it is here to stay.
Nearly a quarter of those who drove off in new cars this year had lease contracts in hand -- and, for a few years, more money in their wallets.
Are they making a wise long-term choice?
Here are a few quick answers:


Isaac L. Auerbach Is Dead at 71; Was Early Advocate of Computers
Isaac L. Auerbach, an early advocate of computer technology, died on Thursday at his home in Lower Merion, Pa.
He was 71 years old.
He died of leukemia, his family said.


Burmese Make Their Way to Democracy
To the Editor:
Your Dec. 6 report on a United Nations resolution regarding the situation in Myanmar is inaccurate and echoes the canard propagated by certain quarters that the State Law and Order Restoration Council is trying to perpetuate itself in power.
The Government has laid down, and is implementing, a program to establish a strong and enduring constitutional democracy in Myanmar.


Sports of The Times; Jordan Never Home Alone For Holiday
MICHAEL Jordan is fast becoming a Christmas ritual, the way Bing Crosby used to be, materializing on the tube at holiday time with the familiar smile and the familiar routine.
The network heavies know that a good part of America is suffering from holiday anxiety by late on Dec. 25, and what it really needs is to gape at some unthreatening dunks and jumpers.


When Made Over, Hell Gate Bridge Won't Clash With East River
REMEMBER how hard it was to decide on the color for the living room?
Adriatic white or egg cream ecru, or maybe something really emphatic like tangerine or Granny Smith green to launch a bold new stage of personal development?
Well imagine the debates you could have over a whole bridge, in particular a great hulking railroad bridge over Hell Gate in the East River that has not been painted since soon after it first went up in 1917?
You could of course paint it bridge silver or practical rust brown and let it go at that.
Or you could assemble a committee of artists and architects to decide on the color, which is what Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan urged the Municipal Art Society to do after he had secured Federal money to paint the arched metal bridge linking Queens and Long Island to the Bronx and mainland America.


CHRONICLE
Former Representative PETER W. RODINO Jr., who was chairman of the House Judiciary Committee during the Nixon impeachment hearings, was in intensive care yesterday following emergency surgery.
Mr.
Rodino, 83, underwent a 90-minute operation on Thursday at St.
Joseph's Hospital and Medical Center in Paterson, N.J., to clear a blocked artery leading to his brain.
Doctors had determined his carotid artery was 90 percent blocked.


Schools Can Build on Apprentice Programs; A New York Project
To the Editor:
Apprenticeship programs for high school students are more than "a tonic for the nation's ailing economy" (front page, Nov. 26).
They are a tonic for the country's ailing schools.
The comment you quote by the mother of one student tells it all: "I'm shocked. This is the first time I've ever seen a school program work."


Japanese Electronics In Slump
Japan's electronics industry, once considered nearly unstoppable, is now suffering from its worst slump since World War II, according to new figures released by the industry's main trade association.
Production of all electronics equipment in Japan fell an estimated 10.6 percent in 1992 from 1991, the first double-digit decline since World War II, the Electronics Industries Association of Japan said in a report released this week.
The trade group also predicted that the industry's output would grow a scant 1.5 percent in 1993.


INSIDE
Israel Denies Deportees Aid
A divided Israeli Cabinet refused to let the Red Cross take food and water to 415 Palestinians deported to Lebanon by Israel last week.
Page 5.
U.N.
Officer Accuses Bosnia
A United Nations general says Bosnian troops fired on his residence in Sarajevo because he opposes Western military intervention.
Page 4.
A Gloomy Japanese Industry
Japan's electronics makers, once considered nearly unbeatable, now say their industry is having its worst slump since World War II.
Page 37.
Longshoremen's Chief Dies
Thomas William (Teddy) Gleason, who led American longshoremen for 24 years, has died at 92.
Page 10.


Robert Marshak Funeral
The funeral for Dr.
Robert Marshak, a former president of the City College of New York and an expert on theoretical physics, will be held at 2 P.M. tomorrow at Parsky Funeral Home in Rochester.
The family requests that any donations be made to the Robert Marshak Memorial Scholarship Fund at the City University of New York.
Dr.
Marshak, 76, died Wednesday while swimming on a vacation with his family in Cancun, Mexico.


A FRENCH GENERAL SEES BOSNIAN PLOT
Citing two mortar attacks on United Nations military headquarters, the French commander of the international peace force here said today that Bosnian Government troops were trying to kill the two top-ranking United Nations officers in the former Yugoslav republics because the generals strongly oppose Western intervention.
The commander, Maj.
Gen.
Philippe Morillon, said he saw a link between the attacks Thursday and again today on the United Nations villa and the Security Council debate whether to authorize the United States and European nations to enforce a ban on military flights over Bosnia.


Americans and French Move Into a Sixth Somali Town


A SHARP REBOUND IN CHRISTMAS SALES
It was a hair-raising holiday season for many of the nation's retailers: sales started out strong, dropped off precipitously and finally skyrocketed the last weekend before Christmas.
Most merchants say their holiday business improved this year despite the ups and downs caused by unusually nasty weather and news of more layoffs and revampings among America's blue-chip companies.


Christmas Is as Usual At Clintons'
Bill Clinton may be President-elect now, but his Christmas holiday included the same ingredients they always have -- family, last-minute shopping and privacy.
The shopping came in a hurried four-hour Christmas Eve expedition through shops and a west Little Rock mall with his 12-year-old daughter, Chelsea, and Webb Hubbell, a family friend and law partner of Mr.
Clinton's wife, Hillary.


The Top 10 for Small-Company Growth
Small company funds lagged during most of the 80's when the market was dominated by big stocks.
The cycle began turning in 1990 and took hold last year, when the group returned an average of 51.6 percent, according to Lipper Analytical Services in Summit, N.J.
They small-company funds have continued their winning streak this year, returning 9.8 percent, nearly twice the average equity fund, though Dec. 10.
These cycles have historically lasted about 8 to 12 years.


CHRONICLE
LESTER POLLACK, who is president of the Jewish Community Centers Association, has been elected chairman of the Conference of Major American Jewish Organizations.
Mr.
Pollack, 59, who lives in Rye, N.Y., will serve a one-year term, succeeding SHOSHANA S. CARDIN of Baltimore.
The presidents' conference comprises the leaders of 50 national Jewish secular and religious groups.


Review/Dance; Wanderer Returns Briefly to City Ballet
Ethan Stiefel, at 19, was very much a young man most likely to succeed at the New York City Ballet.
His blend of energy and classical form stood out in the company's Diamond Project last spring, and he distinguished himself in leading roles in George Balanchine's ballets.
But Mr.
Stiefel was nowhere to be seen in the company's single week of repertory in November; much to everyone's surprise, the City Ballet's rising star left the company in the summer to join the Zurich Ballet in Switzerland, declaring that he desired a wider repertory.


To the Barricades! More P. D. Q. Bach Disinterred
As New Yorkers brace for the year's unraveling, to the annual strains of P. D. Q. Bach at Carnegie Hall, they have reason for heightened anguish.
Fliers announcing the concerts tonight, Monday and Wednesday at 8 P.M. show what seems to be a Prussian marching band in epaulets and spiked helmets.
What's scary is that all bear the unmistakable likeness of Prof.
Peter Schickele, the relentless discoverer of P. D. Q. Bach.


A World From Scratch
Will the new era be dominated by regional alliances and economic pacts or by a renewal of global and multilateral institutions?
The 1990's are shaping up as a struggle between these rival international orders.
So far, regional relationships -- in Europe, North America and elsewhere -- have the upper hand.
The emerging world order looks like an old house: new rooms, windows and doors have been added, but the foundation, plumbing and wiring remain in dangerous disrepair.
There is a need to make regional economic experiments complement, not compete, with multilateralism.
This requires agreement among the major nations about a blueprint of a new world order.


To Lease, or Not to Lease?
It may be cheaper to lease a car than buy it -- depending on how long you want to keep it.
Page 35.  [ Photo ]


Schools Can Build on Apprentice Programs
To the Editor:
By describing the experience of two Boston students in Project ProTech, you present a convincing case for apprentice programs in your "Finding What Works" series (front page, Nov. 26).
As an educator who coordinates an apprenticeship program for high school students, I concur about the value of a supervised work experience.
However, I am concerned that such an expensive program (Project ProTech costs the taxpayer $8,000 a student per year) has the limited goal of "placing people in particular jobs." I regard this approach as a missed opportunity.


Trevino Is Encouraged After Thumb Surgery
After having career-threatening surgery on his left thumb last week in Connecticut, LEE TREVINO finds his fortunes on the rise.
Originally expecting his absence from competition to last for at least four months, the 53-year-old Trevino has been medically cleared to play as early as the Senior Skins Game, the final weekend of January.


Bridge
Virtually no competitive bridge will be played this weekend, with minds on merriment.
That was not true, however, on Election Day last month, when minds were presumably on politics.
The diagramed deal was played then, in a 30-table duplicate game in Kay's Duplicate Club in White Plains.
North and South were Charles Greeley of Larchmont, N.Y., and Lilo Hutzler of Scarsdale N.Y., who climbed to four spades.
The three-diamond cue-bid by North was a Stayman-substitute following the two-diamond overcall.


Mining Agency Acts For Environment
To the Editor:
Regarding "U.S. Mine Inspectors Charge Interference by Agency Director" (front page, Nov. 22), your report of accusations of interference by me in administering the Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act, there is less to it than meets the eye.


In Chicago, Knicks Go as Cold as the North Pole
After being battered end-to-end for much of the first half tonight, the Chicago Bulls gave the Knicks 24 minutes of their own bitter defensive medicine, rallying for an 89-77 victory at Chicago Stadium.
First, Michael Jordan scored 10 points as the Bulls used a 12-0 run to erase a 10-point Knicks halftime lead.
Then the Bulls smothered the Knicks, holding them to a season-low 13 points in the third quarter and just 15 in the fourth as they evened the season series between the teams at one game apiece.
The Knicks' 29 points in the first quarter bettered their total for the second half, which amounted to a season low.


Hedging Currency Risk In World Income Funds
CONSERVATIVE investors fleeing their low-yielding certificates of deposit and money markets discovered this fall that foreign bond and income funds make flimsy shelters once the currency wars begin to rage.
In several funds, European devaluations wiped out the year's income.
But can those willing to brave some monetary skirmishes still capture generous foreign yields and the gains that are likely as those yields fall?
The key might be to find a fund that hedges some of the exchange risk, or invests in the most stable currencies, without giving away all the higher returns.


New Jersey Bell's Future Linked to New Services
For New Jersey Bell, winning approval this week from state regulators to install a $1.5 billion fiber-optic network and operate with new competitive freedoms may turn out to be the easy part.
A new struggle looms larger: Can the phone company persuade New Jersey residents to sign up for a host of new services to help pay for the new network?
The offerings are expected to include so-called interactive video services like educational networks that would enable people to take classes, as well as video services providing virtually instant access to a library of television programs.


L.I.'s Shinnecock Tribe Considers Giving Women the Vote
Almost two months after Roberta Hunter became the first American Indian elected to the town board here, she is still trying to convince the men of her tribe to let her vote when they gather next April to choose the tribe's leaders.
On the 800-acre Shinnecock Indian Reservation, Ms.
Hunter's victory has highlighted a 200-year-old practice that has barred women from participating in the annual election for the tribe's three trustees.


Battle With Poverty In Hartford Schools
The principal of an elementary school in Hartford's North End testified in Superior Court here this week that of his 580 pupils, only 17 do not qualify for free lunches.
A first-grade bilingual teacher at a second school testified that years after Puerto Rican children leave her class, they have learned neither Spanish nor English, and "cannot complete a single sentence in one language."


Q &amp; A
Second-to-Die Policies  Q I have heard that it is possible to convert a life insurance policy into a survivorship policy for a much larger sum and not add much to the premium.
Is this true and what are the advantages of such a policy?
GEORGE FOWLKES, MANHATTAN.


Jobs Without Hope -- A special report; Solid Jobs Seem to Vanish Despite Signs of Recovery
The nation's economy is staggering out of the recession, say most of the gauges that measure it, but people who are getting jobs again tell a sobering story.
Many good factory jobs and white-collar office jobs with good wages and benefits are giving way to unstable and mediocre jobs.
That makes this recovery different from any other.


Thomas Gleason, 92, Head of Longshoremen, Dies
Thomas W. (Teddy) Gleason, who as president of the International Longshoremen's Association for 24 years held an iron grip on the docks of both the Atlantic and Gulf coasts, only to see that grip pried open by containerized shipping, died on Thursday at Cabrini Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 92.
Mr.
Gleason, who lived in Manhattan, was in the hospital's coronary care unit when he died.
But a hospital spokeswoman, Gisele Roberge, could not provide the exact cause of death.


Rename Public School For Its Slain Principal
To the Editor:
I watched with tears in my eyes as the children and parents of Public School 15 in Brooklyn expressed their feelings of shock and loss over the death of their principal, Patrick Daly, shot to death when caught in a housing project gun battle.
He was a lone, shining star in a blighted urban neighborhood America has forgotten.


Corrections
An article on Dec. 13 about visiting Hong Kong with children misstated the value of the Hong Kong dollar in United States money.
The Hong Kong dollar is equivalent to about 13 American cents, not 7.


No to Managed Plan
To the Editor:
Contrary to your Dec. 2 and 3 editorials, managed competition is not the answer to America's health care problems.
Yes, America's health care system is sick, but forcing people into competing health maintenance organizations and other networks will not cure the patient.


Conversations/Shari Lewis; Lamb Chop's Old Pal Hasn't Changed But She Says Childhood Has
THE ponytail has been replaced by a halo of red curls, the face is more matron than moppet, but Shari Lewis, back on her own television show after 30 years, is as perky as ever.
And Lamb Chop, the sock puppet with the marvelously mushy mouth, is as much of a pleasure to the children watching her now as she was to their parents.


A Tighter Belt for Europe's Welfare States
AFTER the Los Angeles riots last April, President Francois Mitterrand of France irked Americans by suggesting that the violence was the price the United States had to pay for putting profits before compassion.
"These riots show that the social needs of any country must not be neglected," the President opined with an unmistakable hint of Gallic smugness.
His remarks reflected a general conviction here that the United States practices a callous kind of capitalism by the standards of Europe, where social safety nets, developed after World War II, are elaborate.


Trees and Their Beauty Get 'Second Life'
CRUSTY boards, tree burls and branches have been transformed into vessels and furniture with sensuously smooth surfaces in an exhibition at the Trenton City Museum.
Selecting the wood is a vital consideration, almost an obsession, for the craft artists who made the objects.
Graining sets up parallel lines or concentric rings, while exotic woods produce subtle color harmonies.
Some woodworkers even value the imperfections: knotholes and cracks with jagged edges become a major focus of their designs.


If You're Thinking of Living in: Silvermine
THE Silvermine River separating Wilton from New Canaan, and the neighborhood that bears its name, were named for an 18th- century mine that may never have existed.
Legends persist that it was on Comstock Hill and provided ore for making coins after the Revolution, or that it was in the basement of a house where the miners stashed their rum and got so drunk so often that their wives blew the house up.


IN SHORT: FICTION
DREAM MESSENGER By Masahiko Shimada. Kodansha, $22.


The High Tatra's Wild Beauty
IT must be admitted that the social amenities of Czechoslovak winter resorts are not yet organized on anything like the luxurious lines of those of the most famous in Switzerland and France." So says "Czechoslovakia, the Land and Its People," by Clive Holland, a guidebook published by Dodd, Mead in 1931. But, the author concedes, the High Tatra area is "fully equalling the lower Alps in its grandeur and natural beauty."
More than 60 years and a stunning run of modern politics have not made much of an impact either on the wild and rugged beauty of the mountains or on the offerings of the resorts now run by the state.
After the Alps, the Tatra are Central Europe's highest mountains, and the eastern republic of Slovakia, soon to be independent, shares the 16-mile-long range with Poland to the north.
The necklace of resorts tucked into its foothills still tend more to the basic than to the elegant.


1992: THE BEST OF THE YEAR
BEST ATHLETE: Michael Jordan 2. Monica Seles 3. Dave Winfield


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-18  SERBS BLAST THEIR OWN HOMES


New Exhibits in Rome, Naples
Visitors to Italy have a chance to see two new exhibits, one in Rome, "Nuevo Mundo! 1492-1992," the other in Naples, "In Search of Isis," which inaugurates five rooms in the National Archeological Museum.
The exhibition in Rome, at the Braccio di Carlo Magno in St.
Peter's Square, brings together paintings, sculptures, manuscripts, historical documents and maps from Colombia, Paraguay, Ecuador, Peru, Mexico, the Vatican Museums, the Papal Galleries and the Vatican library.


Miranda Richardson: Running From Typecasters
After years of resistance, Miranda Richardson has graciously agreed to become a movie star.
It isn't easy for her.
She hates crowds, photographers and interviews.
She is not particularly fond, either, of having to talk her way across America -- to plug her new movies, "Damage" and "The Crying Game." She refuses to discuss her personal life ("that's why they call it personal" ), and she thinks prattling on about her craft diminishes it.


Shared Meters
To the Editor:
The Q &amp;A column on Nov. 1 contained an incomplete and potentially misleading discussion of shared electric meters.


Save the Cambodia Peace
The ambitious United Nations effort to make Cambodia viable is in trouble.
As usual, the Khmer Rouge responds with armed intransigence.
But thuggish elements of the Phnom Penh Government are also intimidating political opponents, jeopardizing chances for truly free elections.
And U.N. officials, instead of seeking a strengthened mandate for peace enforcement, seem reluctant to use their existing authority.


Taking a Hard New Look at Trip Insurance
NEW YORK STATE is moving to tighten up regulation of travel insurance, particularly the rates charged for this temporary coverage.
The state's long-term goal, in the words of Richard C. Hsia, Deputy Superintendent of Insurance, is to see that policies are not overpriced or unreasonably restricted.
"It is a commonplace type of insurance," he said "and people who want this protection should be able to buy it without being ripped off."
New York claims jurisdiction over insurance policies that are "delivered" in the state, a definition that covers a policy bought by a resident of any state in a New York travel agency or one sent through the mail to the home of a state resident, even if it was bought by phone from an out-of-state travel agency.


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ended Dec. 12 MANHATTAN  Carnegie Hill  $150,000
55 East 93d Street  (Alamo)  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 520-sq.-ft. condo in a prewar building; elevator, renovated kitchen and bath, 10-ft. ceilings, 2 exposures; common charge $308, 100% tax-abated (Broker: Carnegie Hill Properties)  Greenwich Village  $163,976
115 East 9th Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,200-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, dining area, 2 exposures; maintenance $1,160 (Broker: J.I. Sopher Co.)  Upper East Side  $600,000
205 East 69th Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,250-sq.-ft. prewar penthouse co-op; 24-hr. doorman, dining area, 1,800-sq.-ft. terrace, 2 fireplaces; maintenance $1,750, 47% tax-deductible (Broker: Corcoran Group)  Upper West Side  $312,000
130 West 79th Street  (Austin)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,000-sq.-ft. condo in a 5-year-old building; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, 2 balconies; common charge $510, taxes $2,400 (Broker: Klara Madlin Real Estate)  Upper West Side  $310,000
607 West End Avenue (89th St.)  2-bedroom, 3-bath, 1,800-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; manned elevator, dining room, 3 exposures; maintenance $1,489, 36% tax-deductible (Broker: Hunt-Kennedy, Inc.)  BRONX  Riverdale  $97,000
3415 Netherland Avenue  (Riverdale Park)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 920-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; elevator, eat-in kitchen, 3 exposures; maintenance $647, 52% tax-deductible (Broker: Charles G. Brophy)  Wakefield  $157,000
4042 Murdock Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, one-family attached brick house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, hospitality suite in finished basement, 1-car garage, 20- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,200 (Broker: Cancro Realty)  BROOKLYN  Ditmas Park  $385,000
1721 Ditmas Avenue  6-bedroom, 4-bath, one-family detached colonial; dining room, side staircase, den, fireplace, stained-glass windows, finished basement, 50- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $3,000 (Brokers: Wilke Realty-Perfect Choice Realty)  Fort Greene  $355,000
203 Washington Park  4-family, 5-story brownstone; 2 bedrooms, 2 baths in primary unit; 1 bedroom, 1 bath in others; dining area, den in each; full cellar, 21- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,600 (Brokers: Brooklyn Properties of 7th Avenue-Naida McSherry Realty)  Park Slope  $208,000
51 7th Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 1,800-sq.-ft. co-op in a brownstone; dining area, remodeled kitchen and baths, rear garden; maintenance $807, 77% tax-deductible (Broker: Warren Lewis Real Estate)  QUEENS  College Point  $134,000
5-08 Julius Road  (Silver Point Estates)  2-bedroom, 2-bath condo in a 3-year-old building; dining room, eat-in kitchen, pool, tennis club; common charge $90, taxes $192 (Broker: Century 21/Weber &amp; Rose)  Forest Hills  $35,000
99-45 67th Avenue  (Berkley)  600-sq.-ft. studio co-op; separate dressing area, raised dining alcove, south exposure; maintenance $222, 45% tax-deductible (Broker: Kraham Realty)  STATEN ISLAND  Huguenot  $93,000
111 Stack Drive  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,111-sq.-ft. condo in 8-year-old building; dining room, eat-in kitchen, laundry room; common charge $135, taxes $1,175 (Broker: RE-MAX Preferred)  Tottenville  $120,000
357 Chelsea Street  3-bedroom, 1-bath, one-family detached colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, full basement, 1-car garage, 50- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,200 (Broker: Coldwell Banker/ DeSimone Realty)


Initial Study Clears Plant In Fatal Fire
A power plant where three workers died in a fire on Friday morning after failing to break through thick windows to escape appears to have had adequate safety features, according to a preliminary investigation by Newark fire officials.
Larry Krieger, a spokesman for the Newark Fire Department, said the O'Brian Newark Cogeneration Plant at 35 Blanchard Street "had fire-suppression systems, alternate exits and all the modern technology" for handling fire emergencies.


Housing List In New York Hits Record
The number of people waiting for New York Housing Authority apartments has risen to 240,000 families, the highest level ever and nearly equal to the total number of units in all of the city's public housing projects and subsidized apartments.
Based on the current vacancy rate of about 4.5 percent a year in Housing Authority apartments, those applying for housing today without priority consideration could face a 20-year wait for one of the estimated 8,000 units that become available annually.


County's Influence in the State Assembly
WHEN the seven-member Westchester Assembly delegation goes to Albany next month, it will include more Democrats and more women than ever before.
Their agenda is still being fine tuned, but the delegation's new profile suggests stronger support for suburban school aid and transportation financing and a variety of women's issues.
Last week, the four freshmen Democrats shuttled between Albany and Westchester, finding lodgings (the closer to the Thruway, the closer to home), setting up offices in both locations (staff money is tight even if you are in the majority) and attending orientations on such subjects as how to draft a bill and how to work electronic voting monitors. (If you don't press a button voting "no," the machine automatically votes "yes.")


Study Finds Soil Tainted By Lead in a Playground
Frustrated by the direction taken in New York City's investigation of lead contamination in soil beneath the Williamsburg Bridge in Brooklyn, a group of residents and experts have conducted their own tests and discovered extremely high levels of lead in soil in a park beneath the bridge in Manhattan.
The tests by disgruntled members of a mayoral panel studying lead contamination found concentrations of lead in nine locations in the East River Park on the Lower East Side that far exceed the levels that the Federal Government considers safe for children.


Storm's Aftermath: Federal Funds Due
COUNTY officials were drumming their fingers on desks and pacing the floors last week as they waited for word from the White House that Westchester, along with other areas of the state, would be eligible for Federal disaster aid.
The good news finally came, and emergency disaster plans that had been laid out in detail -- in anticipation of President Bush's declaration -- went speedily into effect.


Will Darkened Theaters Imperil a State Tradition?
IT is a well-known theater story.
After a performance of "Green Grow the Lilacs," by Lynn Riggs at the Westport Country Playhouse one summer night in 1939, Theresa Helburn, the producer, had a brainstorm: make it into a musical.
Four years later, the musical retitled "Away We Go!" had its world premiere at the Shubert in New Haven where Richard Rodgers and Oscar Hammerstein 2d, in their first collaboration, had the title changed yet again, this time to "Oklahoma!"
Then there's the one about Moss Hart when he was a director suffering Broadway opening-night jitters.
"It's just a New Haven hit. That's all. Just a New Haven hit," Mr.
Hart said, panicking.
The show was "My Fair Lady" and the year was 1956.


Where Credit Is Due
To the Editor:
The wonderfully vibrant photograph of a young John F. Kennedy at a birthday party for his sister Eunice, which accompanied your review of Nigel Hamilton's "JFK: Reckless Youth" (Nov. 22), was credited: Peter Hunter/Magnum (likewise on the book jacket).
This implies that the photograph was taken by Mr.
Hunter.
In fact, it was taken by Erich Salomon, father of Mr.
Hunter, who inherited many of his father's pictures.


TRANSACTIONS
Basketball National Basketball Association  PHOENIX SUNS -- Activated Kevin Johnson, guard.
Waived Alex Stivrins, forward.
Football National Football League  CLEVELAND BROWNS -- Placed Tommy Vardell, fullback, on injured reserve.
Activated Keenan McCardell, wide receiver, and Ken Swilling, linebacker, from the practice squad.
Waived Latin Berry, cornerback.


Women Regain a Kind of Security in Islam's Embrace
THE Koran, the eternal and literal words of God for all Muslims, has this to say about women:


Clinton Turning to New Yorkers
Just a few months ago, the Vice President of the United States came to New York, not to praise, but to berate and in fact to ridicule the place where Democrats would nominate their Presidential candidate.
"In so many ways," Dan Quayle said last June, "the liberal Democrats chose the perfect site for their convention, almost as if they feel a strange compulsion to return to the scene of the crime."


Julia Douglass, Martin Kihn
Julia Kristin Douglass, a daughter of William and Kay Douglass of Monticello, Minn., was married yesterday to Martin Theodore Kihn, a son of Dr.
Ronald Kihn and Dr.
Patricia Kihn of Washington.
The Rev.
Charles Amstein performed the ceremony at the Madison Avenue Presbyterian Church in New York.
Mrs.
Douglass-Kihn, 29, is a singer and a songwriter in New York.
She graduated from the University of Minnesota and received a master's degree in music from Yale University.
Her father is a music teacher at North Junior High School in Hopkins, Minn.
Her mother is the principal of Pinewood Elementary School in Monticello.


Little People On the Avenue
Dressing up the children for Christmas and Hanukkah promenades on Fifth Avenue is traditional.
While candy-colored parkas have become a national uniform for children, some are learning the delight of fashion dressing.
Most popular is the ensemble of dressmaker coat, hat and muff.
Then there are the long, smock-shaped down coats in solid colors or flowered patterns.
For novelty there are marabou-feathered jackets and headbands; for two little Miss Muffets, fake-fur tippets add class.
One junior sophisticate sported a gold-quilted parka, another a gold leather jeans jacket with hat to match, Chanel bag and leather skirt.
But fashion could not match the pleasure tots found in a puppet display on Madison Avenue where they could pull the strings themselves.


The Winners and (Many) Losers of '92
A year ago, the seers thought 1992 would be a year in which unity would prevail in Europe and George Bush in the American elections.
Neither bet, it turned out, proved a winner.
But there were winners -- and a lot of losers, too -- justifying the following awards.
There will, unfortunately, be no awards ceremony.
Teflon Award


He Keeps Going and Going And Even Looking Perfect
Vince Evans, who has a 9-to-5 job waiting for him at home, could do the ultimate.
At age 37, he could walk away from football having thrown a touchdown on his final pass.
"I won't," he said.


Paella That's Easy to Prepare for a Party
FOR people who entertain, this week is the last chance of the year.
It offers a final few days to invite, greet and feed friends, acquaintances and, while you are at it, those whose status is simply that of social obligation.
And for people who usually do not entertain, this week is the last chance to make a showing in 1992.
Whichever category you are in, the week calls for a party.
Unless you engage a well-staffed caterer, a certain amount of work is unavoidable.
The most pragmatic approach is the bountiful buffet.
It can be anchored by a smoked turkey or turkey breast from a good butcher or catering shop.
And it should be flanked by three or four grain and vegetable salads, purchased or homemade.


'Real' Environmentalists Support Nuclear Power
To the Editor:
Citizen Action says that we should rely on natural gas for electricity and that "solar and wind energy are now competitive" ("A Slate for Clean Energy," Viewpoints, Dec. 6).
Solar and wind are not competitive even with huge Federal and state subsidies.
Almost all planned electric generating stations will burn natural gas.
What President-elect Clinton will soon come to know is that when the price of natural gas takes off, the voters will be furious.


The Serbs Pick Milosevic, and the World Is Baffled


Take the A Train
Amy Sheldon regularly hits both the top and the bottom of the scales.
As a sometime vocalist for the Peter Duchin Orchestras, Ms.
Sheldon can often be found doing her favorite jazz numbers at upper-crust parties.
But in between she's likely to be found on a subway platform, singing for passers-by.


Hawaii's Gentle Throwback
SIXTEEN years ago, in one of those boondoggles for which Hawaii is infamous, then Gov.
John Burns had an international airport built in Hilo.
The idea was to attract jumbo jets full of mainland and Japanese tourists direct to this lush historic city that hugs a crescent-shaped bay at the foot of two mammoth volcanoes on the Big Island of Hawaii.
But the airport's long corridors and runways are mostly quiet now.
The expected armies of tourists never came, bypassing Hilo for the sunny dry Kona coast of the Big Island, with its glittery new condominiums, hotel developments, golf courses and high prices.
The problem with Hilo is rain, roughly 130 inches, 280 days or so a year.
One no more leaves home in Hilo without an umbrella than without shoes.
Visitors and residents stroll through the quaint downtown of old wooden clapboard and stucco buildings under corrugated tin overhangs that cover the sidewalks.
The warm tropical rains come and go during the day, on and off, then are heavy and steady during the night, the year round.
The patter of drops outside becomes as familiar as chirping birds, something local people screen out as New Yorkers do honking taxicabs.
"What Rain?" asks a button distributed by the Hawaii Island Chamber of Commerce.


'Sinatra' Scores, 'Bridge' Buckles, And Dennehy Does It Again (and Again)
The Sound of Music -- Blockbuster ratings for CBS's "Sinatra" and ABC's "Jacksons" get the mini-series dancing again.
Wildest and Craziest Fact-Fiction Debate -- J. Danforth Quayle versus "Murphy Brown."


Suzanne Wiener, Seth H. Diamond
Mr. and Mrs.
Howard A. Wiener of Allentown, Pa., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Suzanne Enid Wiener, to Seth H. Diamond, a son of Eleanor Diamond of York, Pa., and the late David Diamond.
An April wedding is planned.


Some Serbian Gunners Shell Their Own Sarajevo Homes
At noon today, a young man named Sasha stood by the dug-in Serbian tank, its gun barrel pointing out from one of the hills overlooking Sarajevo, and shook his head in dismay at the devastation that he and hundreds of other gunners have inflicted on the city that was their home.
"I feel bad, very bad," he said in English.
"I love my city. It breaks my heart every time I fire. But we didn't want this war. It is not our guilt that it began, and now that it has, we must defend our people."


Offering Immigrants From Russia Insights on Life in America
THE spirited discussion, which covered the Iran-contra affair, former President Nixon's role in the Watergate scandal, the Communist Party, tensions in Crown Heights and the jury system, was nearly as biting as the bitter cold on a chilly Sunday morning.
In an auditorium at the Montefiore Medical Center here, six adults met with Edward Beliaev, a lecturer from the School of Public and International Affairs of the Harriman Institute at Columbia University to discuss differences between the former Soviet Union's political system and that of the United States.


Sports of the Times; Will the Jets Lower Boomer on Nagle?
IN a season devoted to discovering the world according to Browning Nagle, the Jets learned the world was as flat as their 4-12 record.
By the time training camp opens, look for the Jets to have imported an experienced quarterback, possibly Norman (Boomer) Esiason, to compete with Nagle for next season's job.
Whichever quarterback rises to the occasion in the exhibition games would open the season.


It's Not Italy, but a Reasonable Facsimile
VESPA is a short, snappy name that says Italy.
This restaurant is so authentic that friends who recently returned from Italy felt that their vacation had been extended.
This little slice of southern Europe on Northern Boulevard in Great Neck occupies a long narrow storefront that is a mixture of cozy homeyness and elegance that comes from white tablecloths and fresh flowers.
A rack filled with food and wine magazines, cookbooks and European newspapers runs the length of one wall.
A picture of Milan with diners' sipping espresso while perusing the papers comes to mind.


With New Labor Deal, N.F.L. Owners Keep Baseball Peers Envious
In 1974, National Football League players went on strike with the battle cry "Freedom now" and wound up with a system of free agency that was a fraud.
Two years later, when major league baseball players negotiated a system of free agency after a court-affirmed arbitrator's decision, Ed Garvey, the man who negotiated the ineffective N.F.L. agreement for the players, ridiculed the baseball union for settling for less than the arbitrator had given the players.
Now, nearly two decades after the freedom-now strike, N.F.L. players finally have what they hope is a workable free-agency system.
The owners, however, must still know something the players don't know because they agreed to the system as they watched their baseball brethren reinforce their belief that free agency would be bad for their pocketbooks.


One Ballroom To Another
ON Tuesday night at 10 o'clock, the 1992 initiates of the 57th annual Debutante Cotillion and Christmas Ball formed a receiving line in the Grand Ballroom of the Waldorf-Astoria.
Looking like princess brides-in-training, 33 young women dressed in white gowns extended gloved hands to an endless assembly line of guests.
Debutantes learn that at a grand party one dances with both pleasure and pain.
Their feet hurt from standing too long in one place in heels.
Their stomachs were a little twisted at the prospect of the formal presentation ceremony they were to face at 11.
Their brains were a little fried from having to genteelly counter each little pleasantry hurled at them from the strangers passing by who were looking them over as if they were desserts on a buffet table.


Models Without Clothes, And Politics Without End
Hot Date of the Year -- Alfred Stieglitz and Georgia O'Keeffe, singly and together, were featured in shows on both coasts.
Best Campaign Photograph No One Ever Saw -- The "computer-manipulated picture" of his daughter that Ross Perot said Republican dirty tricksters threatened to release just before her wedding.
When Mr.
Perot told the story on "60 Minutes," he killed the momentum of his campaign.


Anne Bowers And Seth Ward
Philippa S. Bowers of Charlottesville, Va., has announced the engagement of her daughter Anne Pendleton Bowers to Seth Crawford Ward, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Hugh C. Ward Jr. of Hamilton, Mass.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss Bowers, 31, is the marketing manager for D.B.I.
Architects, an interior architecture and design firm in Washington.
She graduated from the University of Virginia.
Her father, the late Alexander S. Bowers, founded and headed the Stewart Capital Corporation, a venture capital concern in New York.


Frankly, Giants Would Rather Be in Playoffs Than in Philadelphia
For many of the Giants, it all ends today in Philadelphia -- their lost season, the Giant careers of many older players from the Super Bowl years and, barring a miracle, the ill-fated two-year reign of Ray Handley as the head coach.
The Giants (6-9) will play the Eagles (10-5), who are headed for the National Football League playoffs and will play a wild-card game next weekend.
The Eagles have a 7-0 record at home this season and are 8 1/2-point favorites for the game (1 P.M., Channel 2).


Luciana Fato, Brian Curtis Erb
Luciana Fato and Brian Curtis Erb, associates at the New York law firm of Davis Polk &amp; Wardwell, were married yesterday in New York.
The Rev.
Walter F. Modrys performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of St.
Ignatius Loyola.


SOMALIA 1992
I found your photo essay on Somalia extremely moving.
But I was disturbed to find "women" on your list of "the most vulnerable," along with "children, the elderly and the sick." Will the myth of "the weaker sex" never die?
KAREN LUZ
Washington


Wall Street; Of Dental Technology Runups and Reality Checks
WALL STREET often wonders which stockholders fall into the proverbial category of "fool of the market." If recent investors in American Dental Laser Inc. ponder that question, they need look no farther than the mirror.
Shares of the dental technology company languished at about $3 until earlier this month when the Government approved a device that shoots aluminum particles at teeth to prepare them for fillings.
The stock almost quadrupled in three days on the news.


After 9 Deaths, the Enduring Scars at City College
On a recent weekend night, the orange doors to the Nat Holman Gymnasium at City College were locked shut, and an eerie silence permeated the stairwell leading up to a glassed-in lobby visible from the street.
It was at this spot a year ago tomorrow that nine young people were crushed to death and 34 others injured as they waited for a celebrity basketball game that turned into one of the deadliest failures of crowd control in American history.
The cascade of bodies that surged into the building that night for a game between teams of rap stars did more than squeeze the breath from nine people trapped in a narrow stairwell.
It left dozens of others stunned and confused for months afterward, ended the careers of several City College officials and pushed an institution already roiled by controversy into new bouts of introspection and self-doubt.


Knifings Fuel Old Tensions In Indian City
The professionals bearing knives struck in the maze of tiny lanes in the walled city, just as residents had begun to recover from more than two weeks of violence and curfews.
Five people were stabbed on Wednesday in different parts of the old city, which is dominated by Muslims, and the police imposed a curfew to prevent more clashes and possible retaliation by Hindus.


Results Plus
HOCKEY Canadian Juniors Shut Out Americans Canada scored its first two goals on the power play in a 3-0 victory yesterday over the United States in the opening game of the world junior ice hockey championships in Gavle, Sweden. (AP)


Nets Win Going Away, This Time at Cleveland
The New Jersey Nets.
Go figure.
No one can.
When they're in New Jersey, they play like they can't wait to get the game over so they can go play Nintendo.
When they're on the road, they play like champions.
This is the road, so you can guess which Nets team showed up today.
With forward Derrick Coleman playing some of his best basketball of the season (he tied his season high with 30 points), Kenny Anderson constantly finding the open man and Chris Morris hitting some key shots in the final minutes, New Jersey overwhelmed the Cleveland Cavaliers, 119-114, ending Cleveland's seven-game winning streak.
It was New Jersey's first victory here since 1986, and the Nets' 68 points in the second half is a season high.


Residents Take Over After City Dismisses Its Staff
Faced with the prospect of bankruptcy in September, the city laid off its entire municipal staff of six full- and six part-time workers.
It disbanded the police department and let the city's clerks, public works staff and librarian go.
But rather than plunge the town into a spiral of decay, the Draconian measures have energized the 1,650 people who live here.


Cashing In Big: The Bad Boys of Currency
FORGET about investment bankers.
Never mind the arbs.
The bad guys this year were the currency traders.
George Soros and his ilk are said to have sailed off with plunder even the pirates at Drexel might have envied.
"During the French Revolution such speculators were known as 'agioteurs' and they were beheaded," said Michel Sapin, the French finance minister.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
MOSCOW MEETS MADISON AVENUE The Adventures of the First American Adman in the U.S.S.R.
By Gary Burandt with Nancy Giges.
Harper Business, $22.50.


Corrections
Because of a computer coding error, the Paperback Fiction Best Seller List on page 20 of The Times Book Review today ranks six books incorrectly.
"The Waste Lands" by Stephen King should be No. 2, not 7; the titles shown as 2 through 6 should each appear one position lower.


Fast-Forward to 1993: What's On, Who's Off and What's Still Fuzzy
A look back at 1993, courtesy of my crystal cathode-ray tube: JAN. 2 At Bill Parcells's first news conference as the head coach of the New York Giants, WWOR/Channel 9's Russ Salzberg asks, "Who's gonna be your quarterback?" After 30 minutes of invective by Parcells, the news media applauds Parcells's oratory.
MSG Network's Bob Page says: "The stumblebum didn't walk out on us like Handley."


On Sunday; Cottonwood Finds It Has Good Friends
LAST spring, at a symposium about trees that fall on people, state officials warned of the growth of hazardous-tree lawsuits.
This got foresters in the State Department of Environmental Conservation office near here thinking.
For 293 years the historic Balmville tree had not fallen on anyone; it might be due.
This magnificent cottonwood with an 8-foot diameter stands at the intersection of three busy roads.
It's quite beloved and is one of 65 trees in New York designated "historic." The Balmville tree has its own trust fund established years ago by the citizenry.
Twice a year it has a complete check up.
Though it has lived four times its life expectancy, the tree still produces a full crown of leaves and is not diseased.
An 1870 news account called it "the noble specimen," and that is still how people regard it.


YUGOSLAV PREMIER CONCEDES TO RIVAL
After arguing for days that Serbian presidential elections held last Sunday should be voided because of fraud, Yugoslavia's Prime Minister today congratulated his opponent, Serbia's incumbent President, Slobodan Milosevic, on his overwhelming victory.
"I am convinced that the democratic process, so strongly expressed in these elections, will never be halted by anything and that it will further develop and strengthen for the benefit of the people of Serbia and Yugoslavia," Mr.
Panic, said in a telegram to Mr.
Milosevic.


Demystifying Racing's Independent Champion
Maybe now, Alan Kulwicki won't have to explain it anymore.
Now, perhaps those well-heeled team owners will stop wondering why Kulwicki refused their job offers, preferring to struggle with his own team, fighting to survive long enough to turn it into the championship outfit it now is.


Russian Economic Reform Loses a Friend in Ousted Gaidar
To the Editor:
In "No More Radical Reform" (Op-Ed, Dec. 15), David M. Kotz writes about the ouster of Russia's acting Prime Minister, Yegor T. Gaidar, and the apparent end of Russia's shock therapy approach to economic reform.
Professor Kotz judges Mr.
Gaidar's term a failure and states that the West should have no regrets over his departure.
I believe this appraisal of Russian economic reform is misleading.


Hawaii's Gentle Throwback
SIXTEEN years ago, in one of those boondoggles for which Hawaii is infamous, then Gov.
John Burns had an international airport built in Hilo.
The idea was to attract jumbo jets full of mainland and Japanese tourists direct to this lush historic city that hugs a crescent-shaped bay at the foot of two mammoth volcanoes on the Big Island of Hawaii.
But the airport's long corridors and runways are mostly quiet now.
The expected armies of tourists never came, bypassing Hilo for the sunny dry Kona coast of the Big Island, with its glittery new condominiums, hotel developments, golf courses and high prices.
The problem with Hilo is rain, roughly 130 inches, 280 days or so a year.
One no more leaves home in Hilo without an umbrella than without shoes.
Visitors and residents stroll through the quaint downtown of old wooden clapboard and stucco buildings under corrugated tin overhangs that cover the sidewalks.
The warm tropical rains come and go during the day, on and off, then are heavy and steady during the night, the year round.
The patter of drops outside becomes as familiar as chirping birds, something local people screen out as New Yorkers do honking taxicabs.
"What Rain?" asks a button distributed by the Hawaii Island Chamber of Commerce.


Raiders Put Redskins In Danger
Obsessed with the past, Raiders owner Al Davis gallivanted around his team's locker room this evening, comparing Vince Evans to George Blanda, the team's onetime ageless wonder.
Davis had reason to strut, for Evans, 37 years old and previously more famous for his days with the Chicago Blitz, had just engineered a two-minute drill that may end up haunting Washington for a long time.
Evans's 3-yard touchdown bullet to Tim Brown with 13 seconds left in the game elevated a makeshift group of Raiders to a 21-20 upset victory over the Redskins that may have cut off the heads of the defending Super Bowl champions.
The Redskins (9-7) can only make the National Conference playoffs if Green Bay loses to the Vikings Sunday in Minneapolis.


Ms. Hunnewell, Antonio Weiss
Mr. and Mrs.
Francis O. Hunnewell of Wellesley, Mass., have announced the engagement of their daughter Susannah Gordon Hunnewell to Antonio Francesco Weiss, the son of Carole Severson Weiss of New York and Piero E. Weiss of Baltimore.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Hunnewell, 26 years old, is a news clerk at The New York Times.
She graduated from Harvard University, where her fiance is a candidate for an M.B.A.
Her father is an investment banker at Oakes, Woodward &amp; Company in Boston.
Her mother, Elizabeth M. Hunnewell, is a freelance writer in Wellesley.


Guggenheim Hits (the Restaurant) And Misses (the Opening in SoHo), Matisse Triumphant at the Modern
Autumn Colors -- During an extraordinary fall season that included Ribera at the Metropolitan, Agnes Martin at the Whitney, Susan Rothenberg in Buffalo, Ellsworth Kelly in Washington and Pissarro in Dallas, Matisse at the Museum of Modern Art will be remembered above all.
A landmark.
The Show That Ate Kassel -- The much-awaited, much-hyped Documenta 9 in Kassel, Germany, was the year's biggest dud, while the selection of Louise Bourgeois to represent the United States at next year's Venice Biennale renewed interest in these anachronistic international surveys.


Kelly Ann Boyce, Lyle Himebaugh
Kelly Ann Boyce, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John W. Boyce Jr. of Carmel, N.Y., was married in New York yesterday to Lyle Blystone Himebaugh 3d, a son of Anne Himebaugh-White of New York and the late Mr.
Himebaugh Jr.
The Rev.
Anne Benefield performed the Dutch Reformed ceremony at the Plaza.
Mrs.
Boyce-Himebaugh, 29, is an insurance and employee-benefits consultant at Professional Planners Group Inc., a financial-planning concern in New York.
She graduated from the State University at Oneonta, N.Y.
Her father is a business and industrial liaison with the Board of Cooperative Educational Services of Southern Westchester in Valhalla, N.Y.


Costly Task Remains To Repair Unsafe Dams
Ten years after flooding caused a dozen deaths in Connecticut and led to a statewide dam safety program, the state has about 150 dams under orders to be repaired or removed.
Municipalities and private owners will have to spend millions of dollars bringing their dams up to modern codes or rip them out and seed the dry lakebeds to prevent erosion.
And thousands of dams have yet to be inspected.


Foregone Conclusions
All the talk about Emma Thompson's Oscar chances has left her feeling somewhat ambivalent.
Ms.
Thompson, the British actress who stars with her husband, Kenneth Branagh, in the new film "Peter's Friends," is already considered a strong contender for a nomination for her role as the heroine in "Howards End."
"Of course, I've been squeezed into the Oscar bin, because you know there are no great roles in the American cinema for women to play," she said over a glass of cranberry juice last Sunday at the Mark Hotel.
"I'm really delighted to be considered, but it's sad that everybody's saying, 'Hers is the only really decent meaty women's role that there's been.' "


Big-City Rangers Are Yokels on Long Island
It has become routine for the Islanders to defeat the Rangers at Nassau Coliseum.
What is unusual is for the Rangers to look in their rear-view mirror to see the Islanders tailgating their back bumper at a high rate of speed on the Patrick Division Parkway.
That's what it amounts to following tonight's game, a 6-4 Islanders victory before a capacity crowd at Nassau Coliseum.
The Rangers have 40 points and have fallen to third place.
The Islanders have 36 points and have risen to fourth.
How low will the Rangers go?
How high can the Islanders fly?


RUSSIA TO REPLACE RESIDENCY PERMIT
The Soviet system of internal passports, introduced in 1932 as a means to control population movement and since declared unconstitutional, will be replaced in Russia by an identity card that does not show ethnic background, the newspaper Nezavisimaya Gazeta said today.
According to a law expected to be adopted this spring, Russians will also be able to register to live anywhere, once they arrange a written lease or buy a house, a break from centuries of restrictions on free movement within Russia that started in czarist times.


Natalie Klotz, Jerry Barbanel
Brenda and Lewis Klotz of Teaneck, N.J., have announced March wedding plans for their daughter Natalie Anne Klotz and Jerry F. Barbanel, the son of Raymond and Shirley Barbanel of Oceanside, L.I.
Ms.
Klotz, 28 years old, is a management associate for the credit-card division of Citicorp in Long Island City, Queens.
She and her fiance graduated from New York University.
She received an M.B.A. from Fordham University.
Mr.
Barbanel, 29, is an assistant district attorney in Manhattan.
He received a law degree from Hofstra University.


U.N.'s Top Troop Official Sees No Need for War Room
At a quarter to 10 one recent morning, Marrack I. Goulding, a sheaf of overnight cables in his hand, slumped down at the head of the table in his 36th-floor conference room and began another day commanding the United Nations' global army of 60,000 peacekeepers.
The Under Secretary General in charge of peacekeeping laconically forecast "a fairly horrendous day" and announced that the Khmer Rouge had seized a United Nations helicopter in Cambodia and kidnapped the peacekeepers on board, the latest in a series of such incidents.


Foreign Affairs; Bush's Ethical Manure
My problem with President Bush's self-described act of "honor, decency and fairness" is not that he pardoned a clatch of ex-officials involved in the Iran-contra affair, but that he pardoned their crimes.
I might well have pardoned former Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger and the others myself.
And if I were Bill Clinton, I would pardon George Bush in advance of any charges and quickly just to put this unseemly mess behind us and get on with the task of reconstructing America.


Wall Street; A Different Face on the L.B.O. Front
Sandra J. Horbach, 32, recently was named a general partner of Forstmann, Little &amp; Company, the leveraged buyout firm.
Ms.
Horbach's promotion, after five years at Forstmann, put her in a class of one among L.B.O. firms: no name-brand competitor boasts a woman among its general partners.
Ms.
Horbach recently spoke about the good, the bad and the ugly of operating in the male-dominated L.B.O. world.
Question: How did a Chinese and economics major from Wellesley College and Fudan University in Shanghai wind up working at a leveraged buyout firm?


Champions and Still Anonymous
They have never filed for free agency.
They have never been quoted through an agent.
Their names have never appeared in a boxscore, and chances are, and no best-seller list will ever include their unauthorized biographies.
Nevertheless, Joe Durso, Steve Radjeff, Wayne Davies and members of the New York Ultimate remain the Babe Ruths and Michael Jordans of their respective, but little-known, sports.


Renata Pompa, Donald Broderick
Mr. and Mrs.
Samuel Pompa of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter, Renata Pompa, to Donald Broderick, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
James J. Broderick of Port Orange, Fla.
A May wedding is planned.


World Markets; The Many Temptations of Chile
DEEP economic change has been wrought throughout Latin America -- Governments have created balanced budgets, low inflation and real growth, replacing deficits, hyperinflation and recession.
No country has produced more change and more results than Chile.
Analysts tout Argentina for its privatization program and Mexico for its free trade agreement with the United States, but Chile is the model of reform and stability.
Begun in the early 1980's under the military Government of Gen.
Augusto Pinochet, free-market reforms have been continued by the civilian Government of Patricio Aylwin.


Sylvia Brown, Fabrice Gaussen
Sylvia Elisabeth Anne Brown, the daughter of Capt. and Mrs.
Nicholas Brown of Baltimore and Newport, R.I., was married yesterday in Paris to Fabrice Edouard Gaussen, a son of Ambassador and Mrs.
Gerard Gaussen of Neuilly-sur-Seine, France, and Crans-sur-Sierre, Switzerland.
The Rev.
Philippe Bertrand performed the ceremony at the Eglise Reformee de St.-Esprit.
Mrs.
Gaussen was until recently the senior vice president in Paris for International Media Partners, a financial publishing company.
She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania, from which she also received a master's degree in international relations.
Her father, a retired captain in the United States Navy, is the executive director of the National Aquarium in Baltimore.
The bride's previous marriage ended in divorce, as did the bridegroom's.


Costly Task Remains To Repair Unsafe Dams
Ten years after flooding caused a dozen deaths in Connecticut and led to a statewide dam safety program, the state has about 150 dams under orders to be repaired or removed.
Municipalities and private owners will have to spend millions of dollars bringing their dams up to modern codes or rip them out and seed the dry lakebeds to prevent erosion.
And thousands of dams have yet to be inspected.


About Men; A Father's Rite
I took my son to Africa this year.
For three weeks my 20-year-old son and I explored the past and present of our people in Egypt and Ethiopia.
I wanted him to see what I regard as the land of his heritage; I wanted him to experience the ecstasy I felt on my first visit to Africa when I was in my 20's.
I had envisioned a kind of rite of passage for my son; what transpired between us became a turning point -- in our relationship, for me as his father and I hope for him as well.


The Executive Computer; Watching I.B.M., and Wondering Whether to Buy?
JOHN F. AKERS would probably agree with Queen Elizabeth II that 1992 was a horrid year.
Mr.
Akers's International Business Machines Corporation, once the king of the computer companies, has lost more than half its stock value this year and will report a second consecutive annual loss.
Its full-employment, no-layoff policy is history; its fat dividend on the chopping block.
The litany of I.B.M.'s woes has been recited to investors many times in recent weeks, in excruciating detail.
But what is the outlook for customers?
With the corporation in such disarray, does it make sense to pledge allegiance to Big Blue?


Bolshoi's 5 Weeks in London
London's Royal Albert Hall will be home to the Bolshoi Ballet from Jan. 9 through Feb. 14.
The entire Bolshoi company of 160 artists, including its principal dancers, will give 37 performances.
Its own designers will transform the Albert Hall, extending the stage halfway into the auditorium and creating a tableau depicting the opulent interior of the Bolshoi Theater.
The season will feature 13 classical ballets, providing a showcase for the full range of the Bolshoi's repertory, including "Romeo and Juliet," "The Nutcracker" and "Ivan The Terrible."


Citizens vs. the Giants
A citizens' group in San Francisco has begun a petition drive aimed at reversing $15 million in stadium lease concessions for the new owners of the San Francisco Giants, whose bid saved the team for the city.
About 40 people turned out for the kickoff of a monthlong signature- gathering drive organized by the Committee to Stop the Giveaway.
David Spero, an organizer, said the group needed about 19,500 valid signatures to qualify a referendum for the November 1993 ballot.


From Jeff Koons's Shaggy Dog To Picasso's Still Lifes, Sans Ego
Art's Best Friend -- Jeff Koons's gigantic "Puppy," a shaggy dog made entirely of flowers, and the biggest Chia Pet ever, which cast a shadow over the 1992 Documenta exhibition in Kassel, Germany, from the nearby town of Arolsen.
Starting Out in the 90's -- Without benefit of anointed art movements, several artists made impressive gallery debuts, including Jack Pierson at Tom Cugliani, Janine Antoni at Sandra Gering, Dennis Balk at American Fine Art and Thomas Trosch at Fiction/Nonfiction.


In the Region: Connecticut; Discounters Resound in the 'Quiet Corner'
NORTHEASTERN Connecticut has for many years been called "the quiet corner," and some uncharitable souls have gone so far as to tag it moribund.
But the 90's are bringing welcome activity to that quadrant of the state as retailers, particularly discounters, seek new markets and large, reasonably priced tracts.


Peeling Back the Layers of Veneered Furniture
MENDING veneered furniture is a picky job, one tailor-made for whiling away winter weekends.
Veneer on everyday furniture can usually be repaired by amateurs, even novices.
But fine veneered furniture, especially antiques, should be taken to a professional restorer.
To fix cracks, try rubbing them with an appropriately colored putty stick, although an ordinary crayon is often an effective substitute.
In both cases, choose a color that is slightly lighter than the surrounding wood.


Burying Women's Fight for Economic Equality
To the Editor:
Regarding "Economics as if Women Mattered" (At Work, Dec. 13), if women mattered, the article would not have been on page 25 -- just after Hollywood downsizing its corporate Christmas list and just before the want ads.
Let's hope President-elect Clinton ranks the economic equality of women somewhat higher on the priorities list than last place.
KAREN MANCHESTER  New York, Dec. 14


Skunks Show Early Signs of Comeback on L.I.
WHAT is black and white and smells all over?
The skunk has returned to Long Island, and although that may be good news to scientists, it could mean trouble for residents who own dogs.


Keeper of the Flame
Alice Waters has been called Earth Mother and Mother of the New American Cusine.
She's been called a genius, a perfectionist, indefatigable, precious and fey.
But the 48-year-old former Montessori teacher who opened Chez Panisse restaurant in Berkeley, Calif., 21 years ago has never been called a firebrand.
And yet a certain spark illuminates her blue eyes when the subject of winter cooking is raised.
She fidgets.
She speaks of fire and grills and coals and cauldrons.
Food ignites her particular brand of American fundamentalism, and when she expounds its tenets, she sounds like Cotton Mather reborn.
"If people had the patience to wait for tomatoes,
real
tomatoes,
vine-ripened
tomatoes, they would appreciate tomatoes and understand tomatoes and refuse to settle for anything less," she insists.


THE GUIDE
'MARTIN' THE MUSICAL
"Martin Guerre" has been adapted as a musical that opens at the Hartford Stage on Jan. 8 and runs through Feb. 6.
Previews are scheduled from Saturday through Jan. 7.


Peeling Back the Layers of Veneered Furniture
MENDING veneered furniture is a picky job, one tailor-made for whiling away winter weekends.
Veneer on everyday furniture can usually be repaired by amateurs, even novices.
But fine veneered furniture, especially antiques, should be taken to a professional restorer.
To fix cracks, try rubbing them with an appropriately colored putty stick, although an ordinary crayon is often an effective substitute.
In both cases, choose a color that is slightly lighter than the surrounding wood.


SURFACING
MUSIC --
Television-show soundtracks
: "Northern Exposure" has one.
So does "Murphy Brown" and "Beverly Hills 90210." Can umpteen new and tedious Grammy categories be far behind?
LEISURE --
Hollywood charades
: The road to narcissism need not be paved with sex and drugs.
To pass time in the 90's, chastened celebrities are turning to old-fashioned leisure activites, like charades, except instead of miming book or film titles, they're miming each other.
ECOLOGY --
Safe packaging:
Some manufacturers are replacing the white plastic fuzzies (known as popcorn) with eco-sound fuzzies that are either water-soluble (like a corn starch derivative) or compostable.


Mutual Funds; Yet Sweeter Deals for Directors
SOME say that it's Christmas all year round for the independent directors on mutual fund boards.
Now, there's a new ornament on their tree.
Independent directors -- paid $60,000 to $100,000 or more by the big fund groups for the four to eight meetings they attend each year -- are now getting generous retirement packages too, voted upon by the very boards to which they belong.


Thomas Gleason, 92, Who Led Longshoremen's Union, Is Dead
Thomas W. (Teddy) Gleason, who as president of the International Longshoremen's Association for 24 years held an iron grip on the docks of both the Atlantic and Gulf coasts, only to see that grip pried open by containerized shipping, died on Thursday at Cabrini Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 92.
Mr.
Gleason, who lived in Manhattan, was in the hospital's coronary care unit when he died.
But a hospital spokeswoman, Gisele Roberge, could not provide the exact cause of death.


Physicians, in Film, Decry Embargo's Effect on Iraqi Children
FOR most Americans, the war in Iraq is over.
But for the children of Iraq, said Dr.
Michael Viola, director of oncology at University Hospital at Stony Brook, the war continues with savage intensity.
Dr.
Viola said the real problem was in the continuing United Nations embargo.
Although Americans have been told that the embargo exempts medical supplies and that the lack of supplies may be caused by the military's diverting them from the public, Dr.
Viola said:


Drexler Is Sidelined
CLYDE DREXLER is expected to miss two games for the Portland Trail Blazers because of his sore right knee.
The six-time All-Star had arthroscopic surgery Sept. 17, shortly after helping the United States team to the Olympic gold medal last summer.
He was expected to regain his form in 6 to 12 weeks but has experienced swelling and soreness.
Drexler skipped games Dec. 4 at Chicago and Dec. 5 at Cleveland after banging his knee Dec. 1 against the Knicks in New York.


From the Inkwell: The Light Side of '92


Execution and Extermination
To the Editor:
In his review of Stephen Trombley's book "The Execution Protocol: Inside America's Capital Punishment Industry" (Nov. 22), Thomas Maeder describes Fred Leuchter as "America's only specialist in the design and construction of execution devices" and comments that "Mr. Leuchter does not create engines of mass destruction, like the gas chambers of the Nazi death camps." The reader of the review, though, is not informed of Mr.
Leuchter's credentials: he is the author of "The Leuchter Report: The End of a Myth," in which he argues that the Nazi gas chambers could not have been, and were not, used for extermination purposes.
Believing strongly in freedom of speech, I do not question Mr.
Leuchter's right to make such outlandish and unfounded claims.
However, serious doubt must be cast on any "expert" advice that Mr.
Leuchter gives.
JOHN A. DROBNICKI Jamaica, Queens


30 Unpronounceable Years
La Grenouille celebrates itself and its regulars. Dec. 19.


POSTINGS: Co-op and Condo Expo; Information, Plus a Dinner
Anyone contemplating co-op and condominium issues that went unresolved this year, take heart.
A smorgasbord of information and help, as well as door prizes and a buffet dinner, will be offered free at the New York Cooperator's Fifth Co-op &amp; Condo Expo on Thursday, Jan. 14, at the Roosevelt Hotel, Madison Avenue and 45th Street.
The only requirement is pre-registration.
"There is so much going on right now," said Victoria A. Chesler, executive editor of the New York Cooperator, a 12-year old real estate monthly, which serves over 60,000 readers in the metropolitan area.


Best Foot Forward
57th Debutante Cotillion and Christmas Ball. Dec. 22.


Recent Sales
North Haven, Conn.  $160,000
92 Frost Drive  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 37-year-old ranch; paddle fans in bedrooms, in-ground pool, hardwood floors, 0.5 acre; taxes $2,072.
Bronxville, N.Y.  $320,000
63 Boulder Trail  3-bedroom, 2 full-, 1 half-bath, 57-year-old colonial; fireplace, dining room, family room, dressing and laundry rooms; taxes $6,344.
Ossining, N.Y.  $335,000
31 Taconic Road  3-bedroom, 3-bath, 27-year-old ranch; fireplace, dining room,family room, playroom, 2-car garage; taxes $8,325.
Rye Brook, N.Y.  $430,000
101 Old Orchard Road  4-bedroom, 2 full, 1 half-bath, 27-year-old colonial; marble entry hall, fireplace, den, central a/c, 2-car garage; taxes $5,748.
OTHER AREAS  Shoreham, L.I.  $132,500
15 Vee Jay Drive  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 14-year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den, deck, 2-car garage, 0.5 acre; taxes $2,200.
Williston Park, L.I.  $215,000
142 William Street  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 44-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, basement; taxes $4,400.
Fair Lawn, N.J.  $240,000
15-12 Lucena Drive  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 36-year-old split level; eat-in-kitchen, family room, full basement; taxes $4,586.


Connecticut Q&amp;A: Dr. Nicholas Dainiak; Bringing Home Lessons From Chernobyl
The director of the Connecticut Cancer Institute at the University of Connecticut Health Center in Farmington, Dr.
Nicholas Dainiak, has been asked to advise the Minister of Health in Belarus (formerly the Soviet state of Byelorussia), Dr.
Vassili S. Kazakov, on how to cope with the cancer arising from the Chernobyl nuclear disaster.
Though Chernobyl is in neighboring Ukraine, residents of the Gomel region of Belarus received the highest levels of radiation after the reactor meltdown on April 26, 1986.
Since then the incidence of thyroid cancer in children, for instance, has increased to 60 cases a year, from about 4.
In some places in the region the displays that show temperature and time also show the radiation level.


Man Placed in Custody
A man faced a mental health evaluation for trespassing at the gated community where STEFFI GRAF lives in Boca Raton, Fla., authorities said yesterday.
MICHAEL SALATA, 38, was arrested Thursday and remained in custody yesterday on $250 bond, charged with trespassing after a warning for returning to the gate of the luxury Polo Club development "at least three times a day for three days," said the arrest report.


Older and Skilled, New Nuns Are Working to Widen Roles
Ceil Roeger was 50 years old when she decided to sell her house in Houston, get rid of her furniture and become a nun.
Mary Beth Sutton, a 39-year-old insurance executive from Detroit, entered the convent as the final stage of recovery from alcohol addiction.
Diana Jeffries took her vows of poverty, chastity and obedience after her eight-year marriage fell apart.
These women represent the changing face of the American nun.
While the vows they have taken are the same ones women took in the fourth century, the way they are choosing to live them out is quite different, and the effect on their orders is profound.
Including Other Lives
Thirty years ago novices, as new nuns are called, went to the convent right from high school.
They would leave their families and friends behind as they slid into a quiet life of prayer behind tall walls and dark habits.


If the Catalogue Says It's New, Is It Better?
THIS is an exciting time of year for the trowel-and-hoe fraternity.
The catalogues are arriving, most of them from seed producers, but many from woody and perennial plant nurseries.
One garden sage called them "wish books." Indeed, they are.
These beautifully illustrated catalogues foretell the future, what the gardens might look like in 1993.
They offer enticements as to what might be grown.
Many adjectives are used: bigger flowers, vigorous plants, brighter colors, good flavor, abundant yields.


Drifting


CORRECTION
A report in the Postings column last Sunday about the donation of the Patio Gardens housing complex in Flatbush, Brooklyn, to the National Kidney Foundation misidentified its developer.
He was David Wolfenson, not Fred C. Trump.


Making a Difference; Creators of a Gold Guide of Black Artists
AT first glance, the Black Gold National Shopper's Guide resembles a high-class fashion magazine, or fine arts catalogue, with 160 pages of colorful glossy photos.
But a closer look finds advertisements and listings for more than 1,100 fashion designers, sculptors, painters, merchants and book distributors.
The guide is published and distributed by Raynard Villa Hall, 41, and Denise Corder, 39, the president and vice president, respectively, of Communications Problem Solvers, a Chicago marketing and sales promotion agency.
They say the guide is the most comprehensive effort to date to list and promote the wide variety of goods and services available nationwide from black artists and merchants.


Paella That's Easy to Prepare for a Party
FOR people who entertain, this week is the last chance of the year.
It offers a final few days to invite, greet and feed friends, acquaintances and, while you are at it, those whose status is simply that of social obligation.
And for people who usually do not entertain, this week is the last chance to make a showing in 1992.
Whichever category you are in, the week calls for a party.
Unless you engage a well-staffed caterer, a certain amount of work is unavoidable.
The most pragmatic approach is the bountiful buffet.
It can be anchored by a smoked turkey or turkey breast from a good butcher or catering shop.
And it should be flanked by three or four grain and vegetable salads, purchased or homemade.


A World of Plagues And Heresies
THE ISLAND
Three Tales.
By Gustaw Herling.
Translated by Ronald Strom. 151 pp.
New York: Viking. $20.


ran Asserts Claims to 3 Disputed Islands in Gulf
In a sharp denunciation of Arab claims to three disputed islands in the Persian Gulf, Iran's President reasserted Iranian sovereignty by warning neighbors on Friday that they will have to "cross a sea of blood" to reach the islands, the state-run press reported today.
The Gulf Arabs "must not repeat the mistakes of Saddam, who tried to make Kuwait a province of Iraq," President Hashemi Rafsanjani told an audience attending Friday Prayers at Teheran University.
He said that Iran was "much stronger" than its neighbors.


Nets Win Going Away, This Time at Cleveland
The New Jersey Nets.
Go figure.
No one can.
When they're in New Jersey, they play like they can't wait to get the game over so they can go play Nintendo.
When they're on the road, they play like champions.
This is the road, so you can guess which Nets team showed up today.
With forward Derrick Coleman playing some of his best basketball of the season (he tied his season high with 30 points), Kenny Anderson constantly finding the open man and Chris Morris hitting some key shots in the final minutes, New Jersey overwhelmed the Cleveland Cavaliers, 119-114, ending Cleveland's seven-game winning streak.
It was New Jersey's first victory here since 1986, and the Nets' 68 points in the second half is a season high.


It's Not Italy, but a Reasonable Facsimile
VESPA is a short, snappy name that says Italy.
This restaurant is so authentic that friends who recently returned from Italy felt that their vacation had been extended.
This little slice of southern Europe on Northern Boulevard in Great Neck occupies a long narrow storefront that is a mixture of cozy homeyness and elegance that comes from white tablecloths and fresh flowers.
A rack filled with food and wine magazines, cookbooks and European newspapers runs the length of one wall.
A picture of Milan with diners' sipping espresso while perusing the papers comes to mind.


With New Labor Deal, N.F.L. Owners Keep Baseball Peers Envious
In 1974, National Football League players went on strike with the battle cry "Freedom now" and wound up with a system of free agency that was a fraud.
Two years later, when major league baseball players negotiated a system of free agency after a court-affirmed arbitrator's decision, Ed Garvey, the man who negotiated the ineffective N.F.L. agreement for the players, ridiculed the baseball union for settling for less than the arbitrator had given the players.
Now, nearly two decades after the freedom-now strike, N.F.L. players finally have what they hope is a workable free-agency system.
The owners, however, must still know something the players don't know because they agreed to the system as they watched their baseball brethren reinforce their belief that free agency would be bad for their pocketbooks.


Lauren Timoney, Jeffrey J. Upton
Lauren Patricia Timoney, the daughter of Rosemary C. Timoney of Tamarac, Fla., and Edward Timoney of Dania, Fla., was married yesterday to Jeffrey James Upton, the son of Patricia and Robert Upton of New York.
Judge Paul Chernoff of Massachusetts Superior Court in Lowell performed the ceremony at the Ann Whitney House in Brookline, Mass.
Mrs.
Upton, 26, graduated from Smith College.
She is a law student at Boston University, where her husband received a law degree.
Her father is a captain for Delta Airlines in Fort Lauderdale, Fla.
Her mother heads the English department at Taravella High School in Fort Lauderdale.


GENDER DE PLUME
I wish Moore had made his experience less of an amusing anecdote and more of an inquiry into the mind frame of such female editors.
The heart of the feminist challenge to the traditional way of doing things is the belief that an individual should not be limited by gender.
GREGOR HARTMANN
Ridgewood, N.J.


Nina Shapiro, Harold Dauerman
Dr. and Mrs.
Stanley Shapiro of Great Neck, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Dr.
Nina Lisbeth Shapiro, to Dr.
Harold Lee Dauerman, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Leonard Dauerman of Fort Lee, N.J.
An April wedding is planned.
Dr.
Shapiro, 27 years old, is a first-year resident in otolaryngology at the Massachusetts Eye and Ear Infirmary in Boston.
She graduated from Cornell University and received her M.D. from Harvard University.


Frankly, Giants Would Rather Be in Playoffs Than in Philadelphia
For many of the Giants, it all ends today in Philadelphia -- their lost season, the Giant careers of many older players from the Super Bowl years and, barring a miracle, the ill-fated two-year reign of Ray Handley as the head coach.
The Giants (6-9) will play the Eagles (10-5), who are headed for the National Football League playoffs and will play a wild-card game next weekend.
The Eagles have a 7-0 record at home this season and are 8 1/2-point favorites for the game (1 P.M., Channel 2).


Even Martians Know About Elizabeth Taylor
Elizabeth Taylor is finally starring in a new film, a one-hour documentary tentatively titled "Passions and Diamonds."
Roberto Guirra and Eila Hershon, a husband-and-wife team, who have made documentaries about Karl Lagerfeld and Frida Kahlo, have shot about 30 hours of footage of the actress over the last year.


New Accord in Hartford And Other Bright Spots
A YEAR ago, the musical review of 1991 contained the doleful tidings that the Hartford Symphony strike, which had already forced the cancellation of three sets of subscription concerts, was not yet resolved.
Even the most pessimistic could hardly have guessed that the impasse would continue for the rest of the season and into the fall.
Happily, a three-year agreement has been reached between the musicians' union and the Symphony, and the sounds of orchestra are again being heard in Hartford.
The winter-spring schedule lists five pairs of monthly concerts at the Bushnell, along with three sets of Pops programs and another trilogy in the family series.
For a brochure or reservations, call the Symphony office at 244-2999.


COLD WAR MYSTERIES
David Wise's article "Was Oswald a Spy, and Other Cold War Mysteries" (Dec. 6) was itself an example of the sort of cold war hysteria that Wise went to great lengths to pin on the K.G.B.
"Quite aside from the question of what the Russians may or may not choose to release and whether the documents are authentic," Wise cautions, "there may be no record at all of some of the darkest deeds."


The Best of the Year ... And the Rest of the Year
More than most years, it seemed, the unexpected and the quirky took its place within the daily rhythm of sports in 1992.
Here are the events that helped define the year's sports scene as surely as an earned-run average or a 130-mile-an-hour serve:
JORDAN'S MEMORY LAPSE -- Michael Jordan admitted he lied when asked why he had given one James (Slim) Bouler a check for $56,000.
Jordan said it was a loan to help Bouler open a golf-driving range.
Actually, Jordan acknowledged later, it was to pay for gambling losses after a weekend of golf and poker.


John Kemeny, 66, Computer Pioneer and Educator
John G. Kemeny, a distinguished mathematician and computer pioneer who was president of Dartmouth College for more than a decade, died yesterday at the Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center in Lebanon, N.H.
He was 66 and lived in the town of Etna, near the Dartmouth campus.
Alex Huppe, a spokesman for the college, said the cause of death was apparently a heart attack.


Sports of the Times; Will the Jets Lower Boomer on Nagle?
IN a season devoted to discovering the world according to Browning Nagle, the Jets learned the world was as flat as their 4-12 record.
By the time training camp opens, look for the Jets to have imported an experienced quarterback, possibly Norman (Boomer) Esiason, to compete with Nagle for next season's job.
Whichever quarterback rises to the occasion in the exhibition games would open the season.


Offering Immigrants From Russia Insights on Life in America
THE spirited discussion, which covered the Iran-contra affair, former President Nixon's role in the Watergate scandal, the Communist Party, tensions in Crown Heights and the jury system, was nearly as biting as the bitter cold on a chilly Sunday morning.
In an auditorium at the Montefiore Medical Center here, six adults met with Edward Beliaev, a lecturer from the School of Public and International Affairs of the Harriman Institute at Columbia University to discuss differences between the former Soviet Union's political system and that of the United States.


So What Happened To the Rossini Year?
Last month the small Swiss record label Claves -- in conjunction with its corporate sponsor Philip Morris and various political personages, including the Italian ambassador to France -- celebrated the 200th anniversary of Rossini's birth with a witty and elegant banquet at the Ritz Hotel in Paris.
The menu consisted mostly of dishes based on the composer's own recipes.
The party was in Paris because Rossini spent the last 45 years of his life there, gourmandizing more than composing.
The occasion was the release of an eight-CD album of the five early Rossini one-act comic operas.
Unfortunately, the performances, while amiable and honorable, are not top-drawer.
And that pretty much sums up the record industry's response to this Rossini year: surprisingly few new recordings, especially from the major labels, and only a couple of them first rate.
After the excess of the 1991 Mozart year, the treatment of Rossini has been decidedly anticlimactic.


Melissa Burtt and Allan Smith Jr.
ALLAN SMITH JR. planned his proposal to Melissa Burtt for months.
A daylong adventure, it involved mysterious envelopes, tickets to the opera, a bit of foreshadowing (that morning, he had given her a new silk handkerchief that was decorated with champagne bottles) and dinner at Cafe des Artistes on the Upper West Side.
And instead of dessert, the waiter brought Ms.
Burtt a diamond ring on a silver tray.
"The proposal is the start of the process, and it should be the most exciting time, because after that you're burdened with a lot of preparation and decision making," said Mr.
Smith, the manager of corporate communications for Designtex in New York.
"We laugh because it was election year, and every time we turned on the television, it said, '1992: The Year of the Decision.' "


Las Vegas Journal; Helping 50 Legacies of the Old West Avoid the Slaughterhouse
A million flashing lights blazed across The Strip, heralding a chance to win a fortune at the slots, watch a glitzy show or dine on steak and lobster for $4.95.
But one visitor merely snorted at it all. She was content just to chew on hay.


Russian Troops Still in Baltics Tell of Harassment
The thousands of Russian troops remaining in the Baltics, on what is now foreign soil, are dispirited and sometimes angry at what they regard as petty harassments and humiliations on the part of the newly independent states.
Among Baltic leaders, however, especially in Estonia and Latvia, there is deep suspicion that the Russian military does not want to pull out all its troops, since they serve to put pressure on Baltic nations to allow Russia to continue to use key military and intelligence installations.


He Keeps Going and Going And Even Looking Perfect
Vince Evans, who has a 9-to-5 job waiting for him at home, could do the ultimate.
At age 37, he could walk away from football having thrown a touchdown on his final pass.
"I won't," he said.


'Real' Environmentalists Support Nuclear Power
To the Editor:
I presume that Citizen Action's energy policy director, Edwin S. Rothschild, is one of those naive flower-child activists.


New Accord in Hartford And Other Bright Spots
A YEAR ago, the musical review of 1991 contained the doleful tidings that the Hartford Symphony strike, which had already forced the cancellation of three sets of subscription concerts, was not yet resolved.
Even the most pessimistic could hardly have guessed that the impasse would continue for the rest of the season and into the fall.
Happily, a three-year agreement has been reached between the musicians' union and the Symphony, and the sounds of orchestra are again being heard in Hartford.
The winter-spring schedule lists five pairs of monthly concerts at the Bushnell, along with three sets of Pops programs and another trilogy in the family series.
For a brochure or reservations, call the Symphony office at 244-2999.


Former Addict to Head Drug Abuse Office
Mayor David N. Dinkins plans to name a former heroin addict to head his Office of Drug Abuse Policy, an agency that oversees more than 100 drug-treatment centers and coordinates the treatment programs of about a dozen city departments.
A spokeswoman for the Mayor, Annabelle Franceschini, said yesterday that Raymond Diaz, 48, currently a deputy commissioner in the city's Human Resources Administration, was asked last week to take over the office, whose director resigned in September.


Storm's Aftermath: Federal Funds Due
COUNTY officials were drumming their fingers on desks and pacing the floors last week as they waited for word from the White House that Westchester, along with other areas of the state, would be eligible for Federal disaster aid.
The good news finally came, and emergency disaster plans that had been laid out in detail -- in anticipation of President Bush's declaration -- went speedily into effect.


Will Darkened Theaters Imperil a State Tradition?
IT is a well-known theater story.
After a performance of "Green Grow the Lilacs," by Lynn Riggs at the Westport Country Playhouse one summer night in 1939, Theresa Helburn, the producer, had a brainstorm: make it into a musical.
Four years later, the musical retitled "Away We Go!" had its world premiere at the Shubert in New Haven where Richard Rodgers and Oscar Hammerstein 2d, in their first collaboration, had the title changed yet again, this time to "Oklahoma!"
Then there's the one about Moss Hart when he was a director suffering Broadway opening-night jitters.
"It's just a New Haven hit. That's all. Just a New Haven hit," Mr.
Hart said, panicking.
The show was "My Fair Lady" and the year was 1956.


'Fires of the Dragon'
To the Editor:
I'd like to thank the editors for including my book "Fires of the Dragon" in the Oct. 25 Book Review.
Unfortunately, your choice of Nicholas Eberstadt as reviewer raises a serious question of conflict of interest.


Jamie Lee Curtis Faces Up to Her Image
Jamie Lee Curtis is sitting in the study of her new Santa Monica home, trying to get comfortable.
The room, with its Spanish, high-beamed ceilings, feels airy and light.
But the light is too harsh, so she rises to adjust the curtains.
Then she feels too warm, so she jumps up to open the window.
Except the gardener is working outside with a whining, electric leaf blower.
So she dashes out the door in her brand new, black-suede platform heels to tell him to stop.
When she returns, she notices a spot of water glistening on the floor.
So she flies to the kitchen for a towel, and then she's down on her knees in her beautiful black jumpsuit.
After three seconds in the loveseat she decides it's too drafty and leaps up to close the window.


Q and A
The Law on Mobile Homes Question: I currently rent a small lot (25 by 100 feet) in a heavily industrialized and badly deteriorated neighborhood on the Brooklyn waterfront.
Although the lot is zoned residential, I use it for parking and Sunday storage.
I would like to know what obstacles -- if any -- preclude my having a mobile home or trailer home sited on this lot.
I have noted a complete absence of mobile homes in the five boroughs and I am curious if there is some citywide statute banning their use. . . .
Thomas O' Reilly, Seaford, L.I.
Answer: Yes, there is.
With one exception, mobile homes are not allowed in any of the five boroughs in New York City, regardless of how an area is zoned, said Vahe A. Tiryakian, spokesman for the city's Department of Buildings.


Trees and Their Beauty Get 'Second Life'
CRUSTY boards, tree burls and branches have been transformed into vessels and furniture with sensuously smooth surfaces in an exhibition at the Trenton City Museum.
Selecting the wood is a vital consideration, almost an obsession, for the craft artists who made the objects.
Graining sets up parallel lines or concentric rings, while exotic woods produce subtle color harmonies.
Some woodworkers even value the imperfections: knotholes and cracks with jagged edges become a major focus of their designs.


POSTINGS: Fit for Bryant Park; Two New Newsstands
Often as unsightly as they are ubiquitous, newsstands in mid-Manhattan tend to be "mad collections of beads, earrings, necklaces, baubles, umbrellas -- everything but newspapers," said Arthur Rosenblatt, associate director of the Bryant Park Restoration Corporation.
In the new year, the corporation is to present its solution: two newsstands designed by Benjamin Thompson &amp; Associates of Cambridge, Mass.
The walk-in stands have five large, back-lit advertising panels, red walls and shutters, silvery columns and barrel-vaulted roofs.


How to Give A Mugger A Green Face
It's illegal to sell Mace to consumers in New York City, but not green goo.
And so there is Dye Witness, a viscous substance in an aerosol can that, while not harmful, momentarily obscures an assailant's vision and stains his face green for a week.
One quick squirt of the gel, and a potential car-jacker or mugger is both disoriented and easily identifiable, said Stuart Fields, who manages the Counter Spy Shop.


Lincoln's Words Drew Millions, While Soviet Propaganda Mesmerized And an Italian Reinvented Glass
Words Worth Millions -- Two Abraham Lincoln autographs brought huge prices in New York.
At Christie's, an autograph album in which Lincoln wrote the sentence that begins "With malice toward none . . . " was sold for $1.3 million.
And an early version of his doctrine "A house divided . . ." brought $1.5 million at Sotheby's.
After Majolica, the Deluge? -- A Long Island court refused to halt next month's sale of Arthur M. Sackler's Renaissance ceramics collection, an action that may open the floodgates, bringing thousands of Sackler artworks to auction.
But don't bid yet.
The collector's widow, Gillian, is appealing.


Data Update
NATIONAL HOUSING TRENDS
*4*(In thousands of units, seasonally adjusted annual rates)
Oct. 92
Oct. 91
Change
Starts
1,229
1,085
+13.3%
Completions
1,161
1,073
+ 8.2%
Sales
600
526
+14.1%
*4*Source: Census Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
8.46
8.44
8.66
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.49
5.49
6.26
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
8.28
8.28
8.59
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.29
5.35
6.11
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
8.34
8.34
8.60
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.15
5.11
6.16
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
8.49
8.44
8.83
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.92
5.96
6.87
*4*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
3.76
3.72
4.35
National Mortgage Contract Rate
7.40
7.40
8.78
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes.  (Source: HSH Associates)


Connecticut Q&amp;A: Dr. Nicholas Dainiak; Bringing Home Lessons From Chernobyl
The director of the Connecticut Cancer Institute at the University of Connecticut Health Center in Farmington, Dr.
Nicholas Dainiak, has been asked to advise the Minister of Health in Belarus (formerly the Soviet state of Byelorussia), Dr.
Vassili S. Kazakov, on how to cope with the cancer arising from the Chernobyl nuclear disaster.
Though Chernobyl is in neighboring Ukraine, residents of the Gomel region of Belarus received the highest levels of radiation after the reactor meltdown on April 26, 1986.
Since then the incidence of thyroid cancer in children, for instance, has increased to 60 cases a year, from about 4.
In some places in the region the displays that show temperature and time also show the radiation level.


Suing for Peace in a Neighborhood of Violence
This is a quiet night for Sister Kim and her colleagues from the Crown Heights Youth Collective as they maneuver their blue van down streets glistening with Christmas lights and giant menorahs.
The mission for the five people in the van is at once simple and complex: reach out to the children of this embattled neighborhood.
Ask them to talk it out, not shoot it out, to think about their lives, love one another.
It is cold and not much is happening.
A lone figure here and there scurries down the street.
There is a game of basketball, and various groups of boys hang out on the corners.
So talk in the Ford Club Wagon turns to dead children: Pappy.
Kareem.
Raisin.
Kiki -- all young men killed in a Brooklyn neighborhood where allegiances shift daily and disputes are too often solved by bullets.


County's Influence in the State Assembly
WHEN the seven-member Westchester Assembly delegation goes to Albany next month, it will include more Democrats and more women than ever before.
Their agenda is still being fine tuned, but the delegation's new profile suggests stronger support for suburban school aid and transportation financing and a variety of women's issues.
Last week, the four freshmen Democrats shuttled between Albany and Westchester, finding lodgings (the closer to the Thruway, the closer to home), setting up offices in both locations (staff money is tight even if you are in the majority) and attending orientations on such subjects as how to draft a bill and how to work electronic voting monitors. (If you don't press a button voting "no," the machine automatically votes "yes.")


IN SHORT: FICTION
DOLORES CLAIBORNE By Stephen King. Viking, $23.50.


The High Tatra's Wild Beauty
IT must be admitted that the social amenities of Czechoslovak winter resorts are not yet organized on anything like the luxurious lines of those of the most famous in Switzerland and France." So says "Czechoslovakia, the Land and Its People," by Clive Holland, a guidebook published by Dodd, Mead in 1931. But, the author concedes, the High Tatra area is "fully equalling the lower Alps in its grandeur and natural beauty."
More than 60 years and a stunning run of modern politics have not made much of an impact either on the wild and rugged beauty of the mountains or on the offerings of the resorts now run by the state.
After the Alps, the Tatra are Central Europe's highest mountains, and the eastern republic of Slovakia, soon to be independent, shares the 16-mile-long range with Poland to the north.
The necklace of resorts tucked into its foothills still tend more to the basic than to the elegant.


1992: THE BEST OF THE YEAR
BEST EVENT: N.L.C.S., Game 7 2. Summer Olympics 3. Duke-Kentucky N.C.A.A. game


Freed, Eastern Europe Meets Obstacles to Free Expression
Three years after the collapse of Communism, journalism has been reinvented in Eastern Europe as a craft involving independence and objectivity, but politicians remain uneasy and sometimes ruthless about the new press freedom.
Through satellite dishes, cable systems and a wide range of publications, the people of the former East Bloc have access to a range of information and entertainment unthinkable under Communism.
Indeed, many people used to simply obtaining the underground press to find out the truth now complain of being confused by a battery of conflicting accounts.
Some Papers Are Thriving
With ironclad single-party control of the press and television eliminated, many newspapers and journalists have undergone unlikely transformations.
Rude Pravo in Czechoslovakia and Nepszabadsag in Hungary, former mass-circulation trumpets of the Communist Governments, have become thriving papers stripped of dogma even under editors who were long trained to write propaganda.


And on the Campaign Trail, Cop-Outs, Clock Watching And Other Cloudy Images
Photo Ops -- After Campaign '92, that made-for-television vaudeville, voters may not remember what the candidates said about the great national issues, but they are not likely to forget soon what the men who sought to lead the country did for the benefit of the cameras.
Images That Stick -- Was it Bill Clinton blowing his horn on "The Arsenio Hall Show"; President Bush glancing wistfully at his wristwatch during a television debate (perhaps with a premonition that his time was running out), or was it Ross Perot's running mate, the improbable James B. Stockdale, discovering in mid-debate that his hearing aid was off?


Presidential Names
To the Editor:
You assert in "Presidential Pronouncement" (Topics of The Times, Dec. 6) that the last name of our 32d President should be pronounced in three syllables of roughly equal stress: that is, "Roe-zuh-velt."


Istanbul
To the Editor: Why do you publish letters such as the one on Istanbul from Heather Weston (Nov. 15), which could easily come under the banner "Italy," "Mexico," "Greece," etc. and only serve to scare off female travelers?


Presidential Names
To the Editor:
"Presidential Pronouncement" (Topics of the Times, Dec. 6) reports that a Southerner in a letter to The Washington Post tells how our President-elect's name is pronounced "Down South."


Whether It's Hunger Or 'Misnourishment,' It's a National Problem
HUNGER blows across America like a patchy fog, lingering in some valleys, drifting past others.
Often, the mist settles in late in the month, when the food stamps, disability checks and other government aid is used up.
But what is called hunger in this country is a far cry from the enforced starvation that is tearing away at countries like Somalia.
Still, as American soldiers take up arms to help Somalia, relief agencies and anti-hunger advocates in the United States are trying to convince Americans and the incoming Administration that malnourishment in this country grows more widespread and more persistent than it has in two decades.


Toy Makers Meet The Inner Child, Ages 21 and Up
MANY children are confronting a new frustration.
Their parents are buying toys -- for themselves.
More and more adults are joining a trend that toy makers and students of pop culture say reflects the aging of baby boomers -- a generation loath to grow old and searching for new ways to escape the stresses of the workplace.


1992: THE BEST OF THE YEAR
BEST TEAM: The Dream Team 2. Chicogo Bulls 3. Duke


DEMOCRATIC RIFTS MAY HURT CLINTON ON FOREIGN TRADE
Deep divisions in the Democratic Party over how aggressively to confront other nations on trade issues produced unusual infighting during President-elect Bill Clinton's search for a new United States Trade Representative and could stymie his efforts to push sweeping trade agreements through Congress next year.
The party's many fissures could undo the results of the Bush Administration's North American Free Trade Agreement, a pact that, if approved by Congress, would eliminate import taxes and other trade barriers among Canada, Mexico and the United States.
Also at stake are the still-pending 108-nation trade talks, which are intended to reduce trade barriers around the world and stimulate a stagnant global economy.


Maeve Kenny, John Solberg
Maeve Randall Kenny, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John Kenny of Brooklyn, was married Wednesday to John Baldwin Solberg, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert Solberg of Fort Worth.
Msgr.
Charles Diviney performed the ceremony at St.
Charles Borromeo Church.


NORTHEAST NOTEBOOK: Wilmington, Del.; Revitalizing An Old Hotel
THE Hotel du Pont, the centerpiece of this city's downtown business district until the mid-80's, reopened in mid-December after undergoing an 18-month overhaul of its guest rooms.
With the $40 million investment, it expects to regain its position as the region's finest hotel, which it became when it opened in 1913.
The project also sent a signal to concerned city officials and businessmen that the E.I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Company, though downsizing, was not abandoning the city.


If the Catalogue Says It's New, Is It Better?
THIS is an exciting time of year for the trowel-and-hoe fraternity.
The catalogues are arriving, most of them from seed producers, but many from woody and perennial plant nurseries.
One garden sage called them "wish books." Indeed, they are.
These beautifully illustrated catalogues foretell the future, what the gardens might look like in 1993.
They offer enticements as to what might be grown.
Many adjectives are used: bigger flowers, vigorous plants, brighter colors, good flavor, abundant yields.


Citizens vs. the Giants
A citizens' group in San Francisco has begun a petition drive aimed at reversing $15 million in stadium lease concessions for the new owners of the San Francisco Giants, whose bid saved the team for the city.
About 40 people turned out for the kickoff of a monthlong signature- gathering drive organized by the Committee to Stop the Giveaway.
David Spero, an organizer, said the group needed about 19,500 valid signatures to qualify a referendum for the November 1993 ballot.


Q and A
Diving Off Sipadan Island
Q.
I have heard that Sipadan Island off the coast of Borneo has outstanding scuba diving.
I would like to combine a trip there with one to the Kirabantan River in Borneo.
Is this possible? -- Laura Benish, Bronxville, N.Y.


If the Catalogue Says It's New, Is It Better?
THIS is an exciting time of year for the trowel-and-hoe fraternity.
The catalogues are arriving, most of them from seed producers, but many from woody and perennial plant nurseries.
One garden sage called them "wish books." Indeed, they are.
These beautifully illustrated catalogues foretell the future, what the gardens might look like in 1993.
They offer enticements as to what might be grown.
Many adjectives are used: bigger flowers, vigorous plants, brighter colors, good flavor, abundant yields.


INSIDE
Long Wait for Public Housing
The number of people waiting for New York Housing Authority apartments has risen to 240,000 families, the highest level ever.
Page 31.
Russia Eases Residency Rule
Russia will allow citizens to register to live anywhere and will omit ethnic details from identity cards.
Page 8.
Genetic vs.
Emotional Ties
A custody battle over a 22-month-old girl pits two couples, and two states, against each other.
Page 20.
Leading Educator Dies
John Kemeny, a mathematician and Dartmouth president, created the Basic computer language.
Page 40.


Often-Injured Johnson Is Back With the Suns
The Phoenix Suns activated point guard KEVIN JOHNSON yesterday and waived ALEX STIVRINS to make room on the roster.
Johnson, a two-time All-Star, had missed 18 of the Suns' 22 games this season, including the last 12 because of a strained left hamstring and a strained groin.
In four games, he averaged 13.4 points and 6.5 assists.


China Leaps Upward
Marc Riboud, the French photojournalist and world traveler, first visited China in 1957.
He has returned a dozen times, most recently in September.
Known for a style that encapsulates transitional moments, Riboud on this trip documented a country moving from Communism to capitalism.
He found a place where revered monuments and golden arches exist side by side.
Consumerism and Western products reflect a thriving economy, especially in southern cities like Shenzhen; a pace-setter for style, food and business, it has been imitated by cities to the north like Beijing and Shanghai.
Billboards exhort people to buy; soaring new office towers glitter both inside and out; clothes, jewelry and hairdos speak of commercial individuality and affluence.
The country's leader, Deng Xiaoping, propounds a message of new socialism over a modern skyline on a billboard in Shenzhen.
A Beijing sign shows a family on a shopping spree.
They have only one child, as the law prescribes, but a girl, to show that to be "out" in some respects is "in." Their packages are covered in stars and stripes, currently the rage in fashion.
Underneath sits a lone child, not among the lucky shoppers.
Also beneath the glamour is another China, a police state that jails people for their beliefs and promotes a stark philosophy.
There, the manipulations are real, not ornaments of the marketplace.


Integrating The New Yorker
To the Editor:
Melissa Fay Greene's review of Charlayne Hunter-Gault's "In My Place" (Nov. 22) states that Ms.
Hunter-Gault was hired as the "first black staff member" at The New Yorker magazine.
That quoted phrase does not appear in the book, which says, somewhat more obliquely: "At the time, I was unaware that there were no blacks on the staff."


Maryann Janeczek and James Watt
Maryann Janeczek, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Theodore C. Janeczek of Passaic, N.J., was married yesterday to James Anthony Watt, the son of Carol King of Essex Fells, N.J., and the late James H. Watt.
The Rev.
Donal R. Fox performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Mary's Abbey at the Delbarton School in Morristown, N.J.
Mrs.
Watt is a vice president in the foreign-exchange department of Merrill Lynch &amp; Company in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from Fairfield University.
Her father, who is retired, was a vice president in West Paterson, N.J., for the Midlantic Bank.


Istanbul
To the Editor: The woman from New York who visited Instanbul and was hassled by Turkish men (Letters, Nov. 15) experienced something that has been going on for a long, long time in the markets of the Middle East.
Not only are women hassled but men are as well.
The practice is particularly commonplace in the area of the Blue Mosque; I have rarely seen it elsewhere.


No Headline
I was living the way I had learned to live in this culture.
I had the right car, the right address.
But at some point, you have redecorated your house for the third time, and you find that it isn't enough. -- SISTER MARY BETH, who ran an insurance company before joining a Philadelphia convent.  [ 1:2. ]


Challenge to the Faithful
Even before he was hospitalized last summer for the removal of a tumor "the size of an orange" from his intestines, Pope John Paul II seemed to be weakening.
On his last voyage before the surgery, when he visited Cabinda, a northern Angola enclave, he paused, as if to summon strength before tackling what has become an emblem of his papacy -- the makeshift altar steps in some dusty place most other people preferred to forget.
His agenda for the African pilgrimage made ample provision for rest and reflection and reasonablyearly nights, in marked contrast to the hectic, early days when this Polish Pope -- the first non-Italian Pontiff in over four centuries -- broke the mold of papal seclusion.


THE GUIDE
'MARTIN' THE MUSICAL
"Martin Guerre" has been adapted as a musical that opens at the Hartford Stage on Jan. 8 and runs through Feb. 6.
Previews are scheduled from Saturday through Jan. 7.


POSTINGS: Long Search for a Site; An L.I. Olympus Headquarters
For more than two and a half years the Olympus Corporation, the United States arm of Tokyo's Olympus Optical Company Ltd., tried to find a Long Island site for its headquarters.
One after the other, seemingly viable sites fell through because of problems with local zoning boards.
Then the New York State Urban Development Corporation, eager to keep jobs on Long Island, came calling.
It offered Olympus a lease on 10 percent of a 540-acre site that once housed mentally impaired people in Melville.


U.D.C. Doesn't Have Plan for 500 State Acres
"State Bypasses Town in Zoning Approval"  [ Dec. 6 ]  about Huntington had better be a warning to Long Islanders that their vision of humane living and sustainable economic growth is the least concern of our Governor.
The mutilation of this 500 acres of residentially zoned state land may well set the pattern for the next phase of wildcat industrial development on Long Island, this time right on top of a sole-source water-aquifer recharge area.
As homeowners we are outraged by Governor Cuomo's use of state authority, i.e., the Urban Development Corporation, to open the door for a hodgepodge of industrial-commercial businesses polluting our drinking water and congesting the two-lane residential roads around this land.
The Northern State Parkway, which borders one side of the site, provides no access road and, anyway, does not permit the inevitable trucks, unless that restriction is dropped, giving us another Long Island Expressway for all New Yorkers to enjoy!


Under 'Rainbow,' a War: When Politics, Morals and Learning Mix
It was to be simply a guide to teaching first graders tolerance and respect for all.
Instead, the Board of Education's "Children of the Rainbow" curriculum, with its teaching of respect and appreciation for gay and lesbian families, has become the latest battleground for liberals and conservatives in the city's cultural wars.


Where It's Working
To the Editor:
Contrary to what David Himmelstein and Steffie Woolhandler would have us believe (letter, Dec. 10), managed competition in health care is being put to work successfully in communities around the country by local employers acting together.


After Many Years, U.N. and Pretoria Are Getting Together
After decades of being reviled by the South African Government for interfering in the nation's internal affairs, the United Nations has recently gained considerable stature here, and with it an increasing role in helping this country in its political transition.
The United Nations has treated few countries as harshly as South Africa.
Because of the racial segregation policy called apartheid, South Africa was barred from occupying its seat in the General Assembly, and was the target of a mandatory arms embargo and a voluntary oil embargo.


Bolshoi's 5 Weeks in London
London's Royal Albert Hall will be home to the Bolshoi Ballet from Jan. 9 through Feb. 14.
The entire Bolshoi company of 160 artists, including its principal dancers, will give 37 performances.
Its own designers will transform the Albert Hall, extending the stage halfway into the auditorium and creating a tableau depicting the opulent interior of the Bolshoi Theater.
The season will feature 13 classical ballets, providing a showcase for the full range of the Bolshoi's repertory, including "Romeo and Juliet," "The Nutcracker" and "Ivan The Terrible."


1992: THE BEST OF THE YEAR
BEST ATHLETE: Michael Jordan 2. Monica Seles 3. Dave Winfield


Inaugu-Wear for Sale
It must have been a slow news day.
At 11:45 A.M., at least 100 newspeople were pressed against the windows of the spanking-new Clinton-Gore Inaugural Commemoratives store.
"Is someone important coming?" a jaded passer-by asked, barely pausing.


So Why Is This Top Dog a Hawk Not a Huskie?
ASK most college basketball fans who the best player in the state is and the answer most likely will be Scott Burrell of the University of Connecticut.
But that is because most of those fans have never seen Vin Baker of the University of Hartford, if indeed they have even heard of him.
For Baker, unlike Burrell, does not enjoy the television exposure, or media attention in general, that the UConn captain receives, not only in Connecticut but also throughout the nation while playing in the highly publicized Big East Conference.


Peeling Back the Layers of Veneered Furniture
MENDING veneered furniture is a picky job, one tailor-made for whiling away winter weekends.
Veneer on everyday furniture can usually be repaired by amateurs, even novices.
But fine veneered furniture, especially antiques, should be taken to a professional restorer.
To fix cracks, try rubbing them with an appropriately colored putty stick, although an ordinary crayon is often an effective substitute.
In both cases, choose a color that is slightly lighter than the surrounding wood.


NOTES
Kenneth Jay Lane is adapting nicely to the change in administrations.
The costume-jewelry designer who created Barbara Bush's trademark pearl necklace is now doing a brisk business with his 22-karat-gold-plated saxophone pins.
"I had it in a series of musical instruments that I had done a while ago," Mr.
Lane said, "but now it's taken on new significance." The pins are $37.50 at his two New York stores.


Champions and Still Anonymous
They have never filed for free agency.
They have never been quoted through an agent.
Their names have never appeared in a boxscore, and chances are, and no best-seller list will ever include their unauthorized biographies.
Nevertheless, Joe Durso, Steve Radjeff, Wayne Davies and members of the New York Ultimate remain the Babe Ruths and Michael Jordans of their respective, but little-known, sports.


Mutual Funds; Dropping Down the Yield Curve
MONEY market yields have slumped so low that the yields of many stock and bond funds are competitive.
Income funds aim for yield by owning a mix of stocks and bonds.
So do global flexible funds, also called asset allocation funds, which invest one-quarter of their portfolios overseas.
Balanced funds normally own 60 percent stocks, 40 percent bonds.
"Target" funds buy zero-coupon bonds.
Utility and equity-income funds create yield by owning shares in companies paying high dividends.


Ms. Zanft, Lieut. Hutchinson
Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Zanft of Forest Hills, Queens, have announced the engagement of their daughter Olivia Helena Zanft to Lieut.
Daniel Lovett Hutchinson Jr., U.S.N., the son of Mr.
Hutchinson of Ardmore, Pa., and Margaret P. O'Malley of Strafford, Pa.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
Zanft, 23, and her fiance, 25, both graduated from Harvard University, she magna cum laude.
She is a fourth-year medical student at Columbia University.
Her father is a senior consultant at Foster Wheeler, a mining and engineering company in Clinton, N.J.
Her mother, Natalie M. Zanft, is a retired architect.


Profile/Jiro Yanase; Selling Cadillacs in Japan
TO those who think it is tough to sell American cars in Japan today, Jiro Yanase would like to tell you about 1921, when Japan was so poor that his father, the General Motors dealer, sold only three vehicles all year.
Or about World War II, when anyone connected with American cars was considered a traitor.
"Terrorists threw stones at us," he recalled.
"But we never took down the Pontiac and Oldsmobile signs in our service center."


Broadway Alight
Minyan of the Stars, Dec. 20.


'Guys and Dolls' (Thumbs Up), 'Guys Named Moe' (Thumbs Down) And Noel Coward on the Wagon
The Whole World in Their Hands -- Anna Deavere Smith, in "Fires in the Mirror," and John Leguizamo, in "Spic-o-Rama," brought sizzling, panoramic views of urban America to the theater by acting all the roles in plays of their own creation.
Forever Frank -- Fresh revivals of Frank Loesser's masterpiece, "Guys and Dolls" (1950), and of his most romantic outpouring of pure song, "The Most Happy Fella" (1956), reminded audiences of what they've been missing in Broadway musicals.


VCR's Hear Their Master's Voice, While Every Room Has Its Stereo
Clinton Climate -- Fresh winds began blowing at the Federal Communications Commission after the November election.
Prospects are brightening for advanced forms of radio and television, involving direct satellite reception and high-quality cable services.
English Spoken -- The Voice Programmer remote control, a new device from Voice Powered Technology, understands plain English.
Just tell it what show you want to record and it will set the VCR for you. (That's more than 70 percent of all VCR owners can do for themselves.)


Italian Singers, One Soaring, One Plummeting
Best Glimpse of What Opera Can Be Lully's "Atys" returned to the Brooklyn Academy of Music in the exquisitely staged, beautifully sung production conducted by William Christie, demonstrating the difference between opulence and glitz.
Runner-up: the Kirov Opera's "Queen of Spades." Best Single-Handed Celebration of the Rossini Bicentennial -- Cecilia Bartoli showed that musicality, intelligence and a seductively pure tone can still be found, and proved enough of an illusionist to make a full evening of Rossini sound substantial.


Shoes on the Make
WHAT: The overly referenced shoe.
A semiotic nightmare.
A platform motorcycle bootie -- a surrealistic hybrid of women's footwear that meshes biker culture with the 70's lack of culture to make 90's street couture.
Influences: Imagine Marlon Brando in "The Wild One" spiffed up like Tony Orlando.
WHAT ELSE IS IT?: A clog (sort of), a cowboy boot (almost), a loafer (a little bit) and a Hush Puppie (the outers are made of suede-like leather).
It also makes a great place-kicking shoe for weekend touch-football games (note the square toe).


Passenger in Car Dies After a Shooting in Queens
A 32-year-old Queens woman died yesterday after being shot on Friday night as she rode with her husband and 3-year-old daughter on the Grand Central Parkway, heading home from a relative's house after celebrating Christmas and the child's birthday, the police said.
The shooting apparently stemmed from a traffic dispute.
The victim, Pamela Mascaro, who lives in Forest Hills, Queens, died at Mary Immaculate Hospital with a single gunshot wound to the back of the head, said a police spokeswoman, Sgt.
Theresa Tobin.
Mrs.
Mascaro's husband, John, and their daughter, Holly, were not injured, said another police spokeswoman, Detective Kim Royster.


Big-City Rangers Are Yokels on Long Island
It has become routine for the Islanders to defeat the Rangers at Nassau Coliseum.
What is unusual is for the Rangers to look in their rear-view mirror to see the Islanders tailgating their back bumper at a high rate of speed on the Patrick Division Parkway.
That's what it amounts to following tonight's game, a 6-4 Islanders victory before a capacity crowd at Nassau Coliseum.
The Rangers have 40 points and have fallen to third place.
The Islanders have 36 points and have risen to fourth.
How low will the Rangers go?
How high can the Islanders fly?


Dina Schefler, Robert Nemeth
April wedding plans have been announced for Dina Schefler, the founder and president of In Focus Associates, a photographers' representative in New York, and Robert Nemeth, a vice president at J. P. Morgan Investment Management Inc. in New York.
Miss Schefler, 29, graduated from Tulane University.
She is a daughter of Mrs.
Edward Mele of Barneveld, N.Y., and Arno Schefler of Aspen, Colo.
Her father is an art dealer and a breeder of thoroughbred horses there.
The bride is a stepdaughter of Mr.
Mele and Danner Schefler of Aspen.


Making a Difference; From Johnson &amp; Johnson, a Free Software Solution
BUSINESSES hate to waste time and money reinventing the wheel when they can save both by using an existing idea.
While that is usually no big deal, software is often the exception.
Companies tend to be very proprietary about sharing programs they developed to give them an edge over their competitors.


Correction
The caption with the Stamps column on Dec. 13, about an envelope canceled at a United States research station in Antarctica, described the cancellation incorrectly.
It commemorated Operation Deep Freeze; it did not mark the first day of issue.


Historic Trust Adds 15 Hotels
The National Trust for Historic Preservation has added 15 hotels to its Historic Hotels of America program, selecting them for historic character, architecture and the preservation efforts made by owners and managers.
To qualify, hotels must be at least 50 years old, listed in or eligible for the National Register of Historic Places or recognized locally as having historic significance.


The View From: Hartford; Symphony's Musicians and Managers Back in Tune
IN late October, after a 18-month-long dispute between the musicians union and the management of the Hartford Symphony, agreement was reached on a new three-year contract.
A month later, the musicians took their places on stage at the Bushnell auditorium and when the conductor, Michael Lankester, came on stage the orchestra received a standing ovation.
"There was a sense of warmth, and maybe relief," said the chairman of the Symphony's board, Peter Burgess, who described the previous year as "horrific."


The Executive Life; I.R.S. Agents Stalk the Hollywood Hills
HOLLYWOOD'S biggest blockbuster this holiday season could be called "Nightmare on Vine Street." But it won't be showing at a theater near you.
Rather, it's unfolding behind accountants' doors all around Tinseltown, a production of the Internal Revenue Service, which has launched a massive crackdown on producers, directors, writers, actors, craftsmen, technicians and production companies.
"The entertainment industry is on the hit list," Pamela K. Christensen, an I.R.S. chief field examiner, recently told a crowded gathering of industry attorneys and accountants.


Miss McElhone And Chad Greene
Donald McElhone and Josephine McElhone, both of Fairfax, Va., have announced March wedding plans for their daughter Katharine Elaine McElhone and Lieut.
Charles Sheldon Greene 3d, the son of Judith C. Winship of New York and Mr.
Greene Jr. of Dusseldorf, Germany.
Miss McElhone, 22 years old, is an organic chemist at the Wallingford, Conn., research institute of Bristol-Myers Squibb, the pharmaceutical manufacturer.
She and her fiance graduated from Duke University, she cum laude.
Her father is a statistician in Arlington, Va., for the United States Office of Personnel Management.
Her mother is a senior economist at the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation in McLean, Va.


Corrections
An article in Styles of The Times last Sunday about the new top officials at the Costume Institute of the Metropolitan Museum of Art misidentified the arriving curator in some references.
He is Richard Martin.


The, Uh, Royalton Round Table
IN some ways, it is nothing like lunch at the Algonquin Round Table with Dorothy Parker, Robert Benchley and company back in the 20's and early 30's.
Lunch in those Prohibition days was booze disguised in tea cups, club sandwiches and maybe half a pack of Camels.
The New Yorker magazine was born at the Algonquin Hotel's round table, they say, and it was there that Miss Parker, on hearing of Calvin Coolidge's death, asked, "How can they tell?"
In other ways the lunch scene at the Royalton Hotel, diagonally across from the Algonquin on West 44th Street, near Fifth Avenue, is every bit as clubby as the old round table.
Of course, wits like Heywood Broun, the original unmade bed, would be out of place in this stylish company.
The Royalton has become the beanery of choice, the nexus for the elegant editors of the high-profile magazines and Seventh Avenue designers and others in the fields of fashion, beauty, design and celebrity journalism.


The Dark Side of Astra: High Prices on an AIDS Drug
To the Editor:
"A Certain Glow on Sweden's Astra," Nov. 22, should be balanced by a less flattering tale: that of Astra's price-gouging on its AIDS-related product, Foscavir.


A Crowded Writer on the Lonely Prairie
HOW do we tell the truth in a small town?
Is it possible to write it?
Certainly, great literature might come out of the lives of ordinary people on the farms and ranches and little towns of the Great Plains, but are the people who farm, the people working in those towns, writing it?
The truth, the whole truth, tends to be complex, its contentments and joys wrestled out of doubt, pain, change.
How to tell the truth in a small town, where, if a discouraging word is heard, it is not for public consumption?
Like many who have written about the Dakotas, I'm invigorated by the harsh beauty of the land and feel a need to tell the stories that come from its soil.
Writing is a solitary act, and, ideally, the Dakotas might seem to provide a writer with ample solitude and quiet.
But the frantic social activity in small towns conspires to silence a person.
There are far fewer people than jobs to fill.
Someone must be found to lead the church choir or youth group, to bowl with the league, to coach a softball team or Little League, to run a Chamber of Commerce or club committee.
Many jobs are vital: the volunteer fire department and ambulance service, the domestic violence hot line, the food bank.
But all too often a kind of Tom Sawyerism takes over, and makes of adult life a perpetual club.
Imagine spending the rest of your life at summer camp.


Out of the Kitchen and Into the Bakery
THE naysayers who claim career women don't bake cookies should meet Jo-ann Schoenfeld.
What began as recreational baking for family and friends in her home kitchen has evolved into Plaza Sweets, a commercial bakery here that supplies delectable cakes and cookies to specialty shops, restaurants, country clubs, hotels and mail-order companies.
"One of my most vivid memories is of my mother teaching me how to roll out cookie dough when I was 6 or 7," Mrs.
Schoenfeld said during a recent interview at the bakery.
"She loved to cook and she was adventurous in the kitchen. I absorbed her enthusiasm for good food and entertaining."


An Expert Surveys Trends and Schools
KEN LASSITER is one of the most influential people in the world of photography education.
As the Eastman Kodak Company's director of trade relations, manager of photo education
and
manager of fine art photography, he has the power to give grants that encourage quality in teaching and creativity in learning.
One of Mr.
Lassiter's most far-reaching projects is the Kodak Business Television Network, a satellite network devoted to educational programming that the company started in 1986.
Each of Kodak's series of eight or more shows reaches more than a million photography students in a typical academic year, Mr.
Lassiter said, adding that about 25,000 students view the shows live, while the vast majority see them on videotape.


Russians Tell of '61 Atom Accident on Submarine
One of Russia's military newspapers today revealed details of a 1961 nuclear accident on one of the Soviet Union's first nuclear-powered submarines.
One of the two nuclear reactors powering a Soviet K-19 submarine on its maiden voyage was damaged in the early hours of June 18, 1961, after a seal in a primary pipeline failed because of faulty welding, the newspaper Krasnaya Zvezda, or Red Star, said today.


County's Party Will Keep the Cork On
THE year is almost at an end, and it is time for decision making: what to do on New Year's Eve?
For those who plan to hunker down, far from the madding -- not to say drunken -- crowds, the county has a suggestion: come to the "Just Say Happy New Year" party at the County Center, the first such celebration in those roomy halls.


The Best Money Can Buy
If the National Football League players and owners conclude their negotiations tomorrow with a settlement that features a new free-agency system, the race for the best free agents will officially begin.
Free to sign with new teams would be xxx players whose contracts all expire on Feb. 1.
That total represents the 20 players who are plaintiffs for free agency in various court cases and xx five-year veterans given their freedom in the new contract.


BEST SELLERS: December 27, 1992
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
4
DOLORES CLAIBORNE, by Stephen King. (Viking, $23.50.) After being accused of murdering her employer, a woman tells of killing her husband almost 30 years earlier and of her life ever since.
2
2
6
MIXED BLESSINGS, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.50.) Three couples' lives are strained by the problems of having children.
3
3
8
MEXICO, by James A. Michener. (Random House, $25.) An American journalist learns about the history of the land south of the border. (LP)
4
4
10
THE TALE OF THE BODY THIEF, by Anne Rice. (Knopf, $24.) Lestat embarks on a dangerous enterprise; "The Vampire Chronicles," continued.
5
5
42
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $22.50.) A woman law student probes the murder of two Supreme Court justices.
6
7
20
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $14.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.
7
6
17
GRIFFIN &amp; SABINE, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.) The romance of an artist and a secret admirer, told through cards and letters.
8
8
11
THE STARS SHINE DOWN, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $23.) The fortunes of a businesswoman are imperiled by secrets from her past. (LP)
9
11
24
GERALD'S GAME, by Stephen King. (Viking, $23.50.) Twenty-eight hours of horror suffered by a woman handcuffed to a bedpost.
10
9
6
THE GENERAL'S DAUGHTER, by Nelson DeMille. (Warner, $21.95.) The investigation of the murder of an officer, a general's daughter, unearths scandals in the military.
11
10
9
MOSTLY HARMLESS, by Douglas Adams. (Harmony, $20.) In the fifth volume of the "Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy" series, a survivor tries to cope with new predicaments.
12
12
11
SABINE'S NOTEBOOK, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.) Continuing the epistolary romance begun in "Griffin &amp; Sabine."
13
1
DINOTOPIA, written and illustrated by James Gurney. (Turner Publishing, $29.95.) The adventures of a biologist and his son in a land where dinosaurs and humans live happily together.
14
14
17
WHERE IS JOE MERCHANT? by Jimmy Buffett. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $19.95.) A couple on the trail of a dead rock star who has been sighted.
15
15
5
RED SQUARE, by Martin Cruz Smith. (Random House, $23.) Investigator Arkady Renko, returning to Moscow and Berlin after the collapse of Communism, still faces a perdurable mafia.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
15
THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush H. Limbaugh 3d. (Pocket, $22.) Anecdotes and opinions offered by the talk show host.
2
2
12
IT DOESN'T TAKE A HERO, by H. Norman Schwarzkopf with Peter Petre. (Linda Grey/ Bantam, $25.) The autobiography of the general.
3
3
17
EVERY LIVING THING, by James Herriot. (St. Martin's, $22.95.) Continuing the memoirs of the Yorkshire veterinarian.
4
4
28
TRUMAN, by David McCullough. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) A biography of the 33d President.
5
5
10
I CAN'T BELIEVE I SAID THAT! by Kathie Lee Gifford with Jim Jerome. (Pocket, $22.) The autobiography of the co-host of the television show "Live With Regis and Kathie Lee."
6
7
14
THE TE OF PIGLET, by Benjamin Hoff. (Dutton, $16.) Aspects of Taoist philosophy explained through the actions of an A. A. Milne character.
7
6
8
SEX, by Madonna. (Warner, $49.95.) Erotic photographs of the pop star by Steven Meisel, and her reflections on them.
8
9
20
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $20.) A Jungian analyst reinterprets myths and folk tales to enable women to understand their psyches.
9
11
3
JFK: Reckless Youth, by Nigel Hamilton. (Random House, $30.) The first 29 years of the 35th President.
10
12
17
YOUNG MEN &amp; FIRE, by Norman Maclean. (University of Chicago, $19.95.) An account of a disastrous fire in a Montana forest in 1949.
11
8
6
MY LIFE, by Earvin (Magic) Johnson with William Novak. (Random House, $22.) The autobiography of the retired Los Angeles Lakers basketball player.
12 *
10
8
GENIUS, by James Gleick. (Pantheon, $27.50.) The life and achievements of Richard Feynman, the Nobel Prize-winning physicist.
13
2
DAVE BARRY DOES JAPAN, by Dave Barry. (Random House, $18.) The life and culture of the Land of the Rising Sun, as observed by the syndicated humorist.
14
1
HANG TIME, by Bob Greene. (Doubleday, $22.50.) Life as lived and perceived by Michael Jordan during two championship seasons with the Chicago Bulls.
15
1
I HAVEN'T UNDERSTOOD ANYTHING SINCE 1962, by Lewis Grizzard. (Villard, $18.) A humorist's curmudgeonly reflections on what has happened since his high school days.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
3
CREATING LOVE, by John Bradshaw. (Bantam, $23.) Ways to establish healthy relationships with other people.
2
2
24
HARVEY PENICK'S LITTLE RED BOOK, by Harvey Penick with Bud Shrake. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $19.) Anecdotes and tips about playing golf, by a legendary teacher.
3
5
14
THE MEASURE OF OUR SUCCESS, by Marian Wright Edelman. (Beacon, $15.) The head of the Children's Defense Fund offers rules to live by for her own children and others'.
4
4
13
THE AMERICAN HERITAGE DICTIONARY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE. (Houghton Mifflin, $39.95.) The third edition.
5
3
14
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $12.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,050 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
And Bear in Mind
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
THE ANCHOR BIBLE DICTIONARY.
David Noel Freedman, editor in chief. (Six volumes, Doubleday, $360.) This monumental (7,035 pages) and truly ecumenical work brings together the efforts of nearly 1,000 contributors in entries, some of them at essay length, on innumerable major and minor biblical topics.
LEMPRIERE'S DICTIONARY, by Lawrence Norfolk. (Harmony, $22.)
Not
a dictionary but a first novel, droll, ferocious and intricate, set in the late 18th century, treating of a young man whose life is sidetracked by Ovidian myths and other irruptions.
LINCOLN: An Illustrated Biography, by Philip B. Kunhardt Jr., Philip B. Kunhardt 3d and Peter W. Kunhardt. (Knopf, $50.) Powerful images, mostly from the authors' family's archives, dominate this companion volume to ABC's Lincoln documentary.
THE ART OF CELEBRATION: Twentieth-Century Painting, Literature, Sculpture, Photography, and Jazz, by Alfred Appel Jr. (Knopf, $35.) Modern times aren't all Eliot and Kafka, the author cheerfully argues; there's also Joyce, Nabokov, Matisse, Astaire, Chaplin, Teddy Wilson and a whole raft of dedicated life affirmers.
THE BOY WITHOUT A FLAG: Tales of the South Bronx, by Abraham Rodriguez Jr. (Milkweed Editions, paper, $11.) A first book of fiction, in which brutality is controlled by sophistication.
THE PORCUPINE, by Julian Barnes. (Knopf, $17.) A short, edgy, gloomy political novel in which a well-meaning Eastern European prosecutor learns that the fall of the old system has brought not energy and purpose but an ironically bourgeois alienation.
NEW AND SELECTED POEMS, by Mary Oliver. (Beacon, $20.) The winner of a National Book Award this year, Ms.
Oliver's volume offers the precise, intelligent work of 30 years.


For Those Who'd Spy, but Not Be Spied Upon
THE two-week-old Counter Spy Shop on Madison Avenue sells high-technology security, privacy and surveillance devices for everyone from the merely safety conscious to the just plain nosy and the truly paranoid.
"Anything your would-be spy might require," said the store's manager, Stuart Fields.
Even James Bond would be impressed.
There are night-vision goggles, to turn utter darkness into day ($3,000); tiny video cameras ($2,200 to $3,900) that can be worn on the body; recording devices ($595 to $2,400) built into attache cases, pocketbooks and cigarette packs ("Good for the secretary trying to prove a sexual-harassment case," Mr. Fields said), and powerful flashlights that are supposed to blind and disorient muggers ($225, on sale for $159 until Jan. 15).


A Solo Sailor Disappears, and the Questions Linger
The episode at sea that took the life of Mike Plant, the solo sailor who was on a trans-Atlantic voyage in October from New York to France, has left many unanswered questions.
The 42-year-old Plant, a respected ocean racer, is presumed dead, lost at sea after his 60-foot racing boat, Coyote, capsized.
The overturned boat, which was examined by French divers on Nov. 25 in an area about 700 miles southwest of Ireland, has not been salvaged.
In fact, the whereabouts of the vessel are now unknown.


Army Team's 'Marketing' Job Is Selling U.S. Role
Millions of leaflets fell from the sky, depicting an American soldier in helmet and flak jacket shaking hands with a Somali man.
The caption was supposed to read "United Nations," but because of a mix-up in the vowels the message was "Slave Nation."
A great deal of time and trouble went into the leaflet, which was printed in Fort Bragg, N.C.
Maj.
John Markham said the only Somali with military clearance who could do the leaflet had left his homeland when he was 12, and his language skills were a bit rusty.


The Film's The Thing
To the Editor:
I enjoyed the article on script supervisors, "What's Wrong With This Picture?"  [ Dec. 6 ] , but I wondered whether their obsessive attention to detail is such a great thing.


Jamie Lee Curtis Faces Up to Her Image
Jamie Lee Curtis is sitting in the study of her new Santa Monica home, trying to get comfortable.
The room, with its Spanish, high-beamed ceilings, feels airy and light.
But the light is too harsh, so she rises to adjust the curtains.
Then she feels too warm, so she jumps up to open the window.
Except the gardener is working outside with a whining, electric leaf blower.
So she dashes out the door in her brand new, black-suede platform heels to tell him to stop.
When she returns, she notices a spot of water glistening on the floor.
So she flies to the kitchen for a towel, and then she's down on her knees in her beautiful black jumpsuit.
After three seconds in the loveseat she decides it's too drafty and leaps up to close the window.


A Year of Schubert for Snoozing And Saxophones for Sighing
New Kid on the Block -- John Selya, a young dancer with vivid dramatic presence, proved that he could not only choreograph but could make fresh use of an old technique in "Moondance" and "Jack and Jill," new pieces presented by American Ballet Theater.
Skirting Cliches -- Patrick Scully, a rangy young gay activist and performer from Minneapolis, put on a miniskirt and turned pain, loss and wry misadventures into revivifying art in "Queer Notions" at Dance Theater Workshop.


How to Help Riders Park Near L.I.R.R.
Perhaps the main thrust, which has not been given needed positive attention, is the creation of connecting mass-transit!
If we could remedy this problem we would not have the "we don't have a commuter if he can't park his car."


Highlights From a Year of Changes
CHARLES DICKENS wrote that the New Year was like the world's infant heir, "waited for with welcomes, presents and rejoicings." But while we wait, let's rejoice in some of 1992's cultural achievements in Westchester, including anniversaries, new appointments and the births of several musical organizations and venues.
The year had barely begun when the Chappaqua Orchestra, disbanded in 1990, was reborn as the Chappaqua Chamber Orchestra under the direction of James Sadewhite of Irvington.
"Our first program was an amazing success," a trustee, Mary Rohde, said.
"We quickly sold all the seats in the Chappaqua Library Theater and now have a waiting list of nearly 100 names." The next concert is Jan. 16.


New &amp; Noteworthy
GEORGE CUKOR: A DOUBLE LIFE.
A Biography of the Gentleman Director, by Patrick McGilligan. (Harper Perennial, $13.) George Cukor was one of the first great Hollywood directors, and one of the first in the film industry to encounter its sometimes virulent homophobia.
This book shows how he managed to occupy a niche in two very different worlds.
Last year our reviewer, Andrew Sarris, called it "that rarity of rarities among Hollywood biographies: a full-bodied study of a man and his metier, equally insightful about the life and the art."
SUGAR: And Other Stories, by A. S. Byatt. (Vintage International, $10.) This collection of short fiction by the author of "Possession" includes characters who are witches and ghosts, although it is well grounded in the real world of emotions and morals.
"At her best, Antonia Byatt is elegant in the tradition of James and Forster, and her concerns are the enduring ones: the tenacity of the past and the clutch of family, the struggle for freedom and self-definition, and the quest for substantive truth in the shadow of death," Lynne Sharon Schwartz said here in 1987.
Vintage International has also brought back into print the author's 1967 novel, THE GAME ($10), the story of two English sisters, opposites in personality, who have been involved with the same man.
In 1968 our reviewer, Martin Levin, said, "What is so admirable about Mrs. Byatt's treatment of her characters is her blending of what they are with what they believe."


Clinton Job Plan In Manufacturing Meets Skepticism
Over and over, President-elect Bill Clinton has said that creating more manufacturing jobs was at the top of his agenda.
But even staunch supporters in the economics profession say he is doomed to frustration on that score.
For example, Mr.
Clinton told a small group of economists last August that he was concerned about creating more factory jobs, and he asked what his Administration could do about it.
Paul Krugman, an expert on international competitiveness at M.I.T., replied, "Basically, nothing."
And "that's still the correct answer," Professor Krugman said recently.


Drexler Is Sidelined
CLYDE DREXLER is expected to miss two games for the Portland Trail Blazers because of his sore right knee.
The six-time All-Star had arthroscopic surgery Sept. 17, shortly after helping the United States team to the Olympic gold medal last summer.
He was expected to regain his form in 6 to 12 weeks but has experienced swelling and soreness.
Drexler skipped games Dec. 4 at Chicago and Dec. 5 at Cleveland after banging his knee Dec. 1 against the Knicks in New York.


In These Nordic Tales, Gnomes Win Supporting Roles
Based on many of the feature movies being shown as part of a Nordic children's film festival, one might get the idea that Scandinavians have an understated, taciturn culture, where emotions are as spare as the sunshine, parents tend to be stern, and children complain of having to eat too much (or too little) fish.
The small ones also seem to wear fur hats and have lovely skin.
At least those are the impressions that a movie goer might get after sampling some of the 20 films, mostly Swedish, included in "Nordic Delights: A Children's Film Festival," which the Film Society of Lincoln Center is presenting at the Walter Reade Theater on Saturdays and Sundays through February.
Though the festival is geared to youngsters, adults will find that the films open an artistic window onto the region and its approach to children.


1992: THE BEST OF THE YEAR
BEST MOMENT: Derek Redmond 2.
Christian Laettner's shot vs.
Kentucky 3.
Gail Dever's 100-meter dash


Walter Sickert, a 'Literary Painter'
This critic has waited a very long time to see an exhibition of paintings by Walter Richard Sickert (1860-1942) that would establish him once and for all as the outstanding English painter of the first half of this century.
And here it is, at the Royal Academy in London, through Feb. 14, with the full range of his work on the wall, a richly documented catalogue, and a total of 133 paintings procured from all over and elucidated by two ranking authorities on Sickert, Wendy Baron and Richard Shone.
It is a glorious affair, in which all hopes are fulfilled and no twist or turn of Sickert's long career is omitted.
Nor is his love of mischief smothered or kept out of sight.
There is a great deal to see in the 133 paintings in the academy.
Sickert could do just about anything that he wanted to with brushes and oil paint (and sometimes with pastels, as well).
From 1887 onward he could do the London music halls in their heyday.
Performers and public alike were rendered to perfection, with echoes here and there of Degas and Whistler, both of whom he had known, but with an additional and decisive something that was entirely his own.


Determined


Custody Battle: Is Conception Parenthood?
For all of her 22 months, a toddler known in court papers as B.G.C. has lived in a picket-fenced house in this college town as the daughter of Jan and Roberta DeBoer.
But earlier this month, the Iowa Supreme Court said the girl belonged in Iowa with Daniel and Cara Schmidt, the biological father who has never seen her and the biological mother who lawyers say has admitted giving the child up for adoption without his consent.


Bulls Coach Exploits Bragging Rights
It would not have been a good idea for the Knicks to look back to a game that got away from them Friday night in Chicago.
They would have seen Phil Jackson gloating.
"I think they're too old," Jackson said, a quote that jumped off the front page of The Chicago Tribune's sports section yesterday morning, after the Knicks had left Chicago to play the Bucks here last night.
"They're not as young as we were when we were going after the Pistons. We had only to go up.


Clinton's Cabinet Choices Put Him at Center, Balancing Competing Factions
The most striking thing about President-elect Bill Clinton's Cabinet is not so much the jobs he has assigned others, but rather the jobs he has reserved for himself.
The way that Mr.
Clinton has constructed his Cabinet is in keeping with how he ran his campaign: he has included representatives of many views rather than choosing between rival schools of thought within the Democratic Party.
And instead of naming conceptualizers to important economic and foreign policy posts, he has chosen competent musicians and reserved the roles of composer and conductor for himself.


Peeling Back the Layers of Veneered Furniture
MENDING veneered furniture is a picky job, one tailor-made for whiling away winter weekends.
Veneer on everyday furniture can usually be repaired by amateurs, even novices.
But fine veneered furniture, especially antiques, should be taken to a professional restorer.
To fix cracks, try rubbing them with an appropriately colored putty stick, although an ordinary crayon is often an effective substitute.
In both cases, choose a color that is slightly lighter than the surrounding wood.


MacArthur Genius Awards All Round And a Book That Fell Apart -- and Then Off a List
Genius Women -- The MacArthur Foundation gave its first grants to women photographers: one to Wendy Ewald, who teaches poor children to photograph their lives, and one to Susan Meiselas, currently photographing Kurdish refugees.
Mann Act -- Sally Mann's show at Houk Friedman sold a record 300 photographs, bringing in better than $900,000 and consigning Mann to her darkroom for six to nine months to fill orders.


ABOUT NEW JERSEY
IN the dark of early night, as all the city traffic heads home, 15 men in hoods gather in Newark.
They have come to pray, as they do on each one of Newark's uneasy nights, for the sick and the poor and the dead.
They pray for one another.
And in the soft shadows and sharp cold that envelops the old church, they pray for a city that once nearly lost its soul.
After the Mass is ended, the men leave through a side door of St.
Mary's Roman Catholic Church and immediately enter their monastery, Newark Abbey.
In about an hour, most of them will sit down at long wooden tables under a large painting of the Last Supper and have their dinner.
But one of them will not be there.


Bookshelf
Additional titles of interest:
MASAI AND I. By Virginia Kroll.
Illustrations by Nancy Carpenter.
Four Winds. $13.95. (Ages 4 to 7) Linda learns about the Masai in school and wonders about living in a village in East Africa instead of an apartment building.
On each double-page spread of this well-constructed story, the little girl imagines vignettes from daily life in both places, emphasizing familiarity as well as differences.


Visiting Germany
To the Editor: The sales clerk and sightseeing guide in the Talmadge letter can only be described as idiots.
However, it is not fair to condemn a whole country. (There are plenty of jerks right here among us.)
I was in Germany twice this year and had good experiences.
As a travel agent, I get many opportunities to speak with returning tourists.
I recall about one year ago my client's telling me about a Belgian tour guide with an attitude regarding certain nationalities.
This one made remarks about the Swiss.
It would be just wonderful if everyone could live in harmony.


Paella That's Easy to Prepare for a Party
FOR people who entertain, this week is the last chance of the year.
It offers a final few days to invite, greet and feed friends, acquaintances and, while you are at it, those whose status is simply that of social obligation.
And for people who usually do not entertain, this week is the last chance to make a showing in 1992.
Whichever category you are in, the week calls for a party.
Unless you engage a well-staffed caterer, a certain amount of work is unavoidable.
The most pragmatic approach is the bountiful buffet.
It can be anchored by a smoked turkey or turkey breast from a good butcher or catering shop.
And it should be flanked by three or four grain and vegetable salads, purchased or homemade.


If the Catalogue Says It's New, Is It Better?
THIS is an exciting time of year for the trowel-and-hoe fraternity.
The catalogues are arriving, most of them from seed producers, but many from woody and perennial plant nurseries.
One garden sage called them "wish books." Indeed, they are.
These beautifully illustrated catalogues foretell the future, what the gardens might look like in 1993.
They offer enticements as to what might be grown.
Many adjectives are used: bigger flowers, vigorous plants, brighter colors, good flavor, abundant yields.


ABOUT LONG ISLAND
SYLVIA BABITCH worked on Christmas Day.
She changed bedpans and turned patients and did all the thankless chores necessary to keep the bedridden alive in the Suffolk County Infirmary.
A nurse's aide for eight years, Ms.
Babitch is used to being the lowest rung on the health-care ladder.
She is used to cleaning the sweat, vomit and waste of those who cannot care for themselves.
"If you have to do it, you do it," she said.
"You'd be amazed at what you can do when you have to."


Holding Fragile Families Together When Mothers Are Inmates
ON the second Saturday of every month, a chartered bus pulls up to a bluish-gray Victorian house north of downtown Atlanta, picks up about 50 excited young children and heads south on Interstate 85 through the Georgia countryside to the tiny town of Hardwick.
It seems like a routine field trip except for one thing -- the destination two hours away is a women's prison, and the children are going to visit their mothers.
For most, this will be the only time that they'll spend with them until the next month's bus trip.


France Looks Back, Russia Forward, As Americans Rework the Present
Most Obscure Hit -- The soundtrack from "Tous les Matins du Monde," overseen by the violist da gamba (!) Jordi Savall.
The film and disk, which revived the interest of the French in their Baroque musical heritage, afford mournful, sensuous pleasure for any music lover.
Finally, a Genuine (Not Hyped) Crossover Success -- Keith Jarrett's fluid, sensitive performance of Shostakovich's 24 Preludes and Fugues reaffirmed the composer's mastery and the pianist's successful passage from jazz to the classics. (Not that he has left jazz.)


1992: The Year In Sports
In a sports year of controversy and contradiction, the celebrations often had reverberations.
Some selfish, some stunning, some sad.
At the Summer Olympics, basketball's Dream Team turned the tournament into a layup drill, but on the gold-medal stand Michael Jordan, apparently more interested in representing Nike than his country, and other National Basketball Association stars covered up the Reebok logos on their USA suits.


Victory, Then Death: A Dramatic Way to Go
DEATH at a moment of triumph, as with General Wolfe on the Plains of Abraham and Admiral Nelson at Trafalgar, has a bittersweet quality.
There is no time to savor the victory, but there are much worse ways to die.
A bridge equivalent occurred two weeks ago in Rio de Janeiro, when Adelstano Porto D'Ave died in his sleep at the age of 64, a few hours after a significant victory.
This brief return to the card tables, after a period of ill health, was a remarkable climax to a distinguished career.


Stolen Car Crashes Into 3 Police Cars
A man driving a stolen car crashed into three police cruisers on the Upper West Side of Manhattan yesterday, injuring six officers, a police spokeswoman said.
The man, who was not immediately identified, was charged with driving a stolen vehicle and with assault, said the spokeswoman, Sgt.
Theresa Tobin.
None of the officers was seriously injured, she said.
Four were taken to St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center to be treated and two were taken to Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center.


Anais Nin, Unexpurgated
To the Editor:
In her review of Anais Nin's "Incest" (Nov. 22), Katha Pollitt asks if the present publications of the unexpurgated diaries have been edited to present "the image of Nin that her executors wish the world to see."


A World of Plagues And Heresies
THE ISLAND Three Tales.
By Gustaw Herling.
Translated by Ronald Strom. 151 pp.
New York: Viking. $20.


Process Sure Sounds Like America


All the World's a Stage for Opera: Glimmerglass, Carnegie, a Barroom
Wham, BAM, Thank You, Albert -- The Robert Wilson-Philip Glass modern classic, "Einstein on the Beach," returned to the Brooklyn Academy of Music with a little technical creakiness but with its mysteries intact.
The Most Faithful Fidelio -- Lorin Maazel and the Pittsburgh Symphony made a virtue of unstaged concert opera with their presentation of Beethoven's "Fidelio" at Carnegie Hall; in their hands, an opera became a cantata.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
BORN AGAIN AT THE LAUNDROMAT And Other Visions of the New West.
By Dave Carty.
Lyons &amp; Burford, $18.95.


Knicks Fall Into a Trap in Overtime
For a team with championship aspirations, this was no holiday travel to celebrate.
For a point guard who hopes to be a starter, these were two games to mourn.
Having committed two crucial fourth-quarter turnovers in Friday night's loss at Chicago, Greg Anthony got a chance to redeem himself tonight when Doc Rivers, the Knicks' starting point guard, went out early in the third quarter with a partially dislocated right shoulder.
Put it this way: Anthony did not shoulder the burden of leadership well.


Tropical Flower's Spectacular One-Night Stand
FOR centuries, the night-blooming cereus has enthralled anyone lucky enough to be up when its huge white fragrant blossoms open in the light of the moon (if there's no moon, don't worry; it will open anyway).
These nocturnal bloomers are tropical members of the cactus family, and if you see one, it is probably either Hylocereus undatus or Selenicereus grandiflorus.


Remembering the Best Dishes of the Year
YEAR'S end beckons us to recall the restaurants of 1992 that stood like beacons above the culinary landscape, shining their light on contented, happy diners.
Rated Excellent indeed was Terra (156 Greenwich Avenue, Greenwich, 629-5222), an Italian restaurant with a robust, country-style menu featuring thin-crusted pizzas, wood-grilled meats and fish, crisp-edged polenta with meaty wild mushrooms, carpaccio alla fiorentina, osso buco with ricotta milanese, and a heavenly tiramisu.
Not only is the food super but the setting also evokes a Tuscan farmhouse.


Corrections
A report in the Travel Advisory column on Dec. 6 about cruise ships in San Juan, P.R., and Miami misstated the number of ships for which Miami is home port and the time taken by a ship departing Miami to reach its first Caribbean port.
The number of ships is 19, and the time taken is a day and a half.
In addition, the report referred incorrectly to the volume of ships calling at Miami, compared with San Juan, and to the end of the Port of Miami's fiscal year.
Very few vessels whose home port is not Miami call at the port, and far more call at San Juan.
The year ends Sept. 30.


What We Pay For
To the Editor:
Your Dec. 2 and 3 editorials on "managed competition" state that patients "give little attention to doctor's fees or employer-paid insurance premiums because they pay only a small part of these bills." We disagree.
Patients have a growing sensitivity to their bills, deductibles, co-payments and premiums as the cost of medical care grows at a rate four times faster than the national economy and patients are forced to pick up a bigger share of the burden.


Treated for Infection, Tsongas Goes Home
Former Senator Paul E. Tsongas was discharged from a Boston hospital on Friday after treatment for a serious infection that was attributed to a complication from the chemotherapy he was receiving in his latest battle against cancer.
Mr.
Tsongas, who is 51, was also treated in a coronary care unit for an abnormal heart rhythm.
Mr.
Tsongas, a candidate for the Democratic Presidential nomination, went home to Lowell, Mass., from the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute in Boston after a two-week stay.


The Graham Genius Still Soars But Too Bad About That Mangled 'Swan'
The Eternal Flame -- More than a year after her death, the genius of Martha Graham was felt anew in "Panorama," an exercise in high dynamics for 33 women in red who seemingly stride off into the future; created in 1935 and never seen before in New York, this revival by the Graham company was the season's stunner.
Dancer of the Year -- Indisputably Ethan Stiefel, a 19-year-old Mercury whose energetic purity enhanced the New York City Ballet's Balanchine repertory and the troupe's giant choreographic workshop, the Diamond Project.


OFF THE COUCH
Stone's article nicely illustrates the tensions within organized psychiatry by focusing on their effect on one prestigious training program.
What complicates the hopes for rationality in the simplistically characterized shift from "mind" to "brain" is that the complex issues involved will likely be decided on other than disinterested grounds.
Tendentious and overly reductionistic models of mental illness and disturbingly powerful economic influences are now clearly part of the scene.


Raiders Put Redskins In Danger
Obsessed with the past, Raiders owner Al Davis gallivanted around his team's locker room this evening, comparing Vince Evans to George Blanda, the team's onetime ageless wonder.
Davis had reason to strut, for Evans, 37 years old and previously more famous for his days with the Chicago Blitz, had just engineered a two-minute drill that may end up haunting Washington for a long time.
Evans's 3-yard touchdown bullet to Tim Brown with 13 seconds left in the game elevated a makeshift group of Raiders to a 21-20 upset victory over the Redskins that may have cut off the heads of the defending Super Bowl champions.
The Redskins (9-7) can only make the National Conference playoffs if Green Bay loses to the Vikings Sunday in Minneapolis.


Dalys Make Statements
JOHN DALY, in a statement issued yesterday, said he deeply regretted the embarrassment of this past week.
And BETTYE DALY, the golfer's wife, said she did not press charges against her husband as a result of an altercation at their Castle Rock, Colo., home.
Bettye Daly issued the statement on Friday through her husband's Washington-based attorney, STEVEN M. FREI.
She said: "I was not struck or physically injured in the incident. I neither reported the incident nor requested the sheriff's department to intervene."


New Jersey Q &amp; A: Dr. Robert L. Chapman; State's Major Role in the New Roget's
THE appearance of the fifth edition of Roget's International Thesaurus this year was a major event in the worlds of publishing and academe -- particularly so because Dr.
Robert L. Chapman, the editor, took it upon himself to make some basic changes in the organization of the 1852 classic.
It was, as he put it during an interview at his white Colonial house here, a "disruption of the linguistic firmament."
Dr.
Chapman, 72, a scholar who has an uncanny resemblance to the extant portraits of Geoffrey Chaucer, a giant of medieval literature, spent 20 years teaching that subject at Drew University ("a five-minute bike ride away") before his retirement in 1986.


This Old House
LIFE AT BURGHLEY
Restoring One of England's Great Houses.
By Victoria Leatham.
Illustrated. 240 pp.
Boston: Little, Brown &amp; Company. $40.


How to Help Riders Park Near L.I.R.R.
As a commuter from the Salisbury section of Westbury for the last 10 years, I am continually appalled at the discriminatory lack of commuter parking  [ "L.I.R.R. Adds Parking Spots as Ridership Keeps Slipping," Nov. 29 ] .
There is a lot available for residents of North Hempstead-Westbury with a minimal yearly fee.
Those of us in the township of Hempstead have the honor of paying $1.75 per day for a lot that is completely full at 7:20 A.M. and has an unfriendly attendant.
After 7:20 one has to search for alternate-side parking in a neighborhood six blocks away or park one-half mile away on the eastern side of the station.
The southern side of the Westbury station is dreary and dangerous.
Recently someone was beaten to death there at 9 o'clock on a Saturday night.


Highlights From a Year of Changes
CHARLES DICKENS wrote that the New Year was like the world's infant heir, "waited for with welcomes, presents and rejoicings." But while we wait, let's rejoice in some of 1992's cultural achievements in Westchester, including anniversaries, new appointments and the births of several musical organizations and venues.
The year had barely begun when the Chappaqua Orchestra, disbanded in 1990, was reborn as the Chappaqua Chamber Orchestra under the direction of James Sadewhite of Irvington.
"Our first program was an amazing success," a trustee, Mary Rohde, said.
"We quickly sold all the seats in the Chappaqua Library Theater and now have a waiting list of nearly 100 names." The next concert is Jan. 16.


Lieut. Gen. G. H. Davidson, 88, Strategist in Wars
Lieut.
Gen.
Garrison Holt Davidson, who led task forces in World War II and the Korean War and later served as commander of the General Staff College at Fort Leavenworth, Kan., the United States Military Academy at West Point and the Seventh Army in Europe, died on Friday in Oakland, Calif.
He was 88 years old.
General Davidson, who retired in 1964 and lived in Oakland, died of natural causes at Oak Knoll Naval Hospital, where he was admitted earlier in the week, his family said.


Are Actors the Best Directors? (And Should Columbus Sue?)
When Bad Movies Happen to Good Actors -- Jack Nicholson's freshest performance in years redeems the incoherent "Hoffa"; Robert Downey Jr. seems miraculously real in the plodding "Chaplin."  Oscar Prediction -- The All-Actors Race for Best Director -- Clint Eastwood for "Unforgiven," Robert Redford for "A River Runs Through It," Rob Reiner for "A Few Good Men," Danny DeVito for "Hoffa," Richard Attenborough for "Chaplin." How can the Academy resist?


Jamie Lee Curtis Faces Up to Her Image
Jamie Lee Curtis is sitting in the study of her new Santa Monica home, trying to get comfortable.
The room, with its Spanish, high-beamed ceilings, feels airy and light.
But the light is too harsh, so she rises to adjust the curtains.
Then she feels too warm, so she jumps up to open the window.
Except the gardener is working outside with a whining, electric leaf blower.
So she dashes out the door in her brand new, black-suede platform heels to tell him to stop.
When she returns, she notices a spot of water glistening on the floor.
So she flies to the kitchen for a towel, and then she's down on her knees in her beautiful black jumpsuit.
After three seconds in the loveseat she decides it's too drafty and leaps up to close the window.


Katherine Bicknell, Jonathan Locke
Mr. and Mrs.
Basil C. Bicknell of London have announced the engagement of their daughter Katherine Ann Bicknell to Jonathan Charles Locke, a son of Gordon C. Locke of Westcliff-on-Sea, Essex, England, and the late Jacqueline Locke.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss Bicknell, 26 years old, is an accountant in London with the Maersk Company, a shipping concern.
She graduated from Ithaca College.
Her father is the managing director of international advertising for The New York Times in London.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
CHRISTMAS BIRD COUNT
The annual Christmas bird count is under way this morning at Wave Hill in Riverdale, and anyone interested in participating can still be admitted before the session ends at 1 P.M.


This Week's Numbers
Consensus
Last Period
Estimates
*2*(I.D.E.A. Inc.)
Tuesday
Nov. existing home sales, in millions, annual rate
3.60 3.65
Dec. consumer confidence index
65.5
71.3
Wednesday
Nov. new home sales, in thousands, annual rate
600
625
Nov. leading indicators, percent change
+0.4
+0.6
Thursday
Dec. Chicago purchasing managers index
54.2
56.0
Mid-Dec. jobless claims, in thousands
360
350
Tuesday: Johnson Redbook Survey of retail sales released  Thursday: Treasury announces details of seven-year note auction  Friday: Holiday, markets closed


A Solo Sailor Disappears, and the Questions Linger
The episode at sea that took the life of Mike Plant, the solo sailor who was on a trans-Atlantic voyage in October from New York to France, has left many unanswered questions.
The 42-year-old Plant, a respected ocean racer, is presumed dead, lost at sea after his 60-foot racing boat, Coyote, capsized.
The overturned boat, which was examined by French divers on Nov. 25 in an area about 700 miles southwest of Ireland, has not been salvaged.
In fact, the whereabouts of the vessel are now unknown.


Clinton Turning to New Yorkers
Just a few months ago, the Vice President of the United States came to New York, not to praise, but to berate and in fact to ridicule the place where Democrats would nominate their Presidential candidate.
"In so many ways," Dan Quayle said last June, "the liberal Democrats chose the perfect site for their convention, almost as if they feel a strange compulsion to return to the scene of the crime."


A Home For Homeless Arts
To the Editor:
Edward Rothstein's analysis of the work of my father, William Kolodney, as the founder of the arts programs at the 92d Street Y  [ "Lessons for the Future May Lurk in the Past," Nov. 29 ]  captures many of the central elements of my father's philosophy.
What it misses, in part, is the realistic, very practical approach that was necessary to create and maintain arts at the Y.


The Actress Who Wouldn't Pretend
SHATTERED APPLAUSE
The Lives of Eva Le Gallienne.
By Robert A. Schanke.
Illustrated. 319 pp.
Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press. $39.95.


Memories Open Spanish Hearts to Refugees
While European governments, including Spain's, have been reluctant to take in refugees of the Balkan war, many ordinary Spaniards are eager to welcome them.
The televised images from Bosnia and Herzegovina have stirred searing memories here of Spain's civil war in the late 1930's.


Mashburn Goes Searching for Himself
Jamal Mashburn leaned back on the trainer's table recently, and reflected on his career as a University of Kentucky basketball player and his life as a student.
In the last three years, the two have become separate entities.
In terms of his career, life has been extraordinary.


Hometown Boy Takes Over Ft. Monmouth as Cutbacks Loom
"YOU'RE talking about a one-in-a-million chance," Otto J. Guenther said.
The slim, straight-as-a-ramrod 51-year-old was talking about the odds against an officer's being chosen to command his hometown Army base.
But Major General Guenther, born in Long Branch and raised in Red Bank, beat the odds when he was named commander of Fort Monmouth five months ago.
And he has spent the time since then coping with threatened cutbacks in the size and scope of the fort's operations.


Data Bank/December 27, 1992


Houses of Worship Widening Rentals
ABOUT three years ago, the Rev.
Darrell Berger took a close look at the income and outgo of the Unitarian Universalist Church at 76th Street and Central Park West and the balance made him blanch.
The landmarked church had deferred needed maintenance for decades, and its physical condition was getting dire.
The endowment wasn't large enough to cover routine bills, let alone extraordinary repairs, and the congregation was neither rich enough nor large enough to make up the deficits.
But then Dr.
Berger had a flash: If the building is the biggest drain on assets, why should it not also be the biggest contributor to them?
After all, the sanctuary was used for worship services only on weekends.
The church's main hall, conference rooms, gym and kitchens sat idle much of the time, too.
And precedents had been set: Various organizations had rented space from the church for more than 20 years.


Ed and Dre At the Movies
IF you had stumbled upon the set for "Who's the Man?" shooting on the streets of Greenwich Village a few weeks ago, and had wanted to catch a glimpse of the director, Ted Demme, you would not have found him in any typical directorial poses or situations.
He was not sitting in a director's chair, shouting orders and making everybody feel a little tense.
He was not wearing a headset or wandering around whispering covert instructions to one assistant, who then whispered to another assistant.
Mr.
Demme did not appear powerful and pained and angst-ridden.
No, Mr.
Demme was the jovial, stocky, bearish-looking fellow standing in the middle of the street, laughing and hugging a hooker.
You see, this night's shooting happened to be on the eve of the recent nonhurricane, and the hooker, played by actress Leslie Segar, was cold.
Take after take, she had to linger on the corner of West 12th and 4th streets, across from the Cafe Rosso (the set of that night's action), wearing just a bustier and tights.
Finally, Mr.
Demme, an affectionate, hugging sort of guy, took matters into his own hands.
He was wearing a dark-green parka, pale-blue jeans and hiking boots.
He might have reminded you of that friend of your brother's in high school, the one who was nice to you and didn't treat you like a geek.


1992: THE BEST OF THE YEAR
BEST TEAM: The Dream Team 2. Chicogo Bulls 3. Duke


Gina M. LaRoche and Alan C. Price
Gina Marie LaRoche, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Calvin C. LaRoche of Weston, Conn., was married yesterday to Alan Curtis Price, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Cyril H. Price of New York.
The Rev.
Carney Gavin, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at Sacred Heart Church in Georgetown, Conn.
The Rev.
Thomas Mikelson, a Unitarian Universalist minister, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Price, 26, is an M.B.A. candidate at Harvard University, from which her husband received a law degree.
She graduated from Georgetown University.
Her father is the vice president of business development in the White Plains consulting group of the International Business Machines Corporation.
Her mother, Cheryl LaRoche, is an associate conservator at the Foley Square Laboratory, an archeological project in lower Manhattan.


Aides Say Top Democrats Backed Weinberger Pardon
Several prominent Democratic lawmakers contacted the White House in the days leading up to President Bush's pardon of Caspar W. Weinberger, the Defense Secretary in the Reagan Administration, privately assuring the President they would not protest a clemency decision, Administration officials said today.
Two prominent House Democrats, Representatives Thomas S. Foley of Washington and Les Aspin of Wisconsin, conveyed their support for the pardon to the White House, the officials said.
Mr.
Foley is the House Speaker; Mr.
Aspin is President-elect Bill Clinton's choice for Defense Secretary.


About Cars; Sticking Comfortably With Tradition
LINCOLN'S literature notes that its 1993 Town Car has a freshened appearance and the latest in creature comforts.
And, it adds, the fresh look "extends from bumper to bumper, from a new grille to standard geometric-spoke aluminum wheels, to new taillamps and a rear safety-reflector bar."
Ahem.


The View From: Hartford; Symphony's Musicians and Managers Back in Tune
IN late October, after a 18-month-long dispute between the musicians union and the management of the Hartford Symphony, agreement was reached on a new three-year contract.
A month later, the musicians took their places on stage at the Bushnell auditorium and when the conductor, Michael Lankester, came on stage the orchestra received a standing ovation.
"There was a sense of warmth, and maybe relief," said the chairman of the Symphony's board, Peter Burgess, who described the previous year as "horrific."


Class Journey to Israel For Jewish Teen-Agers
A group of 13-year-olds is getting ready to leave for an extraordinary class trip, a journey far more ambitious than the standard senior-class visit to Washington's tourist attractions.
The students, from the Bi-Cultural Day School here, will spend a month of their school year in Israel, in what the school considers the culmination of their eight years of schooling, which has combined Jewish and secular studies.


Historic Trust Adds 15 Hotels
The National Trust for Historic Preservation has added 15 hotels to its Historic Hotels of America program, selecting them for historic character, architecture and the preservation efforts made by owners and managers.
To qualify, hotels must be at least 50 years old, listed in or eligible for the National Register of Historic Places or recognized locally as having historic significance.


Allison Bolch, Crawford Moran
May wedding plans have been announced for Allison Kirsten Bolch and Crawford Cotten Moran.
Miss Bolch, 24, graduated from Denison University and received a master's degree from the University of Georgia.
She is the daughter of Jean Sprunger of Amagansett, L.I., and Carl E. Bolch Jr. of Atlanta.
Her father owns and runs Racetrac Petroleum Inc., a petroleum marketing company in Atlanta.
Her mother is the president of Thimbelina, a needlepoint design concern in East Hampton, L.I.
The prospective bride's stepfather, Charles Sprunger, owns Coquillage, a lighting and landscape concern in Amagansett.
She is also the stepdaughter of Susan B. Bolch of Atlanta.


Ill Artists' Effort to Insure That Art Survives AIDS
In those moments of uncertainty when Kevin Oldham summons up the specter of the AIDS virus that has threatened him for the last four years, it is the secondary death, the artistic death, that seems to be the authentic nightmare.
He worries that the music he has devoted every bit of his waning energy to creating might be cast away, never performed, or -- worst of all -- forgotten.
A highly regarded 32-year-old composer in a discipline in which 50-year-olds are considered young turks, Mr.
Oldham has just begun to win recognition.
Yet along with an increasing number of young composers, painters, writers, choreographers and other artists, all of whom are H.I.V.-positive or who have AIDS, Mr.
Oldham has had to face the fact of his artistic legacy at a younger age than most.
For the first time, a systematic volunteer effort is helping artists to deal with the painful question of the posthumous future of their works.


Diane Bauer and Eric Orlinsky
Marian J. Bauer of Stamford, Conn., has announced the engagement of her daughter Diane Julie Bauer to Eric Gustav Orlinsky, the son of Jo-Ann M. Orlinsky and Walter S. Orlinsky, both of Baltimore.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
Bauer, 26, graduated cum laude from Columbia University.
She is a fourth-year medical student at Johns Hopkins University.
Her father, Stephen Bauer of Mount Kisco, N.Y., is an accountant in Purchase, N.Y.
Her mother is a real-estate saleswoman at Coldwell Banker Schlott Realtor in Stamford.


County's Party Will Keep the Cork On
THE year is almost at an end, and it is time for decision making: what to do on New Year's Eve?
For those who plan to hunker down, far from the madding -- not to say drunken -- crowds, the county has a suggestion: come to the "Just Say Happy New Year" party at the County Center, the first such celebration in those roomy halls.


Is Paris Smoking?
FRANCE is an odd place to go if you want to quit smoking.
Well, you didn't choose your destination with that in mind, did you?
You have other compelling reasons for being there.
But as it happens your trip coincides with a determined resolve to be forever rid of the nasty habit.
You nobly choose the nonsmoking section of the plane, endure the antiseptic surrounds of Charles de Gaulle Airport, then the train ride to the Gare du Nord.
Luggage.
Misdirections.
Faltering French.
Confusion.
No time for the usual nicotine fix.
You haven't had a cigarette in eight or nine hours, by golly!


The High Tatra's Wild Beauty
"IT must be admitted that the social amenities of Czechoslovak winter resorts are not yet organized on anything like the luxurious lines of those of the most famous in Switzerland and France." So says "Czechoslovakia, the Land and Its People," by Clive Holland, a guidebook published by Dodd, Mead in 1931.
But, the author concedes, the High Tatra area is "fully equalling the lower Alps in its grandeur and natural beauty."
More than 60 years and a stunning run of modern politics have not made much of an impact either on the wild and rugged beauty of the mountains or on the offerings of the resorts now run by the state.
After the Alps, the Tatra are Central Europe's highest mountains, and the eastern republic of Slovakia, soon to be independent, shares the 16-mile-long range with Poland to the north.
The necklace of resorts tucked into its foothills still tend more to the basic than to the elegant.


The End. It's Over. Jets Fade Away.
It seemed a completely fitting conclusion to a horrendous season.
The Jets lost, 20-0, to the New Orleans Saints, finished with a 4-12 record and played before an unenthusiastic crowd at Giants Stadium.
It was the first time since 1989 that the Jets had been shut out.
Coincidentally, Coach Joe Walton was fired after the '89 season, also when the Jets finished with a 4-12 record.
Other than a lone banner with "Coslet Must Go" that sprang up sporadically at the east end of Giants Stadium, during the game, the masses aren't calling for the head of Coach Bruce Coslet right now.


Sports of the Times; Postcards From Datelines Near and Afar in 1992
WHEN I was a news reporter in Kentucky, I schemed to find stories from exotic datelines like Pippa Passes or Greasy Creek or Dwarf.
Alas, I never did get out to the Illinois border to justify an article from Monkeys Eyebrow.
Since they don't play the Super Bowl in Rowdy or Fisty or Cutshin, Ky. -- although, goodness knows, they should -- a sports columnist usually takes the datelines in the big cities, with their megahotels and humongadomes.
And at the end of the year, I send postcards from wherever the action was.


Barbara Smith and Dan Gasby
Barbara Elaine Smith, the owner of B. Smith's Restaurant in New York, was married on Wednesday to Clarence Alvin Daniel Gasby, the senior vice president of marketing at Camelot Entertainment Sales Inc., a syndicator of television programs in New York.
The Rev.
Dr.
Dale D. Hansen performed the ceremony at St.
Luke's Lutheran Church in New York.
Ms.
Smith, 40, is keeping her name.
She is the daughter of the late William and Florence Smith.
The bride's father was a steelworker in Clairton, Pa., for the United States Steel Corporation, now called the USX Corporation.
The bride's previous marriage ended in divorce, as did the bridegroom's.


Demystifying Racing's Independent Champion
Maybe now, Alan Kulwicki won't have to explain it anymore.
Now, perhaps those well-heeled team owners will stop wondering why Kulwicki refused their job offers, preferring to struggle with his own team, fighting to survive long enough to turn it into the championship outfit it now is.


Hawaii's Gentle Throwback
SIXTEEN years ago, in one of those boondoggles for which Hawaii is infamous, then Gov.
John Burns had an international airport built in Hilo.
The idea was to attract jumbo jets full of mainland and Japanese tourists direct to this lush historic city that hugs a crescent-shaped bay at the foot of two mammoth volcanoes on the Big Island of Hawaii.
But the airport's long corridors and runways are mostly quiet now.
The expected armies of tourists never came, bypassing Hilo for the sunny dry Kona coast of the Big Island, with its glittery new condominiums, hotel developments, golf courses and high prices.
The problem with Hilo is rain, roughly 130 inches, 280 days or so a year.
One no more leaves home in Hilo without an umbrella than without shoes.
Visitors and residents stroll through the quaint downtown of old wooden clapboard and stucco buildings under corrugated tin overhangs that cover the sidewalks.
The warm tropical rains come and go during the day, on and off, then are heavy and steady during the night, the year round.
The patter of drops outside becomes as familiar as chirping birds, something local people screen out as New Yorkers do honking taxicabs.
"What Rain?" asks a button distributed by the Hawaii Island Chamber of Commerce.


Hungary's Writer-President Tries to Span Gap
The revolutions of 1989 propelled writers from the moral barricades to the seats of power.
In Hungary, Czechoslovakia and Bulgaria, writers forsook their garrets to become heads of state.
For Arpad Goncz, the writer-turned-President of Hungary, the change makes sense.


On Language; Warlords, Bandits, Thugs and Regional Leaders
"Why is the word  warlord employed for the gunmen in Somalia," asks Herb O'Connor of ABC News, "as opposed to other places in the world? It seems a Draculian kind of term."
I like
Draculian
, imputing bloodiness, somewhat on the analogy of
Draconian
. And I agree that
warlord
is a word that seems out of place in Africa.


No Surprise the Public Is Out of the Loop
Mrs.
Gualtieri of the Suffolk Community Alliance shouldn't be surprised that "the democratic process was circumvented" by the State Power Authority at Holtsville  [ "State Presses Plan to Build Power Plant, Dec. 6 ] . The public has no control over energy decisions, and she might have added where are the citizens on Judge Weinstein's citizen advisory panel? Where are the elections for the directors of the L.I. Power Authority, and where is the public in the Public Service Commission?
The State P.S.C. is about 90 years old, and governors of that time, including Franklin D. Roosevelt, thought that the public was too stupid to set electric rates.
So politicians would appoint commissioners, instead of having them stand for election, sort of like our present Governor's thinking that the public was stupid in turning down the last bond issue for this debt-ridden state.


Peeling Back the Layers of Veneered Furniture
MENDING veneered furniture is a picky job, one tailor-made for whiling away winter weekends.
Veneer on everyday furniture can usually be repaired by amateurs, even novices.
But fine veneered furniture, especially antiques, should be taken to a professional restorer.
To fix cracks, try rubbing them with an appropriately colored putty stick, although an ordinary crayon is often an effective substitute.
In both cases, choose a color that is slightly lighter than the surrounding wood.


Calendars That Offer More Than Dates
THE time has come to close the books on another year, an occasion to glance over the calendar of the 12 months past and start anew.
For many, the backward look is to be avoided.
As Oscar Wilde put it, "Most modern calendars mar the sweet simplicity of our lives by reminding us that each day that passes is the anniversary of some perfectly uninteresting event."


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
FROM BIRDLAND TO BROADWAY Scenes From a Jazz Life.
By Bill Crow.
Oxford University, $24.


GENDER DE PLUME
As the editors of "Catholic Girls," we would like to make three points about Dinty W. Moore's About Men column "Gender de Plume" (Dec. 6):
We find it unbelievable that Moore could have misunderstood our call for stories or poems on "the experience of Catholic girlhood," claiming that it never occurred to him that ours was a collection of writings by women.


Kicking Around Hollywood And Rating the Ratings
Strong Satire -- On the subjects of Hollywood ("The Player," "Mistress") and politics ("Bob Roberts").
Silly Ratings -- Three major misfires: "Home Alone 2" (a sadistic PG), "Batman Returns" (PG-13, nice for the tie-in toy market but not representative of the film's double-entendres and mean-spirited mood) and "Basic Instinct" (if this is an R-worthy thriller, Sharon Stone is Santa Claus).


A Flap for 'Wolves' and a Rush for 'Beauty'
Here or to Go? -- Over howls of protest from video dealers left out of the deal, Orion agreed to sell Kevin Costner's "Dances With Wolves" exclusively at McDonald's.
Don't Kill the Reindeer -- After hiring a Moscow studio to animate "The Snow Queen," the tape's American producers had to negotiate with Russian animators who like their fairy tales grimmer and more realistic than the sunny versions preferred by American audiences.


The Great Swamp Must Be Protected
The article about the Great Swamp on Nov. 29 ("The Great Swamp as Battlefield, Again") should arouse the interest and ire of every responsible citizen of New Jersey.
The Great Swamp is a state and national treasure, which should be protected at any cost.
All swamps filter water, but all swamps have limited capacity and, once filled with pollutants, they die.


Schools in China Try a Sideline: Making Money
Peng Wenyi, a high-school principal, worries about absenteeism, lesson plans and his pupils' test scores.
But these days, he also frets about the school's plans to expand its three clothing shops into a large department store.
Seven hundred miles to the north, the Sanyuanli Xiaoli Elementary School has a small sign at the main entrance.
But it has an even larger sign next to that one, identifying its sideline venture: "Air-Conditioner and Refrigerator Repair Shop."


Corrections
A article on Dec. 6 about Oaxaca, Mexico, misstated the Spanish word for fried grasshoppers.
It is chapulines.


What We Pay For
To the Editor:
Your Dec. 2 and 3 editorials on "managed competition" state that patients "give little attention to doctor's fees or employer-paid insurance premiums because they pay only a small part of these bills." We disagree.
Patients have a growing sensitivity to their bills, deductibles, co-payments and premiums as the cost of medical care grows at a rate four times faster than the national economy and patients are forced to pick up a bigger share of the burden.


1992: THE BEST OF THE YEAR
BEST EVENT: N.L.C.S., Game 7 2. Summer Olympics 3. Duke-Kentucky N.C.A.A. game


Cruises Return As Kauai Rebounds
The Hawaiian island of Kauai, devastated by Hurricane Iniki in September, continues to rebound, with some resorts and tourist operations back in business and others on the way.
Among major resorts, the Kauai Hilton and the Kauai Coconut Beach Resort have reopened.
Day tours of the island by helicopter and bus have resumed, after having been discouraged by the state since the storm.
Cruise ships will return to the island next month.
With its sailings from Jan. 9, American Hawaii Cruises plans to begin calling again at Nawiliwili Bay with the Constitution and Independence.


Corrections
A picture caption in Styles of The Times on Dec. 6 referred incorrectly to the editor of Inward Path, a New Age Russian magazine.
She is Aleksandra Yakovleva.


Paella That's Easy to Prepare for a Party
FOR people who entertain, this week is the last chance of the year.
It offers a final few days to invite, greet and feed friends, acquaintances and, while you are at it, those whose status is simply that of social obligation.
And for people who usually do not entertain, this week is the last chance to make a showing in 1992.
Whichever category you are in, the week calls for a party.
Unless you engage a well-staffed caterer, a certain amount of work is unavoidable.
The most pragmatic approach is the bountiful buffet.
It can be anchored by a smoked turkey or turkey breast from a good butcher or catering shop.
And it should be flanked by three or four grain and vegetable salads, purchased or homemade.


1992 CHAMPIONS Compiled by Vincent M. Mallozzi. Archery  World Champions   Women's Barebow -- Nadine Visconti, France.    Men's Barebow -- A. Rosenberg, Sweden.    Women's Freestyle -- Carole Ferriou, France.    Men's Freestyle -- Jay Barrs, U.S.A.    Women's Compound -- Susanne Kessler, Denmark.   Men's Compound -- Morgan Lundin, Sweden.    U.S. Champions   Women's Freestyle -- Sherry Block, Colorado Springs.   Men's Freestyle -- Allen Rasor Jr., Los Angeles.   Senior Women's Freestyle -- Denise Parker, South Jordan, Utah.   Senior Men's Freestyle -- Jay Barrs, Mesa, Ariz.   Women's Olympic Style -- Judi Adams, Phoenix.   Men's Olympic Style -- Jay Barrs.   Men's Compound Unlimited -- Kirk Ethridge, Rogersville, Tenn.   Women's Compound Unlimited -- Inga Low, Roseville, Calif.   Men's Barebow -- Bob Burns, Rough and Ready, Calif.   Women's Barebow -- Jacquie Low, Santa Cruz, Calif.    Auto Racing   Formula One -- Nigel Mansell, Great Britain, Williams-Renault.   CART PPG-Indy Car -- Bobby Rahal, Dublin, Ohio   Nascar Winston Cup -- Alan Kulwicki, Charlotte, N.C., Ford Thunderbird.   S.C.C.A. Trans-Am -- Jack Baldwin, Marietta, Ga., Camaro.   World of Outlaws Sprint Cars -- Steve Kinser, Bloomington, Ind.   Indianapolis 500 -- Al Unser Jr., Albuquerque.   Daytona 500 -- Davey Allison, Hueytown, Ala.   LeMans 24 Hours -- Peugeot: Yannick Dalmas, France; Derek Warwick and Mark Blundell, Britain.   IMSA Camel G.T. -- Juan Fangio II, Balcarce, Argentina, Toyota.     Badminton  U.S. Champions   Men's Singles -- Chris Jogis, Palo Alto.   Women's Singles -- Joy Kitzmiller, Manhattan Beach, Calif.   Men's Doubles -- Ben Lee, Daly City, Calif., and Tom Reidy, Tempe, Ariz.   Women's Doubles -- Joy Kitzmiller and Linda French, Elmhurst, Ill.   Mixed Doubles -- Andy Chong, Chicago, and Linda French.    Collegiate Champions   Men's singles -- Tom Reidy, Arizona State.   Women's singles -- A. Andersson, Ariz. St.   Men's doubles -- Tom Reidy and Martin Flores, Arizona State.   Women's doubles -- Jenny Chan and Andrea Andersson, Arizona State.   Mixed doubles -- Tom Reidy and Jenny Chan, Arizona State.    World Champions   Men's Singles -- Zhao Jianhua, China.   Women's Singles -- Tang Jiuhong, China.    Men's Doubles -- Park Joo Bong and Kim Moon Soo, Korea.   Women's Doubles -- Nong Qunhua and Guan Weizhen, China.   Mixed Doubles -- Park Joo Bong and Chung Myung Hee, Korea.    Bandy   World -- Sweden.   Barrel Jumping   World Champion -- Patrick Le Clerc, St. Bruno, Quebec.   Baseball  Wo


Dizzy's Jazz, Buju's Blues And Latin Rhythms (Sans Salsa)
The Man With a Horn A saxophonist as President?
A guy who wanted to be a professional musician?
This bodes well.
If one dismisses Bill Clinton's expressed appreciation of Kenny G and underscores his expressed appreciation of Sonny Rollins, then we have the most receptive White House to jazz ever.
Diz at 75 -- Dizzy Gillespie celebrated his 75th birthday in grand style with a monthlong stand at the Blue Note in Manhattan, performing with a big band, a Latin group or with his peers.
Through it all came his personality, part vaudeville, part musical genius, and it's clear that he's just about as important as anybody who ever worked in jazz.


In Crown Heights, the Word on the Street Is Cease-Fire


Africa Thinks About Making Wildlife Pay for Its Survival
The old rhinoceros is an ugly beast.
One ear is long gone, probably chewed off by hyenas; the rangers call him Van Gogh.
His upper horn has been lost in combat and his face is thick with scar tissue.
Ecologists who watch his weary meanderings through the volcanic amphitheater of Pilanesburg National Park say he is past breeding and near death.
All the same, his prizefighter's mug would be a rare trophy for a big game hunter, who might pay $100,000 for the chance to kill one of the planet's 2,000 surviving black rhinos.
And $100,000, in the right hands, might buy a lot of protection for Van Gogh's endangered kin.


Talking: Mortgages; The Seller As Lender Alternative
PEOPLE who find themselves unable to buy a new house because bankers refuse to provide the financing to a potential buyer for their current house should seriously consider offering a private mortgage for all or part of the amount.
In this sort of an arrangement the buyer still makes a down payment (which the sellers can use for their next home).
The sellers then draw an income from the remainder rather than getting all the money in cash, much like interest on a long-term bond.


SOMALIA 1992
Somalia is in the region of the ancient world called the Land of Punt.
The three wise men who visited the infant Jesus came from there.
Until recently, the Somalis still sold gold, frankincense and myrrh in the market.


The Editorial Notebook; Guns in the News
The main action at Zirmo's Downtown Shooting Range takes place in a room that looks like an underground parking garage except that the columns supporting the ceiling are pocked by stray bullets.
The shooters stand in cubicles and fire at paper targets hung from wires running down the range on clothesline pulleys.
It's a safe place to learn more about the guns that are at the center of public debates over arming police and disarming criminals.
Charles Thomson, head of the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms New York field office has arranged for me to go to Zirmo's with Stan Wojis, his senior firearms instructor.


Fast-Forward to 1993: What's On, Who's Off and What's Still Fuzzy
A look back at 1993, courtesy of my crystal cathode-ray tube: JAN. 2 At Bill Parcells's first news conference as the head coach of the New York Giants, WWOR/Channel 9's Russ Salzberg asks, "Who's gonna be your quarterback?" After 30 minutes of invective by Parcells, the news media applauds Parcells's oratory.
MSG Network's Bob Page says: "The stumblebum didn't walk out on us like Handley."


Clinton the Composer
The nature of the President-elect's Cabinet selections has made clear that he will be his own chief policy architect.
News analysis and sketches of the appointees, page 22.


On the Road With 'Guys and Dolls' at the Shubert
NO question.
The traveling "Guys and Dolls" at the Shubert in New Haven is an on-the-money reflection of Broadway's real thing.
That goes for Tony Walton's pop comic strip sets and William Ivey Long's outrageously splashy costumes (a concurrence of color explosions), Jerry Zaks's staging (a lesson in overdrive) and Christopher Chadman's slick, revitalized choreography.
Frank Loesser's musical classic is unfailingly reassuring.
One gets caught up in Jo Swerling and Abe Burrows's book, a perfect model of musical theater craftsmanship.
Will Sky Masterson get Sarah Brown to Havana?
Will Nathan Detroit win the bet?
Where will the oldest established permanent floating crap game in New York be held?
By the end of the first scene --
the first scene
-- all these things really matter.


A Little Extra Love
A benefit for God's Love We Deliver, Dec. 16.


Paella That's Easy to Prepare for a Party
FOR people who entertain, this week is the last chance of the year.
It offers a final few days to invite, greet and feed friends, acquaintances and, while you are at it, those whose status is simply that of social obligation.
And for people who usually do not entertain, this week is the last chance to make a showing in 1992.
Whichever category you are in, the week calls for a party.
Unless you engage a well-staffed caterer, a certain amount of work is unavoidable.
The most pragmatic approach is the bountiful buffet.
It can be anchored by a smoked turkey or turkey breast from a good butcher or catering shop.
And it should be flanked by three or four grain and vegetable salads, purchased or homemade.


Dalys Make Statements
JOHN DALY, in a statement issued yesterday, said he deeply regretted the embarrassment of this past week.
And BETTYE DALY, the golfer's wife, said she did not press charges against her husband as a result of an altercation at their Castle Rock, Colo., home.
Bettye Daly issued the statement on Friday through her husband's Washington-based attorney, STEVEN M. FREI.
She said: "I was not struck or physically injured in the incident. I neither reported the incident nor requested the sheriff's department to intervene."


Where It's Working
To the Editor:
Contrary to what David Himmelstein and Steffie Woolhandler would have us believe (letter, Dec. 10), managed competition in health care is being put to work successfully in communities around the country by local employers acting together.


Corrections
Thursday's column mistakenly said Lincoln is part of Chrysler.
It is a division of Ford.


About Cars; Sticking Comfortably With Tradition
LINCOLN'S literature notes that its 1993 Town Car has a freshened appearance and the latest in creature comforts.
And, it adds, the fresh look "extends from bumper to bumper, from a new grille to standard geometric-spoke aluminum wheels, to new taillamps and a rear safety-reflector bar."
Ahem.


Providing Health Care: Is It Quantity vs. Quality?
With 13.7 percent of the elderly population in New York State living in Nassau and Suffolk Counties, the health issues of a graying Long Island, primarily long-term care, are taking on great significance.
When Bill Clinton takes office as President next month, Long Islanders will be waiting to see how his health-care plans will affect the Island.
Among the cautiously optimistic are three people who work daily with health issues of the elderly on the Island.


New Health System Must Include Dental Care
To the Editor:
Any overhaul of the health-care system must recognize the mouth and teeth as an essential part of the body.
I urge President-elect Clinton to propose legislation that includes oral health care in basic medical care.
Consider that at least 21 million work days are lost annually as a result of oral disease.


Sports of the Times; Postcards From Datelines Near and Afar in 1992
WHEN I was a news reporter in Kentucky, I schemed to find stories from exotic datelines like Pippa Passes or Greasy Creek or Dwarf.
Alas, I never did get out to the Illinois border to justify an article from Monkeys Eyebrow.
Since they don't play the Super Bowl in Rowdy or Fisty or Cutshin, Ky. -- although, goodness knows, they should -- a sports columnist usually takes the datelines in the big cities, with their megahotels and humongadomes.
And at the end of the year, I send postcards from wherever the action was.


OFF THE COUCH
By focusing on psychiatric treatment in emergency rooms and institutions, Elizabeth Stone's article "Off the Couch" (Dec. 6) portrays a wider gap between analytic psychotherapists and psychopharmacologists than actually exists.
Analytic treatment was never designed for the severe psychotic conditions described in the article.
The great bulk of psychiatric practice takes place in the therapist's office, with patients exhibiting depression, marital and sexual difficulties, phobias, obsessional thinking, etc., for which conditions analytic or other verbal therapy is still the treatment of choice.
ALVIN B. BLAUSTEIN, M.D.
New York, N.Y.


How Do You Describe Nagle's Season? !@#&amp;
In his first play of 1992 last September in Atlanta, quarterback Browning Nagle fumbled the snap from center and the ball was recovered by linebacker Michael Reid at the Jets' 14.
The Falcons converted the turnover into a touchdown and went on to win the game, 20-17.
On his last play, Nagle rolled out to his left, slipped free of a sack and lofted a pass into the end zone for receiver Chris Burkett.
The ball was intercepted by cornerback Toi Cook.


A State Crackdown on Insurance Fraud
OVER the last year, the New Jersey Insurance Fraud Division -- the largest, busiest and most aggressive agency of its kind in the country -- has investigated more fraud claims and collected more money in fines than ever before in its nine-year history.
And if Insurance Department officials have their way, the division is expected to soon become bigger, busier and, if possible, even more aggressive.


The End. It's Over. Jets Fade Away.
It seemed a completely fitting conclusion to a horrendous season.
The Jets lost, 20-0, to the New Orleans Saints, finished with a 4-12 record and played before an unenthusiastic crowd at Giants Stadium.
It was the first time since 1989 that the Jets had been shut out.
Coincidentally, Coach Joe Walton was fired after the '89 season, also when the Jets finished with a 4-12 record.
Other than a lone banner with "Coslet Must Go" that sprang up sporadically at the east end of Giants Stadium, during the game, the masses aren't calling for the head of Coach Bruce Coslet right now.


1992: The Year in Style
QUEEN ELIZABETH called 1992 "annus horribilis." In plain old American English, the year was a royal pain.
The recession continued to bite hard.
So did Dracula.
It was a great 12 months for bondage wear, body piercing and sex with ice picks.
Everything seemed to hurt.
Ross Perot, representing a triumph of anti-style, won hearts, minds and votes by offering a deficit-busting plan built on shared pain, a kind of Perot Workout that he said would help the body politic shed $3 trillion worth of unsightly flab.
The year's top fashion accessory was inspired by a disease, with Hollywood and Broadway actors displaying red lapel ribbons to show solidarity with people with AIDS.
The year's top toy, a Schwarzenegger-size water gun, turned the old-fashioned squirt gun into a brutal assault weapon that sometimes provoked return fire from actual Uzis.


Guatemala
To the Editor: Having read Linda Bird Francke's article "Guatemala's 16th Century Capital" (Nov. 22), I wondered if we had both indeed been in the same location, so completely different was her experience from mine last July, when I spent a month in Antigua.
I attended one of the language schools she mentions, but boarded with Guatemalans.
To say the least, that is very different from living in the colonial villa she lived in.
And I believe Ms.
Francke minimizes the danger still very much present all over the country.
I did travel outside Antigua, but always with a group because there were persistent reports of danger from guerrilla activity.
Even in Antigua, we were told that the trip to the volcano Vulcan de Angria would be made with armed guards. (I didn't go.) The Spanish newspapers (surprisingly open in view of the very repressive government) were full of reports of assassinations, especially in Guatemala City.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: December 27, 1992
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
6
THE DOOMSDAY CONSPIRACY, by Sidney Sheldon. (Warner, $5.99.) An American probes a mysterious balloon accident in the Alps.
2
9
A RIVER RUNS THROUGH IT, by Norman Maclean. (Pocket, $4.99.) Three tales of the outdoors in western Montana.
3
37
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) Racial tensions surface during a trial.
4
48
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
5
8
HIDEAWAY, by Dean Koontz. (Berkley, $5.99.) A man miraculously resuscitated after he has technically died is haunted by visions of evil.
6
5
ANGEL, by Johanna Lindsey. (Avon, $5.99.) A young woman enjoys a torrid romance while visiting a Texas ranch in the late 19th century.
7
3
THE WASTE LANDS, by Stephen King. (Signet, $6.99.) The third volume of "The Dark Tower," a series about time travel and a heroic quest.
8
8
A RIVER RUNS THROUGH IT, by Norman Maclean. (University of Chicago, $9.95.) Three tales of the outdoors in western Montana.
9
1
RISING SUN, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) The mysterious death of a woman leads to an investigation involving the American-Japanese rivalry.
10
1
FUGITIVE NIGHTS, by Joseph Wambaugh. (Perigord/Bantam, $6.50.) Three people on the trail of a dangerous fugitive in Palm Springs.
11
14
A THOUSAND ACRES, by Jane Smiley. (Fawcett, $12.) The fortunes of a farming family.
12
10
MIDNIGHT WHISPERS, by V. C. Andrews. (Pocket, $5.99.) The travails of Christie Longchamp, haunted by her relatives' passions.
13
12
SCARLETT, by Alexandra Ripley. (Warner, $6.99.) The sequel to "Gone With the Wind."
14
3
SUCH DEVOTED SISTERS, by Eileen Goudge. (Signet, $5.99.) The rivalry of two sisters for the love of the same man.
15 *
4
DRACULA, by Bram Stoker. (Signet, $3.99.) The 1897 novel about the exploits of a vampire-count.
16 *
5
ALL THE WEYRS OF PERN, by Anne McCaffrey. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $5.99.) The 11th volume in a science fiction series.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
2
5
DIANA: Her True Story, by Andrew Morton. (Pocket, $5.99.) A biography of the Princess of Wales.
3
8
WHEN YOU LOOK LIKE YOUR PASSPORT PHOTO, IT'S TIME TO GO HOME, by Erma Bombeck. (Harper Paperbacks, $5.99.) The tribulations of travel suffered all over the world.
4
11
BACKLASH, by Susan Faludi. (Anchor/ Doubleday, $12.50.) A journalist contends that the media and political groups are staging a war against women's rights.
5
8
MOLLY IVINS CAN'T SAY THAT, CAN SHE? by Molly Ivins. (Vintage, $11.) Essays about the recent political and cultural scene.
6 *
2
MEMORIES, by Ralph Emery with Tom Carter. (Pocket, $5.50.) The autobiography of a country-music broadcaster.
7
477
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration. (LP)
8 *
70
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France, as described by a British writer.
9
84
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
10
11
PUTTING PEOPLE FIRST, by Bill Clinton and Al Gore. (Times Books/Random House, $7.99.) The next Administration's program for "changing America."
11 *
16
UNITED WE STAND, by Ross Perot. (Hyperion, $4.95.) The Texas billionaire's suggestions for "rebuilding America."
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
72
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
2
14
THE INDISPENSABLE CALVIN AND HOBBES, by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) A collection of previously published cartoons.
3
7
COWS OF OUR PLANET, by Gary Larson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $8.95.) "Far Side" cartoons.
4
24
LIVE AND LEARN AND PASS IT ON, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Morsels of what various people have learned about life.
5
3
THE WORLD ALMANAC AND BOOK OF FACTS 1993. (World Almanac/Pharos, $7.95.) The latest edition of a standard reference work.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


Barcelona Up, Louis Kahn Down, Philip Johnson Redux
All This and Gaudi, Too -- Barcelona played host to the Olympics and captured the gold in architecture with dozens of new parks, squares and streetscapes that expand the possibilities of public space.
Department of Landmarks Preservation -- Philip Johnson, 87, parted company with his longtime associate John Burgee and launched a new solo career with projects in Texas, Ohio, Pennsylvania and Germany.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
CHRISTMAS BIRD COUNT
The annual Christmas bird count is under way this morning at Wave Hill in Riverdale, and anyone interested in participating can still be admitted before the session ends at 1 P.M.


On the Road With 'Guys and Dolls' at the Shubert
NO question.
The traveling "Guys and Dolls" at the Shubert in New Haven is an on-the-money reflection of Broadway's real thing.
That goes for Tony Walton's pop comic strip sets and William Ivey Long's outrageously splashy costumes (a concurrence of color explosions), Jerry Zaks's staging (a lesson in overdrive) and Christopher Chadman's slick, revitalized choreography.
Frank Loesser's musical classic is unfailingly reassuring.
One gets caught up in Jo Swerling and Abe Burrows's book, a perfect model of musical theater craftsmanship.
Will Sky Masterson get Sarah Brown to Havana?
Will Nathan Detroit win the bet?
Where will the oldest established permanent floating crap game in New York be held?
By the end of the first scene --
the first scene
-- all these things really matter.


Often-Injured Johnson Is Back With the Suns
The Phoenix Suns activated point guard KEVIN JOHNSON yesterday and waived ALEX STIVRINS to make room on the roster.
Johnson, a two-time All-Star, had missed 18 of the Suns' 22 games this season, including the last 12 because of a strained left hamstring and a strained groin.
In four games, he averaged 13.4 points and 6.5 assists.


Grave Site May Be Under Proposed Incinerator
The proposed site for a trash incinerator in the Brooklyn Navy Yard may sit atop graves of Revolutionary War prisoners, a lawyer for a group opposing the project said yesterday.
On Wednesday, an administrative law judge removed one of the last hurdles to construction of the incinerator, saying that the state Department of Environmental Conservation should grant the necessary permits without holding more hearings on the plant's environmental impact.


(Girl Bands)2 + 10-Gallon Hats + Harmony - Deconstruction = $16.98. That's List, of Course.
Suburban Cowboy -- Garth Brooks, who wears a 10-gallon hat while singing Billy Joel and Bob Seger songs.


Garth F. Stein and Andrea Perlbinder
Stephen and Sandy Perlbinder of New York have announced October wedding plans for their daughter Andrea Jo Perlbinder and Garth Ferguson Stein, the son of Marvin and Yolanda Stein of Seattle.
Ms.
Perlbinder, 28 years old, is a screenwriter in New York.
She graduated from Amherst College.
She and her husband received master's degrees in film from Columbia University.


Sound Bytes; Getting Them Young, Keeping Them Engaged
Sally Narodick has combined a career in business, including 15 years as an executive at the Seafirst Corporation, with a busy volunteer life in education.
For the past 10 years she has been on the board of directors for the Lakeside School of Seattle, whose alumni include Bill Gates and Paul Allen, founders of the Microsoft Corporation.
Recently she was appointed to the Washington Governor's council on educational reform.
She is also chairman and chief executive of the Edmark Corporation in Redmond, Wash., which developed Kid Desk and other highly regarded educational programs that encourage interaction of even preschoolers with the computer.
Question: How can businesses help education?


Streetscapes: The Belleclaire; A 1903 Home for the Homeless
IN the recent controversy about lodging homeless families in two Upper West Side hotels, much protest was heard from tenants of one of the buildings, at 333 West 86th Street, a plain-vanilla 1926 apartment hotel.
But the tenants of the other have been silent, the reverse of what those who know the building's history might have expected, because the 1903 Belleclaire at 77th Street and Broadway was one of the flashiest buildings of turn-of-the-century Manhattan.


Science Fiction
THE HARVEST (Spectra/Bantam, cloth, $23; paper, $12), by Robert Charles Wilson, is an intelligently conceived, fully realized novel that might be considered a gloss on the beautiful line of Yeats that one of the characters recalls at a key moment: "Man is in love and loves what vanishes."
Mr.
Wilson understands the virtue of simplicity when dealing with big subjects.
Omnipotent aliens arrive on Earth with an offer that sounds impossible to refuse: immortality for all.
Those who accept will enjoy a luminous existence beyond the flesh where words like "community" and "empathy" take on profound new meanings.
There is only one catch: such immortality will bring an end to humanity as we know it.


Business Diary/December 20-25
THE ECONOMY
The Recession That Was --
Now
They Tell Us


New Jersey Politicians Serve Public, Twice
For politicians in New Jersey, opportunity for elective office often knocks twice, sometimes in two places at once.
This can result in the full-service public servant, like Mayor William J. Pascrell Jr. of Paterson, a Democrat who is also a State Assemblyman; Councilman Ronald L. Rice of Newark, a Democrat who is also a State Senator, and Assemblyman John E. Rooney of Bergen County, a Republican who is also Mayor of tiny Northvale.


Formative Years; Seen, Heard, Even Worried About
In Washington and Little Rock, as on the campaign trail earlier, the talk has mainly been about economic recovery, productivity, the deficit, investment and international competition.
But churning below the surface of these often technical discussions is a larger unease about social decline, and in particular an anxiety about the next generation of Americans.
For many people, the country's economic difficulties are a sign that its seedbed institutions, the families, schools and religious bodies that nurture character, competence, trust and civic responsibility, are coming unraveled.


Somali Culture Holds Surprises, Some Pleasant, For American G.I.'s
MARINE Cpl.
Charles Cox landed here expecting to see starving children in a grim tableau of misery and death.
In his first week, though, Corporal Cox drove by lush farms and grazing land for cattle and other livestock that rivaled the richest countryside near his hometown, Mobile, Ala.
"We didn't expect to see camels and cornfields," said the 23-year-old infantryman.
For thousands of young American marines and soldiers in the military relief operation here -- many serving on their first overseas mission -- the reality of Somalia has differed sharply from their expectations.


You-Know-Who Leads '93 Commemoratives
THE United States Postal Service is ending the old year with a new idea and beginning the new year with an idea so awash in publicity that it seems old.
The new idea is a stamp to be issued Wednesday to celebrate the Chinese New Year, which falls on the first day after the first full moon after the sun enters Aquarius, or Jan. 23 this year.


Air France's Big Challenge
WHEN an Airbus A300 takes off for Air France, three crew members crowd into a cockpit designed for two.
The French carrier is the only airline in the world to have a flight engineer in an aircraft on which new instruments and automation have made the job superfluous.
The engineer's presence is a blatant example of how union strength and the French tradition that people should not be thrown out of work, even though their usefulness has ended, make the state-owned carrier appear woefully unprepared for the deregulation of Europe's airline industry, beginning Jan. 1.


Margaret Russell, T. M. S. Bereday
Margaret Scobey Russell, a daughter of Janet M. Russell of Cleveland and the late Charles K. Russell, was married Tuesday to Thaddeus Matthew Sigmund Bereday, the son of Mary H. Bereday of New York and the late George Z. F. Bereday.
The Rev.
Dr.
Walter F. Smith performed the Presbyterian ceremony at the Williams Club in New York.
Ms.
Russell, 26, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Haverford College and she and her husband are third-year law students at Case Western Reserve University.
Her father was a partner in the law firm of Thompson, Hine &amp; Flory in Cleveland.
Her mother is a registered nurse there.


Christine Faltz, Marshall Flax
Mr. and Mrs.
Ronald Faltz of Merrick, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Christine Marie Faltz, to Marshall Gene Flax, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Nathan Flax of Woodbury, L.I.
An April 1994 wedding is planned.
Ms.
Faltz, 23 years old, and her fiance, 25, graduated from Princeton University.
She is a second-year law student at Hofstra University.
Her father is a real-estate property appraiser in Merrick.
Her mother, Frances Faltz, is a personnel secretary for the New York City Board of Education in Brooklyn.


John Melby, 79, Who Tied Ouster As a Diplomat to Hellman Affair
John F. Melby, a diplomat who was dismissed from the State Department during the McCarthy era and attributed his ouster to an affair with Lillian Hellman, died on Dec. 18 in Guelph, Ontario, Canada, where he lived.
He was 79.
He died of a heart attack, family members said.


A la CarteA Worldly Chef Settles In at a Tortilla Takeout
What is a former chef from the Ritz Hotel in London doing at a takeout in Huntington Village?
That question from a reader, and others like it, resulted from a report in this column in September announcing the soon-to-open Tortilla Grill.
Faz Esmizadeh of Acapulco, Mexico, the friendly, talkative, chef and owner at the Tortilla takeout, has not only been a chef at the Ritz, but also at the Plaza, Grand Hyatt and New York Hilton Hotels in Manhattan.
Over 18 years he has done everything from preparing sushi to cooking kosher meals.


If the Catalogue Says It's New, Is It Better?
THIS is an exciting time of year for the trowel-and-hoe fraternity.
The catalogues are arriving, most of them from seed producers, but many from woody and perennial plant nurseries.
One garden sage called them "wish books." Indeed, they are.
These beautifully illustrated catalogues foretell the future, what the gardens might look like in 1993.
They offer enticements as to what might be grown.
Many adjectives are used: bigger flowers, vigorous plants, brighter colors, good flavor, abundant yields.


A Lonely Couch, a Dash of Sex. So Why the Yawns?
Sex Is More Popular Than Erotica While "Sex," Madonna's book of steamy photographs, became a No. 1 best-seller, her album "Erotica" was all but forgotten in the furor and slid quickly down the pop charts after peaking at No. 2.
From the Couch to Your Ears -- Peter Gabriel turned into a couch potato on his powerful, brooding album, "Us," whose songs dealt with his experiences in psychotherapy.


A Timely Civic Symbol
To the Editor:
In his essay "For Staten Island, a Ferry Terminal Rooted in the Past"  [ Nov. 22 ] , Herbert Muschamp expresses a limited view of what he thinks a modern ferry terminal should be and goes on to shortchange the design, by Venturi, Scott Brown &amp; Associates in conjunction with Anderson/Schwartz.


The Best Money Can Buy
If the National Football League players and owners conclude their negotiations tomorrow with a settlement that features a new free-agency system, the race for the best free agents will officially begin.
Free to sign with new teams would be xxx players whose contracts all expire on Feb. 1.
That total represents the 20 players who are plaintiffs for free agency in various court cases and xx five-year veterans given their freedom in the new contract.


SOMALIA 1992
James Nachtwey's photo essay "Somalia 1992" (Dec. 6) has once again taken us to hell.
He has looked at death through a viewfinder and put it on film for all to see.
He has captured the torment, the frustration and the stench of this nightmare.
Dare we say that it doesn't get any worse than this?
His photographs opened some eyes -- maybe even turned some stomachs.
The truth hurts.
H.
MARCO
New York, N.Y.
ILS&gt;Photo of starving Somalies (Photograph by James Nachtwey/Magnum)


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a report in the Night column in Styles of The Times last Sunday about a premiere party for the film "Toys" misidentified a star of the film.
She is Joan Cusak, not John Cusak.


On the Road With 'Guys and Dolls' at the Shubert
NO question.
The traveling "Guys and Dolls" at the Shubert in New Haven is an on-the-money reflection of Broadway's real thing.
That goes for Tony Walton's pop comic strip sets and William Ivey Long's outrageously splashy costumes (a concurrence of color explosions), Jerry Zaks's staging (a lesson in overdrive) and Christopher Chadman's slick, revitalized choreography.
Frank Loesser's musical classic is unfailingly reassuring.
One gets caught up in Jo Swerling and Abe Burrows's book, a perfect model of musical theater craftsmanship.
Will Sky Masterson get Sarah Brown to Havana?
Will Nathan Detroit win the bet?
Where will the oldest established permanent floating crap game in New York be held?
By the end of the first scene --
the first scene
-- all these things really matter.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
123.90
123.07
125.92
per Dollar
German Mark
1.5997
1.5641
1.5188
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.5240
1.2753
1.1605
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.2613
1.5660
1.8742
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$333.00$337.00
$353.75
Republic
National Bank
Currency: Thursday NY Close


Bulls Coach Exploits Bragging Rights
It would not have been a good idea for the Knicks to look back to a game that got away from them Friday night in Chicago.
They would have seen Phil Jackson gloating.
"I think they're too old," Jackson said, a quote that jumped off the front page of The Chicago Tribune's sports section yesterday morning, after the Knicks had left Chicago to play the Bucks here last night.
"They're not as young as we were when we were going after the Pistons. We had only to go up.


1992: THE BEST OF THE YEAR
STORY OF THE YEAR: Arthur Ashe 2.
Baseball's self-destruction 3. 20th Anniversary of Title IX


Bringing the Doctors In
To the Editor:
Any advice from Dr.
C.
Everett Koop must be granted serious consideration, including his recommendation that medical care reform be further studied (letter, Nov. 30).


1992 CHAMPIONS Compiled by Vincent M. Mallozzi. Archery  World Champions   Women's Barebow -- Nadine Visconti, France.    Men's Barebow -- A. Rosenberg, Sweden.    Women's Freestyle -- Carole Ferriou, France.    Men's Freestyle -- Jay Barrs, U.S.A.    Women's Compound -- Susanne Kessler, Denmark.   Men's Compound -- Morgan Lundin, Sweden.    U.S. Champions   Women's Freestyle -- Sherry Block, Colorado Springs.   Men's Freestyle -- Allen Rasor Jr., Los Angeles.   Senior Women's Freestyle -- Denise Parker, South Jordan, Utah.   Senior Men's Freestyle -- Jay Barrs, Mesa, Ariz.   Women's Olympic Style -- Judi Adams, Phoenix.   Men's Olympic Style -- Jay Barrs.   Men's Compound Unlimited -- Kirk Ethridge, Rogersville, Tenn.   Women's Compound Unlimited -- Inga Low, Roseville, Calif.   Men's Barebow -- Bob Burns, Rough and Ready, Calif.   Women's Barebow -- Jacquie Low, Santa Cruz, Calif.    Auto Racing   Formula One -- Nigel Mansell, Great Britain, Williams-Renault.   CART PPG-Indy Car -- Bobby Rahal, Dublin, Ohio   Nascar Winston Cup -- Alan Kulwicki, Charlotte, N.C., Ford Thunderbird.   S.C.C.A. Trans-Am -- Jack Baldwin, Marietta, Ga., Camaro.   World of Outlaws Sprint Cars -- Steve Kinser, Bloomington, Ind.   Indianapolis 500 -- Al Unser Jr., Albuquerque.   Daytona 500 -- Davey Allison, Hueytown, Ala.   LeMans 24 Hours -- Peugeot: Yannick Dalmas, France; Derek Warwick and Mark Blundell, Britain.   IMSA Camel G.T. -- Juan Fangio II, Balcarce, Argentina, Toyota.     Badminton  U.S. Champions   Men's Singles -- Chris Jogis, Palo Alto.   Women's Singles -- Joy Kitzmiller, Manhattan Beach, Calif.   Men's Doubles -- Ben Lee, Daly City, Calif., and Tom Reidy, Tempe, Ariz.   Women's Doubles -- Joy Kitzmiller and Linda French, Elmhurst, Ill.   Mixed Doubles -- Andy Chong, Chicago, and Linda French.    Collegiate Champions   Men's singles -- Tom Reidy, Arizona State.   Women's singles -- A. Andersson, Ariz. St.   Men's doubles -- Tom Reidy and Martin Flores, Arizona State.   Women's doubles -- Jenny Chan and Andrea Andersson, Arizona State.   Mixed doubles -- Tom Reidy and Jenny Chan, Arizona State.    World Champions   Men's Singles -- Zhao Jianhua, China.   Women's Singles -- Tang Jiuhong, China.    Men's Doubles -- Park Joo Bong and Kim Moon Soo, Korea.   Women's Doubles -- Nong Qunhua and Guan Weizhen, China.   Mixed Doubles -- Park Joo Bong and Chung Myung Hee, Korea.    Bandy   World -- Sweden.   Barrel Jumping   World Champion -- Patrick Le Clerc, St. Bruno, Quebec.   Baseball  Wo


Lisa Kappler, Thomas Claiborne
Barbara M. Kappler of Hilton Head Island, S.C., and Norman E. Kappler of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter, Lisa Brooke Kappler, to Thomas Hamilton Claiborne, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Herbert A. Claiborne of Richmond.
A spring wedding is planned.
Miss Kappler graduated from Hollins College.
Her father is a senior vice president of Young &amp; Rubicam Advertising in New York.
Her mother is a real-estate broker for the Sea Pines Company, a development company on Hilton Head Island.


Kenya's Multiparty Vote Faces Critics' Wrath
Western diplomats, Kenyan dissidents and human rights campaigners have asserted in recent days that the nation's first multiparty elections in 26 years, scheduled Tuesday, have been marred by across-the-board cheating and an electoral system that is skewed to benefit the ruling party and the Government of President Daniel arap Moi.
The President has promised that the election will herald a return to a multiparty democratic party system, unknown in this East African country since the early 1960's.
But the critics insist that the elections will be a charade intended to perpetuate Mr.
Moi's increasingly authoritarian hand, while showing sufficient political pluralism to persuade Western donors to restore the aid that was suspended a year ago, costing Kenya nearly $360 million.


Making a Difference; Business-Crime Busting: A New Source of Profit
IF you've been a bad boy or girl in the business world, you'd better watch out.
Neil V. Getnick might get you.
Who, you say?
Mr.
Getnick is a 39-year-old former assistant district attorney in Manhattan who has developed a specialty as a civil prosecutor for business crimes.


How to Help Riders Park Near L.I.R.R.
Now is the perfect time for a creative and radical solution to the problem of parking at L.I.R.R. stations.
If Long Island is not to lose any more of its suburban character, the traditional responses to a growing population -- elevated parking structures, wider highways and other massively scaled infrastructure solutions -- must be radically changed.
A sensibly sized vehicle would at least double the parking capacity at stations.
The L.I.R.R., the Grumman Corporation and other companies searching for ways to convert to a peacetime economy can, with the blessing of the Federal Department of Transportation, cooperate to manufacture an appropriate small vehicle for railroad-station commutation.


If the Catalogue Says It's New, Is It Better?
THIS is an exciting time of year for the trowel-and-hoe fraternity.
The catalogues are arriving, most of them from seed producers, but many from woody and perennial plant nurseries.
One garden sage called them "wish books." Indeed, they are.
These beautifully illustrated catalogues foretell the future, what the gardens might look like in 1993.
They offer enticements as to what might be grown.
Many adjectives are used: bigger flowers, vigorous plants, brighter colors, good flavor, abundant yields.


1992: THE BEST OF THE YEAR
BEST MOMENT: Derek Redmond 2.
Christian Laettner's shot vs.
Kentucky 3.
Gail Dever's 100-meter dash


Phones for Rent On Vail's Slopes
The cellular phone has joined skis, poles and boots as rental items at Vail and its sister area, Beaver Creek, in Colorado.
The cellular phone rental service is offered at most Vail and Beaver Creek ski school locations, and free pickup and delivery is available.
The phones are provided free but there is a minimum basic charge of $5.25 for the first three minutes of use; extra minutes are $1.75 each, plus the cost of the call.
In addition to the phone, renters get a battery with backup battery, a charger and a leather fanny pack.
Information: (303) 479-4679 or (303) 471-1324.


Corrections
A picture caption in the Travel Advisory column on Nov. 29, about the Montreal Biodome, included an erroneous identification, supplied by the Biodome, for two of the penguins shown.
The two, at the right, were rockhopper penguins, not gentoo.


Tech Notes; Mazda's New Clean-Burning Hydrogen-Fueled Car
FOR decades, car companies in the United States and abroad have experimented with hydrogen-powered cars, seeking to capitalize on hydrogen's status as one of the most abundant elements on earth and also one of the cleanest burning fuels.
But early prototypes were fraught with drawbacks.
Engines powered by hydrogen knocked and backfired constantly, fuel tanks were huge and unwieldy, and the cars could not travel more than 100 miles without refueling.


Three Little Words for Bill Clinton
President-elect Bill Clinton faces what some of his advisers regard as a cruel choice.
Either he'll have to honor his campaign pledge to "grow the economy" by pumping tens of billions into training and infrastructure.
Or he'll have to honor his pledge to cut the deficit in half.
He cannot, according to new deficit projections, do both.
Which pledge should he honor?


Israel and Lebanon Again Bar Aid for Deportees
The standoff between Lebanon and Israel over the fate of 415 Palestinian deportees trapped in a snow-covered valley in southern Lebanon, continued today as both sides again rejected appeals to allow relief agencies to deliver food or medicine.
Prime Minister Rafik al-Hariri, whose Government has blocked relief assistance from reaching the group since Monday, asked Washington to intervene with Israel to allow aid to reach the Palestinians.


Talking 'Toys' With LL Cool J
NAME: LL Cool J.
IDENTITY: The 24-year-old rap star who's currently appearing with Robin Williams in Barry Levinson's new film, "Toys."


Out of the Kitchen and Into the Bakery
THE naysayers who claim career women don't bake cookies should meet Jo-ann Schoenfeld.
What began as recreational baking for family and friends in her home kitchen has evolved into Plaza Sweets, a commercial bakery here that supplies delectable cakes and cookies to specialty shops, restaurants, country clubs, hotels and mail-order companies.
"One of my most vivid memories is of my mother teaching me how to roll out cookie dough when I was 6 or 7," Mrs.
Schoenfeld said during a recent interview at the bakery.
"She loved to cook and she was adventurous in the kitchen. I absorbed her enthusiasm for good food and entertaining."


There Are Many More Treatments for Prostate Cancer
To the Editor:
"If Fire Fails Against Cancer, Try Ice" (Technology, Nov. 22), about prostate cancer, was biased toward cryosurgery, and in particular the Cryomedical Sciences Accuprobe.
But there are other successful treatments, including surgical intervention and radiation therapy.
Readers facing this serious, though treatable, disease deserve to know all possible aspects of medical intervention.
SEYMOUR DIAMOND, M.D.
Chicago, Dec. 1  The writer is adjunct professor of pharmacology and molecular biology at the Chicago Medical School.


Waiting for the Suicide Truck
INSHALLAH
By Oriana Fallaci.
Translated by Oriana Fallaci from a translation by James Marcus. 599 pp.
New York: Nan A. Talese/Doubleday. $25.


Corrections
A report in Styles of The Times last Sunday about the marriage of Cynthia Jane Oakes and Tarek Mostafa Ben Halim omitted the bride's education.
She graduated from Princeton University.


A Drag? Well Yes And No
Susanne Bartsch's troupe at a party at Webster Hall, Dec. 15.


Technology; Turning a Stew of Old Tires Into Energy
OIL companies think of automobile tires as a petrochemical product, but earlier this month, Texaco Inc. tested a process using tires as a feedstock, in a multi-stage process for making electricity cleanly.
The process, which Texaco says is technically viable and, it believes, economically viable as well, recasts tires as an interim stage between crude oil and useful energy.
It also gives a starring role to worn-out lubricating oil, thus addressing two headaches.


They Wrote a Few of Our Favorite Things
From "Oklahoma!" in 1943 to "The Sound of Music" in 1959, the collaborations of Richard Rodgers (music) and Oscar Hammerstein 2d (lyrics and libretto) transformed the American musical into a more serious and unified art form than it had been before.
Ethan Mordden's RODGERS &amp; HAMMERSTEIN (Abrams, $45) examines the team's output on a show-by-show basis, with the benefit of the author's encyclopedic knowledge of musical theater.
He discusses each show in the context of other Broadway developments, both before and since its premiere.
According to Mr.
Mordden, with Rodgers and Hammerstein "the writing of the script became the fundamental act of composition" and "the musical-comedy composer and the operetta lyricist developed a 'healing' art as interested in discussing the advantages of community or analyzing the nature of love as in entertaining." Mr.
Mordden, a prolific writer on the theater, argues that "State Fair," the team's only original film score, is "the one dud of their 17-year career," "Pipe Dream" is their "only bomb" and "Carousel" is their "masterpiece." He also contends persuasively that "Allegro" deserves another look because it paved the way for the more contemporary "concept" musicals further developed by Michael Bennett and Stephen Sondheim.
Mr.
Mordden's approach may finally be more celebratory than critical.
But given the enduring appeal of Rodgers and Hammerstein's creations, we're inclined to sing along.


So Why Is This Top Dog a Hawk Not a Huskie?
ASK most college basketball fans who the best player in the state is and the answer most likely will be Scott Burrell of the University of Connecticut.
But that is because most of those fans have never seen Vin Baker of the University of Hartford, if indeed they have even heard of him.
For Baker, unlike Burrell, does not enjoy the television exposure, or media attention in general, that the UConn captain receives, not only in Connecticut but also throughout the nation while playing in the highly publicized Big East Conference.


Mystery Writer's Words and Actions Help the Neediest Cases
When James Howe sat down to write his fourth children's mystery featuring his 13-year-old sleuth, Sebastian Barth, he decided that he wanted to enlighten readers as well as entertain them.
So he weaved homeless characters into the plot and described the living conditions of the poor in a small town in Connecticut.
But after he finished the book, "Dew Drop Dead," he felt uneasy.
He knew that children needed to learn about homeless people, but he also worried that he was profiting from the suffering of others.


Knicks Fall Into a Trap in Overtime
For a team with championship aspirations, this was no holiday travel to celebrate.
For a point guard who hopes to be a starter, these were two games to mourn.
Having committed two crucial fourth-quarter turnovers in Friday night's loss at Chicago, Greg Anthony got a chance to redeem himself tonight when Doc Rivers, the Knicks' starting point guard, went out early in the third quarter with a partially dislocated right shoulder.
Put it this way: Anthony did not shoulder the burden of leadership well.


The Power of Words in Jail, the Joy of New Talent
Acting Feat of the Year -- Chained by their ankles to a prison wall, Alec McCowen and Stephen Rea gave superb performances in Frank McGuinness's "Someone Who'll Watch Over Me." The Trend That Has to End -- Re-enacting old sitcoms on stage, as in "CBS Live."


Is Wagner's Music Anti-Semitic? Is Schubert's Gay? Is Cage's Music?
Cultural Institution Most Embroiled in Self-Examination -- Lincoln Center.
Or the 92d Street Y. Or the Brooklyn Academy of Music.
Or the New York Philharmonic . . . .
Most Dramatic Change in a Dramatic Role -- The innovative Gerard Mortier took over the Salzburg Festival, filling the shoes of Herbert von Karajan as artistic director, but discarding Karajan's royal robes.


Maura Manning, F. X. Comerford
Maura Grace Manning, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William J. Manning of Garden City, L.I., was married there yesterday to Francis Xavier Comerford, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward F. Comerford of Brooklyn.
The Rev.
Joseph A. Kelly performed the ceremony at St.
Joseph's Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.
Comerford, 31, is a design director for men's wear at the Polo/Ralph Lauren Corporation, the clothing manufacturer, in New York.
Her father is of counsel to the New York law firm of Simpson Thacher &amp; Bartlett.


POSTINGS: Short Hop to a New Job; Queens West President
A half mile and two decades separate Roosevelt Island and the Queens West development project in Hunters Point.
Rosina K. Abramson will bring her experience from one to the other when she becomes the first president of the Queens West Development Corporation, a subsidiary of the New York State Urban Development Corporation.
The appointment, by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, takes effect Jan. 4.
Until 1991, Ms.
Abramson was president and chief operating officer of the Roosevelt Island Operating Corporation.
She is now executive director of the City Planning Department and counsel to the chairman.


Parent Who Shuns School Wins Board Seat
Julie Hershey seemed to come from nowhere to capture a seat on the Greenville County School Board last month.
She had lived in the area for only a year and a half, while the incumbent, Duke McCall, was a longtime resident who had served eight years.
Yet, Mrs.
Hershey's call for higher teacher pay, more classroom supplies and higher standardized-test scores struck a chord with voters already suspicious of the actions of the long-feuding board.


New Jersey Politicians Serve Public, Twice
For politicians in New Jersey, opportunity for elective office often knocks twice, sometimes in two places at once.
This can result in the full-service public servant, like Mayor William J. Pascrell Jr. of Paterson, a Democrat who is also a State Assemblyman; Councilman Ronald L. Rice of Newark, a Democrat who is also a State Senator, and Assemblyman John E. Rooney of Bergen County, a Republican who is also Mayor of tiny Northvale.


Remembering the Best Dishes of the Year
YEAR'S end beckons us to recall the restaurants of 1992 that stood like beacons above the culinary landscape, shining their light on contented, happy diners.
Rated Excellent indeed was Terra (156 Greenwich Avenue, Greenwich, 629-5222), an Italian restaurant with a robust, country-style menu featuring thin-crusted pizzas, wood-grilled meats and fish, crisp-edged polenta with meaty wild mushrooms, carpaccio alla fiorentina, osso buco with ricotta milanese, and a heavenly tiramisu.
Not only is the food super but the setting also evokes a Tuscan farmhouse.


Immigration's an Effect Of Population Growth
To the Editor:
"Calls to Restrict Immigration Come From Many Quarters" (The Week in Review, Dec. 13) shows immigration as the thorny issue it is, though you barely explore the complexities of immigration and its chief cause -- global overpopulation.
Also, you incorrecly state that the Sierra Club is a member of the Coalition to Stabilize Population.
We are not.


Police Under Fire in German Unrest
With a crackdown on rightist violence under way in Germany, six youths who were recently arrested in the eastern town of Frankenthal seemed candidates for stiff jail sentences.
They had been caught storming a hostel for asylum-seekers, terrorizing inhabitants and screaming Nazi slogans.
But prosecutors decided to free the six, explaining that there was no evidence to prove that they were radical rightists.


Peeling Back the Layers of Veneered Furniture
MENDING veneered furniture is a picky job, one tailor-made for whiling away winter weekends.
Veneer on everyday furniture can usually be repaired by amateurs, even novices.
But fine veneered furniture, especially antiques, should be taken to a professional restorer.
To fix cracks, try rubbing them with an appropriately colored putty stick, although an ordinary crayon is often an effective substitute.
In both cases, choose a color that is slightly lighter than the surrounding wood.


The Human Touch
To the Editor:
"Dr. Video: How Best to Decide What Patients Need," Michael M. Weinstein's Dec. 13 Editorial Notebook, tells of a new and creative approach to medicine.
Interactive video promises to inform patients, reduce costs and improve the quality of care.
For patients in need of prostate relief, for example, "impartial information" about sex and survival is presented in a balanced, objective way before any operation is scheduled, or any surgeon seen.


On the Road With 'Guys and Dolls' at the Shubert
NO question.
The traveling "Guys and Dolls" at the Shubert in New Haven is an on-the-money reflection of Broadway's real thing.
That goes for Tony Walton's pop comic strip sets and William Ivey Long's outrageously splashy costumes (a concurrence of color explosions), Jerry Zaks's staging (a lesson in overdrive) and Christopher Chadman's slick, revitalized choreography.
Frank Loesser's musical classic is unfailingly reassuring.
One gets caught up in Jo Swerling and Abe Burrows's book, a perfect model of musical theater craftsmanship.
Will Sky Masterson get Sarah Brown to Havana?
Will Nathan Detroit win the bet?
Where will the oldest established permanent floating crap game in New York be held?
By the end of the first scene --
the first scene
-- all these things really matter.


Paella That's Easy to Prepare for a Party
FOR people who entertain, this week is the last chance of the year.
It offers a final few days to invite, greet and feed friends, acquaintances and, while you are at it, those whose status is simply that of social obligation.
And for people who usually do not entertain, this week is the last chance to make a showing in 1992.
Whichever category you are in, the week calls for a party.
Unless you engage a well-staffed caterer, a certain amount of work is unavoidable.
The most pragmatic approach is the bountiful buffet.
It can be anchored by a smoked turkey or turkey breast from a good butcher or catering shop.
And it should be flanked by three or four grain and vegetable salads, purchased or homemade.


Man Placed in Custody
A man faced a mental health evaluation for trespassing at the gated community where STEFFI GRAF lives in Boca Raton, Fla., authorities said yesterday.
MICHAEL SALATA, 38, was arrested Thursday and remained in custody yesterday on $250 bond, charged with trespassing after a warning for returning to the gate of the luxury Polo Club development "at least three times a day for three days," said the arrest report.


Visiting Germany
To the Editor: I read the letter (Nov. 8) from Phyllis Talmadge expressing disappointment about the treatment she received during a recent visit to Munich and Berlin.
Now living in the United States, I am German-born and Jewish.
For business as well as pleasure, I visit Germany yearly on extensive trips that take me to all corners of my native land.
In fact, I returned from Munich just one week ago.


Latin Is Not All It Seems
The Nov. 15 article on the re-emergence of Latin in the public schools ("All Over State, Latin Redux") raised some interesting questions.
I would encourage any intellectual endeavor, including the study of Latin.
However, given the finite amount of time and resources, should Latin be preferred over other, live languages like Italian, Chinese, American Sign Language, etc.?


A World of Plagues And Heresies
THE ISLAND Three Tales.
By Gustaw Herling.
Translated by Ronald Strom. 151 pp.
New York: Viking. $20.


Russian Flair, Danish Dazzle, Domestic Diamonds
Big Bold Revival -- The Kirov Ballet presentation of Leonid Lavrovsky's "Romeo and Juliet" confirmed that this version from 1940 -- the first Russian staging of the Prokofiev ballet -- remains unsurpassed for dramatic pace and musical sensitivity.
Tiny but Terrific -- When it was restaged this fall, "Epic," Paul Taylor's 1957 solo made up of ordinary gestures to recorded time signals, proved an unnerving study in quiet desperation.


1992: The Year In Sports
In a sports year of controversy and contradiction, the celebrations often had reverberations.
Some selfish, some stunning, some sad.
At the Summer Olympics, basketball's Dream Team turned the tournament into a layup drill, but on the gold-medal stand Michael Jordan, apparently more interested in representing Nike than his country, and other National Basketball Association stars covered up the Reebok logos on their USA suits.


The Price of 2 Bishops Can Break the Buyer
MUCH has been made of the advantage of the bishop-pair, one side's two bishops versus either the opponent's bishop and knight or two knights.
And rightly so.
The superiority is slight but persistent, usually showing itself in the ability to profit by opening the game for long-range attacks of the bishops, whereas the opponent is constrained to keep the status quo.


'Milk and Honey' in a Revival at Forum
THE FORUM remains New Jersey's signature theater for those who are hooked on out-of-the-way musicals.
Mostly, shows with Jewish themes round out the repertory.
On both counts, there can hardly be a more ostensibly fitting choice than "Milk and Honey," the operetta about Israel's independence that, in 1961, marked the Broadway debut of Jerry Herman, until then a composer of nightclub, television and Off Broadway satirical revues.


Debra J. Budny, William Schmidt
Lorraine G. Budny of South Kent, Conn., has announced the engagement of her daughter Debra Jean Budny to William Reed Schmidt, a son of Benno C. Schmidt of New York and Martha Orgain of Beaumont, Tex.
An April wedding is planned.
Miss Budny owns Brushworks, a decorative painting concern in Sharon, Conn.
She graduated from Western Connecticut State University.
Her father, the late Bernard Budny, was the chief executive of Spaulding Bakery in Binghamton, N.Y.
Her mother is the publisher and the editor of Etcetera, a newsletter about South Kent and surrounding towns.


How Do You Describe Nagle's Season? !@#&amp;
In his first play of 1992 last September in Atlanta, quarterback Browning Nagle fumbled the snap from center and the ball was recovered by linebacker Michael Reid at the Jets' 14.
The Falcons converted the turnover into a touchdown and went on to win the game, 20-17.
On his last play, Nagle rolled out to his left, slipped free of a sack and lofted a pass into the end zone for receiver Chris Burkett.
The ball was intercepted by cornerback Toi Cook.


Bridge
A neat defensive play on the diagramed deal was recently reported by the French journalist Guy Dupont.
It was played in an interclub match in Val-de-Marne, and the hero was Claude Vigneron, who held the West cards.
After his opponents bid diamonds and spades, West's two no-trump was for take-out, showing length in the unbid suits, a variation of the unusual no-trump.
North took a shot at four spades, and East had to decide whether to save in five hearts.
That contract would obviously have failed by one trick, and did in the replay.


After Highway Shooting, Reports of Other Incidents
Detectives investigating the shooting of a woman on a Queens highway Friday night fielded calls over the weekend from motorists who also reported frightening encounters on city highways, but none of the callers had specific information about the shooting, the police said.
The woman, 32-year-old Pamela Mascaro, died on Saturday from a single gunshot wound to the back of the head.
The gun was fired by a man who had been tailgating the car that Ms.
Mascaro's husband, John, was driving on the Grand Central Parkway, the police said.
Neither Mr.
Mascaro nor the couple's daughter, Holly Laine, 3, who was also in the car, was injured.


Israeli Software Makers Are Increasing Exports
"It's easier exporting to the moon than to America," says Shmuel Zailer, a director of Raz-Lee Ltd., an Israeli software company.
That complaint is often heard at Israel's software companies, even though the industry expects to export about $130 million in programs this year, up from $75 million in 1990.
About 40 percent goes to the United States.


Male-Female Ratios, County by County


Old St. Wapniacl
Now that President-elect Bill Clinton has done the hardest thing, appoint his Cabinet, schoolchildren around the country will be pressed to do the next hardest: remember it -- at least to the extent of remembering the names of all the Cabinet departments.
It's an assignment that invites sympathy and assistance.
For decades, students could find comfort in good old
St. Wapniacl
.
That was the mnemonic representing the initials of the then 10 departments: State, Treasury, War, Attorney General, Post Office, Navy, Interior, Agriculture, Commerce and Labor.
But the last four decades have seen endless churning in the makeup of the President's Cabinet.
War and Navy were combined into Defense.
Post Office fell out of the Cabinet.
And six new Cabinet agencies have been created.


Bill Auction By Treasury
The Treasury financings this holiday-shortened week are confined to the regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills today.
Traders said that by late Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 3.15 percent, and on the six-month bill 3.29 percent.


A New Agency for the Homeless Gives No Cause for Optimism
To the Editor:
It is puzzling that in "A Fresh Start for the Homeless" (editorial, Dec. 7) you unequivocally support creation of a New York City agency to serve the homeless -- an agency that would place considerable reliance on contracted-out services and further fragment the city's already fragmented social service system.


On Health Care Reform; Managed Competition Is Good Diagnosis
To the Editor:
"Suddenly, Momentum for Health" (editorial, Dec. 10) implies that the American Medical Association just entered the health care reform debate.
That does not square with the facts.
The A.M.A. began its campaign to assure access to affordable care for all Americans in March 1990.


CHRONICLE
LOU RAWLS, the husky-voiced pop-jazz baritone, helped raise more than $10 million in cash and pledges for the United Negro College Fund on Saturday night during his 13th annual Christmas telethon.
The seven-hour "Lou Rawls Parade of Stars," which was broadcast from New York City and Hollywood, featured MICHAEL JACKSON, WHITNEY HOUSTON, FRANK SINATRA, DIONNE WARWICK and BILL COSBY.
Also serving as hosts were MARILYN McCOO, NANCY WILSON and ED McMAHON.


Moira Curtain, Karun Singh
Moira Gerardine Curtain, a daughter of Ursula and John Curtain of Melbourne, Australia, was married there yesterday to Karun Krishna Singh, a son of Sarah and Amar Singh of Bryn Mawr, Pa.
The Rev.
John McEntee performed the ceremony at St.
Thomas Aquinas Roman Catholic Church.
Ms.
Curtain, 31, is keeping her name.
She is a program leader for Columbia University Community Services at its West 105th Street residence for the homeless.
She graduated from the University of Melbourne, and she and her husband received master's degrees in social work from Columbia.
Her father, who is retired, is a founder of Curtain &amp; Company, a Melbourne accounting firm where he was a senior partner.


Play It Again, Coach: Nets Don't Look Too Bad
The last time New Jersey beat the Cavaliers in Cleveland, Ronald Reagan was President.
The year was 1986.
Kenny Anderson was 16 years old.
Derrick Coleman was a freshman at Syracuse.
And Chuck Daly, the Nets' coach, was still a couple of years away from winning his first National Basketball Association championship with Detroit.


Pro Bono Accounts
*
Chicago Historical Society, Chicago, to DDB Needham Chicago, to handle the museum's account, previously at Hal Riney &amp; Partners, Chicago.


Katherine Savits, Jeremy Rabinovitz
Katherine Rose Savits, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joel M. Savits of Rockville, Md., was married yesterday in Washington to Jeremy Rabinovitz, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin H. Rabinovitz of Brookline, Mass.
Rabbi Joseph Weinberg performed the ceremony at the Washington Hebrew Congregation.
Ms.
Savits, who is keeping her name, is the director of youth programs at the Y.M.C.A. in Silver Spring, Md.
She graduated from William Smith College and received a master's degree in recreational management and administration from the University of Maryland.
Her father is a senior partner in the Washington law firm of Jordan, Coyne, Savits &amp; Lopata.


Laettner's Play Termed Selfish by Teammates
CHRISTIAN LAETTNER, at first embraced by his Timberwolves teammates, is being pushed away as Minnesota's losses mount.
Even CHUCK PERSON, who once promised to take Laettner under his wing, has become increasingly unhappy with what he perceives as Laettner's selfishness.


Northwest Extends Its European Fare Cuts
Northwest Airlines has extended by three months, until March 31, its fare cuts to Europe of up to 43 percent, hoping to bolster travel during the historically slow winter months.
The discounts had been scheduled to end this week.
Representatives of competing airlines could not be reached last night, but industry analysts said they expected Northwest's rivals to match the cuts.
The analysts said the fare cuts to Europe were another sign of Northwest's aggressive marketing strategy.
In the summer, Northwest sparked an bruising fare war by offering half-price fares. 'Too Many Seats'
While discounts are common during the off-peak season of January to April, the Northwest fares also point up the excess capacity in the industry.
"We just have too many seats," Candace E. Browning, an airline analyst at Merrill Lynch, said.
Her projections suggest that airline capacity in 1993 will be 10 percent higher than in 1991, despite the disappearance of airlines including Eastern and Pan Am.


Israel Holds Fast to Decisions on Arab Deportees
Israeli officials told a United Nations envoy today that they would not reconsider their decision to deport 415 Palestinians to southern Lebanon.
They also told him they would not reconsider their rejection of a Red Cross request to allow aid to reach the Palestinians through Israeli-held territory.
A United Nations Under Secretary General, James O. C. Jonah, met with Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin and Foreign Minister Shimon Peres to discuss the fate of the Palestinians, who were deported on Dec. 17 and are stranded in tents in southern Lebanon.


Susan Butler, William Lacy
Susan Cavert Butler, a producer in New York for "A Current Affair," the Fox Television show, was married yesterday to William Neal Lacy, the owner of Bill Lacy Design, an architectural consulting concern in New York.
The Rev.
Theodore Hoskins performed the ceremony at the Saugatuck Congregational Church in Westport, Conn.
The bride is the daughter of Richard Butler of Westport and Rosemarie Butler of Redding, Conn.
She graduated from Smith College.
Her father, who is retired, was the media director in New York for Lever Brothers, the household-products company.
She is a stepdaughter of Roseanna Butler.


Knicks Need a Spark At Point-Guard Spot
How much more was revealed about the Knicks this weekend than that they are still not a good road team and they don't like playing on Christmas Day?
In Chicago on Friday night, they became unhinged by the defensive pressure of the two-time defending champion Bulls and the best player in the world, Michael Jordan.
In Milwaukee on Saturday night, they lost in overtime to a team led in scoring and quarterbacked by a couple of rookies from Arkansas.


Finding Profits in Risks of Weather
Harold Mollin will often call a number at random in a faraway area code and ask whoever answers if it is raining.
He has never been turned down, and most offer to give him a call if they detect the slightest sprinkle.
This seemingly eccentric behavior stems from Mr.
Mollin's odd business.
Through his four-year-old company based in Great Neck, L.I., he insures against effects of the weather on businesses and individuals around the world.


N.F.L. Talks Will Continue
National Football League owners and player representatives will meet today in New York in hopes of completing a preliminary settlement of their labor differences.
Today's meeting could conclude recent weeks of negotiations that have brought both sides closer to an agreement than at any time in the last five years.
The key issue remains free agency, with the players wanting more freedom to move to new teams without penalty.
The league has operated without a collective bargaining agreement since 1987, the final year of a five-year agreement signed in 1982.
The agreement is expected to be unveiled for the 1993 season.
Paul Tagliabue, the N.F.L. commissioner, and Jim Quinn, the players' attorney, after meeting for 12 hours last Monday and Tuesday, announced that a tentative agreement had been reached on Tuesday afternoon.
Al Davis, the Los Angeles Raiders owner, and Gene Upshaw of the players association met over the weekend in Washington in an effort to help complete the agreement.
Davis, a member of the owners' negotiating team, has been among the owners who have pushed for a longer agreement (one of at least 10 years) and for more player exemptions (as many as eight per team).
If a deal is reached, both sides must present their plan to United States District Judge David Doty in Minneapolis for his approval.


Afghanistan, Armed and Abandoned, Could Be the Next Bosnia
To the Editor:
In articles analyzing states and peoples suffering from weapons and conflicts left over from the cold war, such as "Clinton Inherits Conflicts That Don't Follow the Rules" (The Week in Review, Dec. 13), you include Somalia, Bosnia-Herzegovina, the successor states of the Soviet Union and some others.
But you and others omit Afghanistan, where a cold-war regional conflict has turned into another post-cold-war state breakdown.


Twnhse, 15 Mi. Red Sq., $6,833 Mo.
The United States has been exporting chunks of its culture for decades, through books, television shows, compact disks or films, to name a few.
But it is fair to say that planned communities, like Columbia, Md., or Rancho Santa Maria, Calif. -- or even the concept -- have not been big items of foreign exchange.
But that is changing.
Inspired by a slumping market in the United States and a perceived need to provide Western-style comfort and security for foreigners seeking gold in the former Soviet Union, American developers, with the blessing of the Russian Government, have packed up their blueprints and headed for Moscow.


Results Plus
HOCKEY  Lemieux Rolls Along Mario Lemieux recorded his 98th and 99th points of the season with two assists as the Pittsburgh Penguins beat the Sabres, 4-2, in Buffalo.
The victory was the sixth in the last seven games for the Penguins, who have a league-leading 55 points.
The Penguins took a 1-0 lead at 6:22 of the first period on a power-play goal by Jaromir Jagr, who flipped a backhander from the slot past a sprawled Dominik Hasek, with Lemieux picking up an assist.
Pittsburgh built a 3-0 lead in the second period on goals by Rick Tocchet, a short-handed tally at 11:18, and Bob Errey, whose shot at the 15:08 mark went in under the glove of Hasek.(AP)


Pity the Animal Prisoners of Conscience; That Goes for Fish Too
To the Editor:
The poet William Blake wrote "Robin Redbreast in a cage, puts all Heaven in a Rage." How about all of the fishes and other aquatic individuals stuck in small, dirty tanks?


Exit Losing
The Giants' season ended today the way it began and the way it evolved.
The Giants were inconsistent and overly generous.
They were lethargic, then sharp, then almost asleep, and they lost, 20-10, to an Eagles team that played with more intensity.
So the Giants finished this disastrous season with a 6-10 record that almost surely will lead to Ray Handley's dismissal after two years as the head coach.
The Eagles finished with four straight victories, an 8-0 season at home and an 11-5 record over all.
Next Sunday, they will play the Saints in New Orleans in the first round of the National Football League playoffs.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an obituary on Saturday about former Representative Richard H. Ichord misidentified his hometown in some copies.
He lived in both Waynesville, Mo., and Washington, not in Nevada, Mo.


Cathedral of St. John the Divine Celebrates 100th Birthday


Abigail Wolf, Jonathan Allen Weiss
Abigail Wolf, a daughter of Judge Flora Barth Wolf of Philadelphia and the late Edwin D. Wolf, was married yesterday to Jonathan Allen Weiss, the son of Mark and Joan Weiss of Chevy Chase, Md.
Rabbi Henry Cohen performed the ceremony at the Horticultural Center of Philadelphia.
Ms.
Wolf, 25, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Columbia University and is a medical student at Temple University.
Her mother is a judge in the Family Court division of the Court of Common Pleas in Philadelphia.
Her father was the director and a founder of the Public Interest Law Center of Philadelphia, a nonprofit civil-rights advocacy group.


No Headline
I don't think we broke apart.
We just took the year off. -- PEPPER JOHNSON on the New York Giants' 6-10 season.  [ C3:1. ]


Miami Seeks Perfection Off Field, Too
For millions of television viewers, and the record books that reflect the history of college football, the defining moment of this season for the University of Miami will come here in the Louisiana Superdome Friday night when the Hurricanes meet Alabama in the Sugar Bowl to decide a national championship.
For the Miami seniors, who could play a part in a third such championship for the school within four seasons and a fifth within 10, the longer-lasting achievement might come next spring, when their class of football players has the chance to establish a 100 percent graduation rate among the 19 seniors on scholarship.
That would be 41 percent higher than the performance of the football class that arrived at the school in 1984, according to figures used by the College Football Association.
A Different Breed
But Miami's football players haven't just apparently improved their ways in the classroom.
In more subtle ways, in their pre-game rhetoric and their observations afterward, these Hurricanes have seemed less interested than their predecessors in establishing a defiant image and more willing to seek public acceptance.


Questions Outweigh Answers In Shooting Spree at College
When his music changed, Wayne Lo changed, and in time two people lay dead, four others were wounded and a sheltering place had become a killing field.
As he sits in the Berkshire County House of Corrections in Massachusetts, charged with murder and assault with a deadly weapon in connection with a 20-minute rampage at Simon's Rock College in Great Barrington, Mass., only Mr.
Lo knows what led him to turn away from the classical music he once loved and instead embrace the violent, discordant music known as hardcore, and a surly group of students who were equally entranced by it.


Two Children Die in Fire
Two small children died and their mother was critically burned in a fire that swept through their fourth-story apartment in Jersey City yesterday, authorities reported.
Capt.
John McNamara of the Jersey City Fire Department, identified the dead as Karrono Cobbs, 2 years old, and his brother, Brian, 1.
Their mother, Tanya Cobbs, who was severely burned, was listed in critical condition at St.
Barnabas Medical Center in Livingston, N.J.
Captain McNamara said the cause of the fire in the 30-unit apartment house at 235 Dwight Street, was under investigation.
A dozen families had to be relocated because of damage to the building.


Domino's Pizza Gives Grey A Second Chance to Deliver
THESE days, second chances are as uncommon along Madison Avenue as year-end bonuses, particularly those bestowed by unhappy clients struggling to regain momentum in competitive categories.
So Grey Advertising Inc., in overhauling a disappointing initial effort for Domino's Pizza Inc., intends to get it right this time.
An aggressive campaign promising customers "Somethin' for Nothin' from Domino's" begins on television tonight, replacing a series of languid commercials introduced in September 1991 with the theme "Nobody knows like Domino's how you like pizza at home."


High Hopes Fade at East European Newspapers
The newspaper Reform was a hot publication when Hungarian Communism collapsed late in 1989.
The first issues in 1988 attacked the regime with unusual bite, earning the weekly tabloid a reputation for lively reporting and pushing its circulation close to 400,000.
This was enough to lure Rupert Murdoch, the Australian-born chairman of News Corporation, who paid about $4 million for a 50 percent stake in Reform and a daily called Mai Nap in 1990.
Mr.
Murdoch, however, had not spotted a problem: without a Communist government to pillory, how would Reform continue to attract readers?


Linda Zappi, Edward Magro
Linda Elizabeth Zappi and Edward Anthony Magro, both lawyers in New York, were married yesterday at St.
Patrick's Cathedral by the Rev.
Joseph Kelly.
Mrs.
Magro, 32, is an associate at Callahan, Schepp, Yuhas &amp; Adams.
She graduated magna cum laude from Boston University and received a law degree from St.
John's University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Vincent J. Zappi of Valhalla, N.Y.


Breathing New Life Into a Hospital
WHEN the Koch administration announced the closing of Sydenham Hospital in 1979, Harlem rallied behind the venerable institution as a symbol of community pride, but not necessarily of quality health care.
Finally, Harlem has both.
The same year that the Sydenham decision was announced, a small group of civic-minded New Yorkers reorganized North General Hospital.
They enlisted public officials, philanthropists and major medical institutions to extricate the foundering hospital from unpaid bills and to raise both money and standards.


Lineup is set for N.F.L. Playoffs


Question Box
Golf Leaders Who Win
Q.
In golf's four Grand Slam tournaments -- the Masters, United States Open, the British Open and the P.G.A.
Championship -- how often does the player who leads going into the final round wind up as the winner?


Jackson Still Says No
The Dallas Mavericks' owner, DONALD CARTER, has relented and offered top pick JIM JACKSON of Ohio State a six-year contract.
But Jackson's agent, MARK TERMINI, has said that his client is no longer interested in any deal that would take him to Dallas.


New Channels Vie for Slices of Growing Cable Pie
A station devoted 24 hours a day to how-to programs.
Another given over to non-stop game shows.
A third carrying endless romance.
Just when you thought the cable industry had run out of capacity, a whole new generation of channels is already under development.
Not one of these channels is expected to be on the air before late next year at the earliest.
But together with the newly launched science-fiction, courtroom and cartoon networks, they demonstrate the direction in which the cable industry is heading: toward narrow-casting in the extreme.
Elbow Room
Anticipating the day when cable systems expand -- for some, 500 channels may be only a few years away -- everyone from independent entrepreneurs to Hollywood production companies is trying to claim a sliver of the increasingly crowded cable spectrum.
A group in Beverly Hills is hoping to launch a "golden age" channel aimed specifically at the over-50 set.
International Family Entertainment Inc., which owns the Family Channel, is planning to roll out a new channel devoted wholly to interactive contests.


People
*
Becky Broers, senior vice president and account executive at Lintas New York, was promoted to executive vice president.


Redskins, Chiefs In Playoffs
The Washington Redskins, who wound up the season with consecutive losses, avoided becoming another Super Bowl champion to miss the playoffs the next season.
Although the Redskins were upset in their regular-season finale Saturday, by the Los Angeles Raiders, they backed into the playoffs yesterday as the National Conference's final wild-card team when Green Bay was eliminated by losing to Minnesota.


World Economies


Gartner! Kovalev! Gartner! Kovalev!
Faced with the sort of terrible odds that make for terrific comebacks, the Rangers clambered all the way back last night to defeat the Boston Bruins, 6-5, and discovered a real hero in the process.
The Rangers were trailing at Madison Square Garden by three goals with less than seven minutes left in the game, a hefty margin on any normal night.
They were playing without the injured Brian Leetch and, for the final two periods, without the flu-ridden Mark Messier.


Corrections
An article on Saturday about Bill and Hillary Clinton's Christmas described one of their gifts incorrectly in some editions.
Mrs.
Clinton gave golf clubs to Mr.
Clinton; he did not give them to her.


Truly a Contest For the 1990's
If the 1970's were known as the "Me Decade" and the 1980's were the "Greed Decade," what should the 1990's be called?
Guests attending the seventh annual holiday party at the New York office of Trimedia/ Nycom Inc., a public relations and marketing company, were invited to enter a contest to coin a sobriquet for the 90's.
The winner, selected by Trimedia/Nycom executives, was "the Payback Decade," submitted by Maria De Paul of Oil Daily, a petroleum industry trade newspaper.


High, if Not Dry: Storm Proves Value of Strict Building Codes
If any good news came out of the storm that bruised the region's coastline two weekends ago, it was the general success of houses constructed under strict building codes to withstand high winds and surging tides, Federal and local government officials say.
Moreover, pressures from environmentalists in some beach communities that forced new housing to be set far behind existing dune lines spared those structures heavy damage when the storm swept the dunes away.


Winning Ways in South Korea
Kim Young Sam, a veteran democrat, won South Korea's presidential election by a convincing margin.
Kim Dae Jung, his main rival, lost the election but won new respect with a gracious and healing concession speech.
The defeated candidate then announced his retirement from politics, opening the way to a new generation of democratic leadership.
What a contrast to the last election five years ago, when both Kims embarrassed themselves.
Given a rare opportunity to elect a civilian democrat in Korea's first free election in nearly two decades, they couldn't submerge their personal ambitions for the sake of a common goal.
By splitting the opposition vote, they handed the presidency to Roh Tae Woo, a former general nominated by the dictatorial regime.


Peace on Earth, by Posse
The world that confronts President-elect Clinton is newer and more disorderly than anyone might have imagined only a year ago.
In what seems a test of wills, American forces have clashed with Iraqi warplanes; this followed the first casualties in Operation Restore Hope in Somalia.
The United Nations edges closer to aerial intervention in Bosnia.
And a glance around the world reveals a dozen or more "failed states," countries verging on collapse and ethnic strife, each a possible candidate for U.N. intervention.
It's hard to say whom all this makes more uncomfortable, the old-style military or old-style pacifists.
Anxious to stay out of Bosnia, some Pentagon authorities insist U.S. soldiers can "do" deserts, as in Somalia, but not mountains, as in Bosnia.
Some peace groups, by contrast, suspect that the Pentagon has a hidden agenda in Somalia, that the scale of the operation is intended to justify bloated defense budgets.


Spending Jump Poses A Puzzle
Even before the holiday shopping season, America's mighty army of retail consumers had begun to loosen its grip on purse strings and wallets -- parting with $165 billion in November alone.
But as merchants bask in what for many was the best Christmas in several years, economists are still trying to piece together just where these shoppers are getting the money: from higher incomes, by borrowing or by drawing from savings or other assets.
The answer could well determine the health of the economy in the months to come.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  HIGH TURNOVER AMONG CASEWORKERS FOR CHILDREN
Over the last three years, the Dinkins administration has sharply reduced the staff of caseworkers who investigate child abuse, leaving many of New York City's most vulnerable children in the hands of overburdened, inexperienced workers.
The staff reductions, caused by the city's fiscal crisis and a decision to divert staff to a new program for troubled families, have worsened a chronic weakness in the city's child-protection system: extremely high turnover among ill-trained caseworkers.
Last year, 77 percent of the workers who investigate reports of child abuse resigned, were laid off or moved to jobs in other agencies.
A1.
AN ECCENTRIC BIRTHDAY CELEBRATION
The Cathedral of St.
John the Divine -- the world's second-largest cathedral -- celebrated its 100th birthday with the eccentric pomp for which it has become famous.
The high-wire artist Philippe Petit, balancing a globe in the air, led a procession through the aisles that included an angel on stilts, two circus clowns, bagpipers and West African drummers.
Behind the spectacle, the service provided a moment to reflect on a hulking and still-incomplete structure in Morningside Heights that is one of New York City's most important religious institutions.
B3.


No Headline
The Rev.
J.
Robert Williams, whose ordination in 1989 by the Bishop of the Episcopal Diocese of Newark caused consternation in the Episcopal Church because he was an avowed homosexual, died on Thursday in Boston.
He was 37.
He died at Beth Israel Hospital in Boston of an AIDS-related pulmonary infection, said Joseph Walker, a spokesman for the J. S. Waterman Funeral Home.
Mr.
Williams had lived in Boston for about a year.


W. C. Trueheart, 74, Ex-Diplomat in Saigon
William C. Trueheart, a former Ambassador to Nigeria and deputy chief of mission in Saigon just before the American military buildup in Vietnam, died Thursday at Sibley Memorial Hospital in Washington.
He was 74 and lived in Washington.
Mr. Trueheart died of cancer, said his son, Charles Trueheart.


An Unfinished Act of Faith
The Cathedral of St.
John the Divine -- the world's second-largest church -- celebrated its 100th birthday yesterday with the eccentric pomp for which it has become famous.
The high-wire artist Philippe Petit, balancing a globe in the air, led a procession through the aisles that included an angel on stilts, two circus clowns, bagpipers and West African drummers.
Behind the spectacle, the service provided a moment to reflect on a hulking and still-incomplete structure in Morningside Heights that is one of New York City's most important religious institutions.
The Episcopal cathedral has exerted considerable influence in debates over municipal corruption, civil rights, religious unity and the environment, even as it faced the erosion of old-line Protestant power in New York City.


Susan Petree, Robert Kuhn
Susan Hunter Petree, a senior vice president of the Fleet Bank of Massachusetts in Boston, was married yesterday to Robert Mitchell Kuhn, the president of Hamilton Standard, an aerospace-equipment manufacturer in Windsor Locks, Conn.
The Rev.
Jonathan Morgan, a Congregational minister, performed the ceremony at Henderson House in Weston, Mass.
Mrs.
Kuhn graduated from Stanford University.
She is the daughter of Richard and Virginia Petree of New Rochelle, N.Y.
The bride's father, who is retired, was the United States representative for Security Council and political affairs at the United Nations in New York.
Her mother, also retired, was the founder and executive director of the National Association of Japan-America Societies in New York, a federation of friendship societies.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
Japan's low-cost health-care system faces a crisis: the rapid growth in retirees.
The proportion of Japan's total medical costs for the aged, just 17.8 percent in 1980, will rise to 37 percent by the year 2000.  [ Page A1. ]
Europe's consumers eagerly await the single market that officially begins on Friday.
"We firmly believe we're getting ripped off on a lot of things at home," says one Briton, who prefers to shop in France.  [ A10. ]


Patents
Improving Ball Control In Bowling  WASHINGTON
MANY patents are no doubt very useful for someone somewhere in the world, but not exactly on the top of the average wish list.
How many consumers, for instance, have asked, "Why can they put a man on the moon, but they can't come up with a Highly Sensitive Magnetic Field Detecting Squid with Dual Demodulation Circuit?"
The detecting squid and another newly patented invention, the Anti-Roll System for a Missile Launcher, are unlikely to become mass-market items.


Law Ill-Equipped for Politics
In pardoning Caspar W. Weinberger and five other Iran-contra figures last week, President Bush pronounced his own caustic verdict on the process that had convicted four of the men and indicted the two others.
"The criminalization of policy differences," the President called it.
Many might dispute that dismissive characterization.
But few people, even those who most strongly supported the Iran-contra prosecutions and who now deplore the pardons, would argue that the legal process of a criminal investigation has shed light on the affair.


Polish Limits on Abortion Create a New Clandestine Movement
As Lucja, a devout Roman Catholic, tells the story, she became pregnant in September when her husband clamped his hand over her mouth and raped her in an alcoholic rage.
She had promised herself she would never subject another child to her husband's drunken abuse.
And there were economic considerations.
The family -- Lucja and her husband, her two sons and her parents -- were already crowded into a three-room apartment, and barely getting by on a combined monthly income of $250.


Elizabeth Ludlum, Frank T. Medici
Elizabeth Mary Ludlum, a daughter of Walter and Louise Ludlum of Ossining, N.Y., was married yesterday to Frank Thomas Medici, a son of Dr.
Frank and Madelyn Medici of Suffern, N.Y.
The Rev.
Thomas Devery performed the ceremony at St.
Theresa's Roman Catholic Church in Briarcliff Manor, N.Y.
Mrs.
Medici, 27, is a retirement-planning counselor at the Teachers Insurance and Annuity Association- College Retirement Equities Fund in New York.
She graduated from Mount Holyoke College.
She and her husband received M.B.A. degrees from Fordham University, where he is now a law student.
Her father is a vice president of the Bank of New York in White Plains.
Her mother is a floral designer in Ossining.


INSIDE
Serbian Forces Warned
President Bush has warned Serbs that the United States is ready to use force if unrest spreads to an ethnic Albanian corner of Serbia.
Page A6.
Concessions on Arms Pact
In a push to conclude a nuclear treaty before his term ends, President Bush has agreed to compromise on two three hurdles to an accord.
Page A7.
Borders Drop, Europe Shops
When the economic barriers in Europe formally collapse on Jan. 1, some boons will be immediate, and others may take years.
Page A10. 2 Approaches to Homeless
The Franklin Avenue Armory in the Bronx houses one of the city's worst shelters, and a better one.
Page B1.


Spotlight Turns to Mashburn
Kentucky's Jamal Mashburn has the most impressive statistics and advance reputation among the college basketball performers scheduled to play in the Chemical Bank ECAC Holiday Festival, which begins tonight in Madison Square Garden.
Mashburn, a Harlem native who attended Cardinal Hayes High School in the Bronx, is a 6-foot-8-inch, 240-pound junior forward.
He is averaging 25.3 points per game for the Wildcats, who meet Rutgers in the tournament's opener at 7 P.M.
Manhattan plays St.
John's in the second game, and the championship game will be played on Wednesday.


Some Target Practice On a Stand-In Goalie
The Devils took advantage of a Hartford goaltender switch because of an injury to Sean Burke and skated away with a 6-2 triumph over the Whalers this evening at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
Frank Pietrangelo went into the goal for the Whalers 1 minute 59 seconds into the middle period as Burke left with an aggravated right ankle.
Burke had allowed 2 goals on 14 shots.


Essay; A Tale Of Three Counsels
We have been treating Mr.
Bush's "Christmas Eve massacre" of the Iran-contra prosecution as a single event, motivated either by compassion for Presidential loyalists or a need to shut down deeper inquiry.
That's a mistake.
The pardons rounded out a trio of decisions about independent counsel made in the last two weeks.


McMillan Claims Official Aimed Racial Slur at Him
The National Football League is investigating an allegation by the Jets' Erik McMillan that an official working the New York-New Orleans game on Saturday used a racial epithet in referring to the cornerback.
Jets General Manager Dick Steinberg confirmed today that McMillan made the allegation against the referee, Larry Nemmers, who has been an N.F.L. official for eight years.
Steinberg and the Jets' president, Steve Gutman, talked with McMillan this morning at the team's training facility at Hofstra University.
After hearing McMillan's version of the incident, Steinberg said the team would not pursue the matter and would let the N.F.L. handle the investigation.


Pity the Animal Prisoners of Conscience
To the Editor:
A capybara is on display at Coney Island, lonely and miserable in a filthy, urine-soaked metal box.
Capybaras are the world's largest rodents; adults can weigh more than 120 pounds.
As a wildlife biologist, I find it repugnant that we incarcerate animals like this capybara as if she were a lifeless hunk of stone.


The Ludlum Defect
To the Editor:
As a staunch supporter of President-elect Bill Clinton, I was delighted to note in your Dec. 10 article on his bibliophilia that I was on his reading list.
However, I have never written a "techno-thriller." I'm the guy who can't read a manual, much less write about one.
I have to call my children if I care to use my videocassette recorder, and as for the new telephone systems, forget it!


U.S. Chief Bids Adieu to an Expanding Hermes
After eight years of expanding the United States presence of Hermes -- the Paris-based luxury-goods purveyor best known for its ties, scarves and handbags -- Chrys Fisher resigned yesterday as chief executive of the company's American subsidiary.
The unexpected move comes at a time when Hermes (pronounced air-MEZ) and Mr.
Fisher are at the top of their game in the United States.
The privately held company, owned by the Hermes family, does not provide earnings information, but sales in December are expected to be as much as 30 percent higher than last December's.


News Groups Caught in Dispute Between Hispanic and Gay Journalists
An angry dispute between two groups of journalists about the boycott of Colorado is threatening to present the nation's major news organizations a choice between insulting Hispanic people or homosexuals.
The battle erupted because the board of the National Association of Hispanic Journalists voted in mid-November to proceed with a spring convention in Denver despite a widening national boycott protesting the passage of an anti-homosexual-rights measure in Colorado.
The measure, approved by voters in a referendum, prohibits the state Legislature and Colorado cities from approving anti-discrimination protection for homosexuals and voided existing ordinances.
Association board members said the cost of canceling the meeting would devastate the association.


A Disgruntled Team That Got No Kick From Campaign
Suddenly, the words that Giants players diplomatically tried to avoid all season -- bickering, chaos, finger-pointing -- came blurting out today as their campaign ended with a crash: another defeat filled with lost opportunities to an opponent that seemed to have more will.
Perhaps other 6-10 seasons end with this much frustration and anger.
But how many happen to a team that had won two Super Bowls in the previous six seasons?


Innovative Ways Found To Collect for the Neediest
Behind some donations to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund lie stories of people who have put a twist on the traditional ways of giving.
Alfred H. Lane of Manhattan collected money for the fund by scanning sidewalks, alleyways and waiting rooms around New York City for loose bills and change.
That may seem like a thankless task on streets where tens of thousands of people walk every day, but Mr.
Lane said that he collected $257.65.
He doubled that amount for his contribution.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday
None


Barriers Fade for European Shoppers
Standing in the aisle of a supermarket here, loading their shopping cart with discounted beer and wine for the return trip across the English Channel, Steve and Claire Field spoke eagerly of the potential benefits of the single European market that comes into being Jan. 1.
No longer will the Fields have to wait in long lines to have their purchases checked when they return to Britain from any of the other 11 European Community nations, because almost all customs barriers will be dropped.
No longer will they face strict limits on the what they can bring home, as long as it is for personal use.


'Bye Chez Panisse, Hello Maison Blanche
This has been a pretty nondescript period, except that my wife, Laura D'Andrea Tyson, was named to head the President's Council of Economic Advisers.
I've been hearing from friends who I was convinced had dropped us years ago.
Nothing of the kind,
they assured me.
Since Laura has been spending most of her time in Washington or Little Rock, I've had to explain: "Your congratulations are misdirected. This is the number for commiserations."
Our son, Elliot, although only 9, has grasped the significance of the appointment with a wisdom beyond his years.
His immediate reaction: "I'm going to become a Republican!" (I've persuaded him that the cure he proposes is worse than the disease.)


Harry Connick Arrested
Harry Connick Jr., the singer and musician, was arrested at Kennedy International Airport last night when he tried to board an airliner while carrying an unloaded semi-automatic pistol, according to the Port Authority police.
Mr.
Connick, 24 years old, was charged with a misdemeanor -- fourth degree possession of a weapon -- taken to Queens Central Booking and released on his own recognizance, according to Sgt.
Stephen Prospero, a spokesman for the Port Authority police.


U.S. SHOOTS DOWN AN IRAQI WARPLANE IN NO-FLIGHT ZONE
A United States F-16 shot down an Iraqi warplane today after Iraqi jets breached a zone in southern Iraq, the Defense Department said.
The incident, which American officials described as an apparent test of American resolve in the region, was the first time that an Iraqi plane had been downed since the United States banned Iraqi flights south of the 32d parallel in August to protect Shiite Muslims there from air attacks by President Saddam Hussein's forces.


Sports of The Times; The Giants' Motto: Just Let George Do It
WHEN the 20-10 loss to the Eagles ended along with the 6-10 season, Ray Handley sprinted from the sideline to the tunnel and up the ramp, the first of the Giants coaches and players to enter the locker room.
After a short speech to the players that linebacker Pepper Johnson later described as "basic stuff," the Giants coach now was in an anteroom, waiting for the news media to gather.
No, there was no guillotine above his head, no hangman's noose dangling nearby as he stood there patiently, wearing a white turtleneck shirt and blue pants.


Shortage of Trained Caseworkers Imperils Young Victims of Abuse
Over the last three years, the Dinkins administration has sharply reduced the staff of caseworkers who investigate child abuse, leaving many of New York City's most vulnerable children in the hands of overburdened, inexperienced workers.
The city has cut the number of workers by a quarter, even though reports of abuse and neglect have continued to surpass 50,000 annually.


Review/Television; The Amy Fisher Story, No. 1: Her Version
It's official.
NBC has won the network scramble to be first on the air -- tonight at 9 -- with an Amy Fisher movie.
"Amy Fisher: My Story" is told from the point of view of the 17-year-old Long Island girl who shot and disabled the wife of the man she said was her lover.
Next Sunday, insatiable followers of the case will have to choose between two head-to-head presentations at 9 P.M.: CBS's "Casualties of Love," told from the point of view of the man named as the lover, who denies everything, and "The Amy Fisher Story," on ABC, presumably without any point of view, just the shabby facts.
Neither is yet available for review.


Yes, Schools Can Teach Respect for Others; Part of Pluralism
To the Editor:
"Heather's Mommies vs. Heather's Parents" (Op-Ed, Dec.12), Richard Vigilante's article on pluralism, is a disingenuous and dangerous argument by someone who has probably never experienced racism or homophobia directly.


Crown Heights Exposes Fissures Among Jewish Groups
The bitter standoff between blacks and Jews in Crown Heights has not only stirred long-simmering racial tensions in New York City and distilled deep anger among both groups.
It has also exposed longstanding divisions within the city's diverse Jewish population, and given fresh and wider voice to a strain of outspoken figures who have been active on the fringes of debate for years.
While the spectacle of crowds running through the streets last year chanting "Kill the Jew" united Jewish New Yorkers of many religious and political perspectives in a sense of unease, some mainstream Jewish civic organizations acknowledge that they were initially slow to gauge the depth of feeling on the issue.
That allowed some louder voices to prevail, culminating in recent weeks in attacks by a handful of hecklers who shouted that Mayor David N. Dinkins was a "Jew hater" for not intervening more swiftly to quell the violence.


Europe, Unifying, Has Fears For Its Art
For many of the region's guardians of national art treasures, the dream of European unity suddenly looked like an awful nightmare when European Community countries decided to remove all border controls inside a giant single market that goes into effect on Jan. 1.
Without customs checks, they saw no way of preventing valuable paintings, sculptures, mosaics and the like from moving through the 12-nation area as easily as, say, cheese or engine parts.
In the name of free trade, they said, national heritages would be ransacked by smugglers and dealers.


Abroad at Home; George Milhous Bush
Government officials may violate the law whenever they believe their actions are good for the country.
That was President Bush's principal rationale for pardoning six men involved in the Iran-contra affair.
They were motivated by "patriotism," Mr.
Bush said.
So it did not matter that what they did conflicted with judgments reached through our constitutional process and written into law.
It did not matter that they covered up their actions by lies.


Battle Lines Drawn, as Deer and People Collide
THE pastoral sight of deer feeding around the Durand-Eastman County Park has not necessarily been a welcome one to residents here.
The deer, having stripped the park of greenery in several areas, have taken to munching on expensive landscaping in the yards of houses nearby.
And as they cross the roadways looking for food, the deer are involved in more than 100 car accidents a year in this town of about 50,000 residents, the police say.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Television; Is It Jay? David? No Matter; Ted Koppel Is Likely Winner
While the television industry watches to see whether Jay Leno or David Letterman is left standing after their shootout at the late-night corral, the real winner may be the innocent bystander.
That's the theory at ABC, which owns the bystanding program, "Nightline." ABC News executives are especially relishing the prospect that no matter what the ultimate configuration -- Mr.
Letterman at CBS and Mr.
Leno at NBC, or vice versa -- the entertainment audience at 11:30 P.M.
Eastern time will be split, leaving "Nightline" to dominate the period with its news audience.


Arnold Miller, 60; Founder of Matrix, A Shampoo Maker
Arnold M. Miller, who began his career as a hair stylist and later founded Matrix Essentials Inc., one of the nation's leading makers of hair-care products, died on Saturday at Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston, where he had been receiving treatment for cancer.
Mr.
Miller was 60 years old and lived in Beechwood, Ohio, a suburb of Cleveland.
He died of pneumonia and other complications of cancer, which he had been battling for about a year, said Dennis Lubin, senior vice president of marketing at Matrix Essentials.


Soweto Journal; From Die-Hard Camps, the Roll of the War Drums
On a patch of green and perfect lawn that mimicked the greater estates of the rich over the hill, Terence Serero and Mpifa Tshepe took stock of their land the other day and decided that everyone else had gotten it all wrong.
What is needed, the two 22-year-old college students from the Pan Africanist Congress said, is not talk of peace but "people's war," an insurgency to end "the colonial, settler regime" so that the new land of Azania, as they call South Africa, might raise the banner of scientific socialism.


TRANSACTIONS
Basketball National Basketball Association  PHOENIX SUNS -- Activated Kevin Johnson, guard.
Waived Alex Stivrins, forward.
Football  National Football League  CLEVELAND BROWNS -- Placed Tommy Vardell, fullback, on injured reserve.
Activated Keenan McCardell, wide receiver, and Ken Swilling, linebacker, from the practice squad.
Waived Latin Berry, cornerback.


Filene's and AC&amp;R Part Company
Filene's Basement in Wellesley, Mass., and AC&amp;R Advertising in New York said last week that they had mutually decided to end their two-year relationship after the off-price retail chain determined it wanted "to re-evaluate its marketing direction and advertising needs." The account, with billings estimated at $2 million, has been moved in-house.


Barbara Sopher, Daniel Harelick
Barbara Abigail Sopher, a daughter of Marilyn and Morris Sopher of Riverdale, the Bronx, was married yesterday to Daniel Barak Harelick, a son of Marlene and Stanley Harelick of Fair Lawn, N.J.
Rabbi Charles H. Sheer performed the ceremony at the Sephardic Temple in Cedarhurst, L.I.
Ms.
Sopher, 26, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Barnard College and is a candidate for an M.B.A. degree at Columbia University.
The bride is also an independent real-estate broker in Riverdale.
Her father owns the A-1 Capital Corporation in Riverdale, and her mother owns Riverdale Equities Ltd., both real-estate investment companies.


M-G-M Media To Foote, Cone
Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Inc. said last week that it had selected Foote, Cone &amp; Belding in Los Angeles to handle media planning and buying on its estimated $30 million to $40 million account, which had been handled by Wells Rich Greene BDDP in Los Angeles since 1983.
The change takes effect on Feb. 1.
Foote, Cone was awarded the account after a three-month review that also included the incumbent, as well as Lintas Campbell-Ewald in Los Angeles and Saatchi &amp; Saatchi DFS/ Pacific in Torrance, Calif.


Mary Faucette, William Cantey
Mary Rutledge Faucette, a daughter of Harriott Hampton Faucette of Columbia, S.C., and the late Andrew M. Faucette Jr., was married in Columbia yesterday to William Hazlehurst Cantey, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John M. Cantey, also of Columbia.
The Rev.
Susan Heath performed the ceremony at Trinity Episcopal Cathedral.


A Magazine With 2 Parents May Spawn Industry Trend
In an unusual collaboration between two communications giants that may signal a new trend in magazine publishing, Dow Jones &amp; Company and the Hearst Corporation will begin bimonthly publication this week of their magazine, Smart Money.
The personal finance magazine, which tested two issues in 1992, combines the editorial expertise of Dow Jones, publisher of The Wall Street Journal, and the publishing experience of Hearst, generally acknowledged as the best in the industry at starting magazines.
Each partner was able to supply what the other lacked.
In what is sure to be a model for the future, the parentage of Dow Jones and Hearst represents the magazine industry's first in-vitro fertilization in this country.


Deacons Name Coach
JIM CALDWELL, for the past seven years an assistant under Penn State Coach JOE PATERNO, was named football coach at Wake Forest.
Caldwell, 37, will replace BILL DOOLEY, who announced in August that he would retire after this season.


Books of The Times; A Narcotics Detective Finds That No One's Family Is Immune
Once Through the Heart
By Ralph Blumenthal
352 pages. Simon &amp; Schuster. $22.
In the summer of 1989, Ralph Blumenthal, a reporter for The New York Times, arranged to interview a New York police detective, Patrick DeGregorio.
Mr.
Blumenthal, who was researching an article about undercover work, had met the detective a few years earlier while writing a book about a drug case.
Now, over a meal at a Flushing, Queens, restaurant, Mr.
DeGregorio described the tense life of an undercover cop.
In the process, he mentioned his teen-age daughter, then in a drug treatment program.
Mr.
Blumenthal was immediately intrigued.
Here was a police officer who was devoted to exposing drug traffickers and whose own daughter had become involved with drugs.
What's more, Mr.
DeGregorio had caught her selling them.
Mr.
Blumenthal quickly lost interest in his article about undercover work.
It was the story of the narcotics cop and his drug-selling daughter that he wanted to tell.
Mr.
DeGregorio agreed to cooperate.
The result was a widely read article in The Times, now expanded into a book, "Once Through the Heart."


Market Place; Generic Drugs: An Upbeat Time
THESE are heady days for the generic drug companies that make low-priced copies of prescription drugs no longer protected by patents.
Important drugs that had about $3.5 billion of combined annual sales lost their patent protection in 1992, and products with least $10 billion more of sales will be up for grabs over the next three years.
The generic companies should also benefit from President-elect Bill Clinton's pledge to curb drug price increases and from a surge in the number of prescriptions channeled through health maintenance organizations, company drug benefits plans and other large buyers, all of whom favor low-priced generics.


A-Pact Chances Are Called Good as Bush Bends
In a last-ditch push to conclude a nuclear arms treaty before he leaves office next month, President Bush has agreed to compromise on two of the remaining three hurdles to an agreement, Secretary of State Lawrence S. Eagleburger said today.
Mr.
Eagleburger disclosed the Administration's willingness to compromise in remarks to reporters today en route to Geneva, where he will meet on Monday with senior Russian officials.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-11 U.S. SHOOTS DOWN IRAQI PLANE
A U.S. fighter jet shot down an Iraqi plane after it entered a southern zone that was created to protect Shiite Muslims, the Pentagon said.
It was the first time that a plane was downed since a ban on Iraqi flights south of the 32d parallel.
A1


Marion Strachan; Nurse-Midwife, 84
Marion Strachan, a nurse-midwife and educator, died on Dec. 20 in Hartford.
She was 84 and lived in Bloomfield, Conn.
She had been in failing health for some years, said Dr.
Ruth Watson Lubic, the general director of the Maternity Center Association.


West Feliciana Parish Journal; The Men Are Here, And Here To Stay
It is not as though the country roads of West Feliciana Parish are crawling with anxious men in pickup trucks looking for scarce women.
There is no more than the usual complement here of that most typical of rural meeting spots, the honky-tonk bar.
And yet the Census Bureau is unequivocal.
In this parish just north of Baton Rouge, there are more than twice as many men as women, 212 men to every 100 women.
That ratio, the highest in the country, is far greater than the national average of 95 men to 100 women.


Prisoner Advocacy Group Battles Financial Woes
A group that provides legal services to perhaps the least-loved clientele in New York State is battling, both in court and in the political arena, to avert crippling financial blows.
At the heart of its struggle lies the question of whether the government must help prison inmates take legal action against their jailers.
Prisoners' Legal Services of New York exists solely to help poor inmates pursue grievances ranging from improper calculation of sentences to brutality by guards.
Its services usually consist of little more than advice to inmates or letters to corrections officials, but the group has won dozens of lawsuits on behalf of prisoners.


Finance Subsidiaries: 'For Sale' Sign is Up
Some of the best-known names in American industry are coming to the same conclusion: They are better off concentrating on their core businesses and pulling out of their finance company subsidiaries.
The methods and reasons for leaving the credit business vary.
But in many cases the original goal of helping customers buy the parent company's products no longer seems to justify the investment needed to stay in the business and compete with banks and other lenders.


How to Survive in Music? Play Anything, Anywhere
One recent Saturday, at an hour well before many clock radios switch themselves on, Wayne du Maine stood in a corner of a practice room at the Juilliard School, took off his St.
Louis Cardinals cap and put it on again, backward.
He picked up his trumpet, silently fingered its valves, and gently challenged a young student to play a scale.
Mr. du Maine, who is 27 years old, was starting his weekly teaching stint at Juilliard, where he is one of the few black teachers in its Music Advancement Program for promising minority elementary school students.
Teaching is his only regularly scheduled job in a calendar otherwise filled with midday rehearsals and one-night performances of anything from a Mahler symphony to an Andrew Lloyd Webber musical.


Yes, Schools Can Teach Respect for Others
To the Editor:
Richard Vigilante writes ("Heather's Mommies vs. Heather's Parents," Op-Ed, Dec. 12) that the promulgation of the Rainbow Curriculum in New York City public schools, with its acknowledgment of gay and lesbian households, is based on "the vain hope that if we teach the nice children that homosexuality is O.K., the bullies will stop beating up gays in the schoolyard or on the streets."


Review/Television; ABC on the Trail of Cocaine Traffickers in Bolivia
If Bill Clinton tunes into ABC tonight, he will hear himself being instructed by Peter Jennings to admit that "the cocaine war in Bolivia is already lost" and to stop wasting money on it.
Such a directive to an incoming President may seem a touch presumptuous, even from a network anchor, but it is forcefully backed up by pointed interviews and vivid scenes from the field.
"The Cocaine War, Lost in Bolivia" is meant to stir withdrawal symptoms at the Drug Enforcement Agency, whose greatest success has been all those pictures of drug busts it has imposed on television stations.
Looking into the agency's operations in the country that produces much of the cocaine that reaches the United States and where he has been told he could see the war against drugs at its most effective, Mr.
Jennings finds unredeemed failure.


Yes, Schools Can Teach Respect for Others; A Struggle for Control
To the Editor:
As both a parent and a future teacher, I have followed with interest the debate over the Children of the Rainbow curriculum proposed for New York City's schools.


Alfred T. Lee; Trademark Lawyer, 65
Alfred T. Lee, a trademark lawyer, died on Friday at his home in Amawalk, N.Y.
He was 65 years old and had another home in the Murray Hill section of Manhattan.
He died of cancer of the pancreas, said Sandy Rosen, a partner of Mr.
Lee's in the New York office of the Los Angeles-based law firm of Paul, Hastings, Janofsky &amp; Walker.
Mr.
Lee was the senior partner in charge of the office's intellectual property department.


Japan's Health Care: Cradle, Grave and No Frills
Seventy-year-old Genji Ito had to travel 20 minutes by bicycle on a drizzly morning recently to get to the Toho University Hospital by 7:30, an hour before it officially opened.
But it was still a good day, he noted happily, for his early start had landed him No. 69 in the hospital's dank waiting room, which meant that it would take only until noon to see the doctor about his heart condition and get his medication.


CHURCH TAX CUTS THE GERMAN FOLD
Hundreds of thousands of Germans have given up membership in the Protestant and Roman Catholic churches over the last three years because they no longer wanted to make contributions through "church tax" payments administered by the Government, church officials say.
They explain the development in part as an unexpected consequence of German unification in 1990.
A one-year Government income tax surcharge to help pay the costs of absorbing the formerly Communist part of the country apparently led many people to take another look at their finances and give up the church.


Islanders Hurting, but Only Physically
There were smiles on their faces but bruises on their bodies today when the Islanders gathered for practice here at the Long Island Skating Acadamy.
The smiles were because of a 6-4 triumph over the Rangers Saturday night, the Islanders' sixth victory in their last seven games.
The result lifted them to the .500 level for the first time since early November, at 16-16-4, and gave the Islanders a 10-0-2 record over the Rangers in the last dozen regular-season games played between the two metropolitan rivals at Nassau Coliseum since October 1989.


Bishop Assails School Leaders Over Lessons on Homosexuals
Describing homosexuality as "a basic human disorder," the Roman Catholic Bishop of Brooklyn and Queens said in a taped television interview yesterday that public school educators who promoted the teaching of gay and lesbian conduct as legitimate alternative life styles were failing to provide "moral leadership."
Bishop Thomas V. Daily, appearing on WNBC-TV's "News Forum" program, also said the purpose of the Board of Education's "Children of the Rainbow" curriculum -- which, among other things, teaches young children to be tolerant of homosexuals -- had been obscured by efforts to "legitimize" gay life styles.


Barbara F. Meister, Jean-Marc Juhel
Barbara Fay Meister, who teaches French at the Collegiate School in New York, was married yesterday to Jean-Marc Juhel, who teaches French at the Fountain Valley School in Colorado Springs.
Rabbi Edward M. Maline performed the ceremony at the home of the bride's sister, Dr.
Lynn Meister, in Coral Springs, Fla.
Mrs.
Juhel, 29, graduated summa cum laude from Tufts University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She received a master's degree in French from New York University and a master's in applied lingusitics from Columbia University, where she is a Ph.D. candidate in that subject.
She is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Bertram Meister of Scarsdale, N.Y.
The bride's father is a dermatologist in Yonkers.
Her previous marriage ended in divorce, as did the bridegroom's.


2 Views of Decency
The Federal Communications Commission lowered the boom this month on Howard Stern, the foul-mouthed New York disc jockey, with an unprecedented $600,000 fine for indecency.
But if Mr.
Stern's commentaries were carried by cable or satellite, he could say what he wanted with impunity.
New communications technologies are rapidly eclipsing the roles of traditional radio and television and distributing material to thousands of people that is sometimes far more graphic than Mr.
Stern's program but is subject to none of the same restrictions.


Clinton Set for a Vacation Of Sports and Lots of Talk
President-elect Bill Clinton will leave Monday for his version of a busman's holiday: several days of seclusion with a thousand or so friends, talking.
As they have done for the last eight years, Mr.
Clinton, his wife, Hillary, and their daughter, Chelsea, this week will attend the annual Renaissance Weekend, a retreat at an oceanside resort on the South Carolina island of Hilton Head.
The retreat combines recreational activities like tennis and golf with group and panel discussions on a wide array of topics in the areas of public policy, spirituality and self-improvement.


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings this week: TUESDAY
Delmarva P&amp;L


Striving for Dignity Above a Homeless Shelter; Alongside Fear and Despair in a Bronx Armory, a Dormitory Setting Is Offering Hope
His home has been called overcrowded and dangerous, but Hilton Smith had few complaints.
On Christmas Eve, he watched television and heated chicken soup on a hot plate in the Franklin Avenue Armory in the Bronx.
The black suit he bought for his brother's funeral hung by a window, unmolested in a homeless shelter where almost anything can be traded eventually for crack.
Mr.
Smith's accommodations -- a small, neat 18-bed dormitory room on the fourth floor -- are not the sort usually associated with New York City's large shelters for homeless men.
Most of the shelter is another world: three stories below, 394 cots were locked into a tight grid of fear, violence and despair.
Men stumbled around their cots, some between drug fixes, some chatting when no one else was near.


Four-Alarm Fire in Mount Vernon Injures 9 and Leaves 20 Homeless


Fear in Caribbean Over Trade Pact
Just out of earshot of the shop-floor bustle of industrial parks here, plant managers fear they will soon be able to detect another sound here: the whoosh of capital drawn toward Mexico by its sweeping new trade agreement with the United States.
Like many others in the Caribbean basin, they said they thought that the North American Free Trade Agreement, which would allow duty-free movement of goods across the borders of Canada, Mexico and the United States, would give Mexico advantages that would strongly undermine ties between the Caribbean and the United States.
Those ties have been building since the early 1980's.


BUSH WARNS SERBS NOT TO WIDEN WAR
President Bush has warned Serbian leaders that the United States is ready to use military force if they widen the Balkan war to a Serbian province inhabited mainly by ethnic Albanians, diplomats said today.
As part of a Bush Administration effort to put pressure on the Serbian authorities, who have been widely blamed for the war in the Balkans, the warning was conveyed orally and in writing last week in Belgrade and was addressed to President Slobodan Milosevic of Serbia and Gen.
Zivota Panic, commander of the Yugoslav Army, diplomats here said.


States, Failing to Cooperate, Face a Nuclear-Waste Crisis
Thousands of hospitals, pharmaceutical makers and electric utilities across the country face grave new troubles in the new year, when it will become much more difficult and costly to dispose of their low-level radioactive wastes.
The problems grow from a 12-year-old Federal law that was intended to make the disposal of such waste more equitable to the states with dump sites.
But political conflict and public opposition have frustrated attempts to carry out the law.


Books of The Times; A Narcotics Detective Finds That No One's Family Is Immune
Once Through the Heart
By Ralph Blumenthal
352 pages. Simon &amp; Schuster. $22.
In the summer of 1989, Ralph Blumenthal, a reporter for The New York Times, arranged to interview a New York police detective, Patrick DeGregorio.
Mr.
Blumenthal, who was researching an article about undercover work, had met the detective a few years earlier while writing a book about a drug case.
Now, over a meal at a Flushing, Queens, restaurant, Mr.
DeGregorio described the tense life of an undercover cop.
In the process, he mentioned his teen-age daughter, then in a drug treatment program.
Mr.
Blumenthal was immediately intrigued.
Here was a police officer who was devoted to exposing drug traffickers and whose own daughter had become involved with drugs.
What's more, Mr.
DeGregorio had caught her selling them.
Mr.
Blumenthal quickly lost interest in his article about undercover work.
It was the story of the narcotics cop and his drug-selling daughter that he wanted to tell.
Mr.
DeGregorio agreed to cooperate.
The result was a widely read article in The Times, now expanded into a book, "Once Through the Heart."


N.F.L. Keeps On Giving
N.F.L.
Charities has awarded a $100,000 research grant to The Miami Project to Cure Paralysis, the world's largest scientific center dedicated to spinal-cord injury research.
The grant brings to $350,000 the amount N.F.L.
Charities has contributed to The Miami Project, which was co-founded in 1985 by former Miami all-pro linebacker NICK BUONICONTI following a spinal-cord injury suffered by his son, MARC.


Accounts
*
Pitney Bowes, Stamford, Conn., to Keiler &amp; Co., Farmington, Conn., to handle the company's mailing systems account, previously at Deutsch/ Dworin Inc., New York.
Billings were not disclosed. *
Genentech Inc., San Francisco, to Vicom/FCB, San Francisco, to handle advertising for Pulmozyme, a drug that is pending approval to treat cystic fibrosis.
Billings were not disclosed.


Review/Music; Latest From the Late: Schickele Offers More P.D.Q. Bach
Among the highly gifted, versatility is a mixed blessing.
For however much they may overachieve in a lifetime, they are almost sure to fall short of their full potential in one area or another, to the disappointment of at least some of their admirers.
The ebullient composer Peter Schickele, for one, has shifted focus in recent years, trying to stake out a personal and musical life for himself apart from his consuming creation, P. D. Q. Bach.
Mr.
Schickele has curtailed touring and now confines his addled advocacy of the last and least of Bach's 20-odd children largely to recordings and year-end concerts in New York; the latest round began on Saturday evening at Carnegie Hall.


Maria Herrera-Uslar; Society Figure Was 78
Maria Teresa Herrera-Uslar, the Dowager Marquesa de Torre Casa, who was a society figure, philanthropist and author, died on Saturday at the Caracas Medical Center in Venezuela.
She was 78 and lived in Caracas.
The Marquesa, who was widely known as Mimi Herrera, died of heart failure due to complications from cancer, said her son, Reinaldo Herrera, whose wife is the fashion designer Caroline Herrera.


CHRONICLE
When BILL BIXBY, the actor and director, underwent an experimental procedure for prostate cancer recently, he was surprised to find his doctors so grim and worried.
So he tried to shake their anxiety in a way that an actor might: he played dead on the operating table.
The dozen or so doctors and nurses at the hospital in Los Angeles were not amused, Mr.
Bixby recalled in an interview in the new issue of TV Guide.
"Don't do that again," his doctor told him.


Laura R. Shaw, Aaron M. Frank
Laura Rachel Shaw, a daughter of Dr.
Henry and Evelyn Shaw of Scotch Plains, N.J., was married yesterday to Aaron Michael Frank, a son of Dr.
Gerald and Judith Frank of Potomac, Md.
Rabbi Joel Tessler performed the ceremony at the Lincoln Square Synagogue in New York.
Mrs.
Shaw Frank, 24, graduated from Columbia University, where she is now a law student.
Her father is a professor of chemical engineering at the New Jersey Institute of Technology in Newark.


DISARMING SOMALIS GAINS IN PRIORITY
As the two most powerful Somali clan leaders reiterated an agreement to end factional fighting here in the capital, United States officials said today that American troops would step up their efforts to disarm Somali gunmen.
A high-ranking official said the troops would expand patrols in Mogadishu and confiscate weapons and the four-wheel-drive vehicles on which gunmen have mounted weapons.
Vehicles from which weapons have been removed but which still have mounts for them would also be seized, he said.


No Panic Button Yet But Jet Changes Loom
While the players cleared out their lockers today to begin an off season of soul searching, Jets coaches and management were sifting through the rubble of a 4-12 season to determine what went wrong and what is salvagable.
Over the next few months, the players will reflect on the twist and turns of the past season.


Smile and Say 'Crowded'


Graduate Study for Factory Hands
Shawn Wilson held part of a fuel tank firmly against a heavy metal table and began pounding an uneven flange to flatten it for welding.
With each stroke, she added to the din at the sprawling factory here in this industrial city's still-vigorous West Side.
And with each stroke, she came a little closer to a secure, good-paying job in a high-tech factory of the future.
Ms.
Wilson, at 24, is an apprentice candidate at the Milford Fabricating Company, a subsidiary of the Budd Company that supplies customized parts to the automotive industry.
If working in an automobile assembly plant can be compared to Literature 101, Milford is a Ph.D. course.
Turning Designs Into Reality
It is Milford technicians who take the designs of automotive engineers and translate them into the tools and processes capable of mass production.
Mechanics fine-tune giant stamping presses so sheet metal can be pressed into shape without tearing or wrinkling.
They operate measuring machines so delicate they must be suspended on air bags and so accurate they can detect flaws down to 5 ten-thousandths of an inch.


U.S.-Russian Arms Talks Seem Snagged on Details
The United States and Russia continued to talk today about concluding a far-reaching nuclear-arms-reduction agreement and agreed to meet again on Tuesday.
Foreign Minister Andrei V. Kozyrev of Russia offered to bet a bottle of whisky on a positive outcome.
Speaking to reporters before a dinner tonight with the Russian delegation, Secretary of State Lawrence S. Eagleburger said tersely, "We're making progress." Asked whether he expected to overcome the differences on stubborn technical issues before he is scheduled to leave Geneva on Tuesday, Mr.
Eagleburger replied, "We will work as hard as we can."


Gloom Lifts in U.S. and Falls on Japan
The Japanese are losing confidence that their nation will be the dominant economic power in the next century, while Americans see their own economy as gaining strength and view Japan as less of a long-term economic threat than before.
In a poll conducted in both countries this month by The New York Times, CBS News and the Tokyo Broadcasting System, 45 percent of Americans said the United States would be "the No. 1 economic power in the world" in the 21st century while 30 percent said Japan would be.


Shareholder Sues Home Shopping
A shareholder of Home Shopping Network Inc. has sued the company and its chairman, Roy Speer, contending that the company has paid Mr.
Speer's son Richard at least $7.8 million in fees under a contract that is no longer valid.
The plaintiff is the 7457 Corporation, whose only shareholder is Steven M. Mizel.


Sports of the Times; Sugar Bowl Rocks Early With Strains of Marley
THE father was a mystical genius who felt the pain of the world.
His name was Bob Marley, and he has been gone since May 9, 1981, but yet he is never gone.
The son comes without the dreadlocks and the hypnotic reggae beat, but he is a prophet of sorts, too.
He says Miami is going to kick Alabama all over the Sugar Bowl on Friday night.
His name is Rohan Marley, and he is a tough little linebacker.


METROPOLITAN COLLEGE REPORT
Of the several college basketball tournaments in the area this week, two offer some intriguing possibilities.
The tradition of the ECAC Holiday Festival at Madison Square Garden is unmatched, but the first Seton Hall-Meadowlands Tournament at Byrne Meadowlands Arena could end up being the most exciting for the fans.


The Contrabury Tales
Heere bigynneth the Pardoner's Tale
Whan that November gave Bush the boote, He pierced Walsh's case to the roote: Ere goon to Houston on a pilgrymage, Bush cutte loose Wynberger's entourage.
"For patriots, no Damoclesian sword," Seyde he (not cyting Nixon's Ford).
"Caspar, a parfit Pentagonne knyght, Merits honour, not a kourtroom fyght. Abrams, Fiers, Clarridge, George, McFarlane -- none styck in my gorge."
Heere bigynneth the Man of Law his Tale
Walsh, Koppeled in his Oklahoma lair, Quod, "Another Saturday nyght massacre! There's no tyme at Willard Inn to sup 'Til I probe this iniquitous cover-up. The vileyne of conceeling notes May've stopp'd Reagan impeechment votes. Outsyde the loop? A contra-dykshun Of diary entrys -- an Iran-gayt fykshun. And Bush's fayte for this disgrayce? 'Tween Lytl Rock and the hardd playce."
Heere taketh the maker of this book his leve
And then 'twixt George and the Dragon Came Gephardt, Mitchell, fyngers waggin', Smellynge a Whyte Howse partee lyne; Angree, Dole seyde, "Prosecutor, resyne!" Surpryze!
Who fayvord the clemencee?
Aspin and Foley, seyde the G.O.P.
What did Bush know?
Whan did he know it?
Gentyl Reeder, I'm but a Chaucerian poet (Merrilee meterynge the Pardoner's way Of treeting scandall in his C.I.A.).


Big Science Squeezes Small-Scale Researchers
THE nation's top Federal agency for the support of basic scientific research is battling to reconcile the growing financial appetite of its biggest project with an overall budget crunch.
The conflict is threatening to pull the plug on more than a hundred small-scale science projects across the country.
"People here are in great pain," said Dr.
Stuart A. Rice, dean of physical sciences at the University of Chicago.
"Really senior people are having their grants cut."


Lawrence Bruce Jr., 47, Lawyer and Leader of Unicef Committee
Lawrence E. Bruce Jr., a lawyer and president of the United States Committee for Unicef, died on Friday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 47.
He died of complications from a liver ailment, a family member said.


John Peters, 85, Dies; Founded an Aid Group
Dr.
John L. Peters, a Methodist minister and founder of World Neighbors, an international self-help organization, died Saturday at the Cherry Creek Nursing Home in Aurora, Colo., a suburb of Denver.
He was 85 and lived in Aurora.
He died of complications from pneumonia and leukemia, said Judy Kelley, a spokeswoman for World Neighbors.


Alexander's Inc. reports earnings for 12wks to Oct 17


Review/Theater; Tommy Tune's Dream of Yesterday's Broadway
If Tommy Tune could wave a magic scepter, Broadway would be transformed from its currently bedraggled state into an immaculate thoroughfare of diamond-studded glamour and endless high spirits.
The years would melt away, and names like George Gershwin, Cole Porter, Fred Astaire and Ray Bolger would blaze on every marquee.
To step into a theater would be to enter a Busby Berkeley dream world of top hats, tap shoes and gushing Broadway melodies.
That is the dream that the performer, director and choreographer captures only fleetingly in "Tommy Tune Tonite!," the handsomely mounted song and dance show he has brought to the Gershwin Theater for a limited engagement through Sunday.
It is a world in which it is possible to "Tap Your Troubles Away," as the show's opening Jerry Herman song suggests.
Or where "Everything Old Is New Again," as proclaims the Peter Allen-Carole Bayer Sager number that serves as one of the program's thematic threads.


Dudley Is All Legs, All Heart, All Right
On any night, a quick look down the Nets' bench for a game-saver and the eyes just might skip backup center Chris Dudley.
He's gawky, all legs, and he looks as if he would be more comfortable playing volleyball in southern California than mixing it up on a basketball court in New Jersey.
But he is also the kind of player who works every minute of a game, and he was one of the chief reasons the Nets barely escaped with a 104-103 victory over a tough Charlotte team tonight at the Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


Claude E. Forkner, 92, Internist and Professor
Dr.
Claude E. Forkner Sr., a former professor at Cornell University Medical School and an internist, died on Dec. 20 at his home in DeLand, Fla.
He was 92.
Dr.
Forkner died in his sleep.
He had suffered from diabetes, said his wife of 65 years, Marion Sturges DuBois Forkner.


Governor of Alabama Is Indicted On Charges of Financial Misdeeds
Gov.
Guy Hunt of Alabama, whose financial dealings have been under investigation for more than a year, was indicted today on 13 felony counts, including charges that he took $200,000 from his inaugural fund for his own use.
Mr.
Hunt, a Primitive Baptist preacher and former Amway salesman who rose from relative obscurity in 1986 to become Alabama's first Republican Governor since Reconstruction, was indicted on charges including theft of property, conspiracy and violations of Alabama's ethics law.


Rufus Bullock, Investment Executive, 56
Rufus Bullock, chairman of Edgewood Management Company, an investment advisory firm in New York City, died on Friday at Greenwich Hospital in Greenwich, Conn.
He was 56 and lived in Greenwich.
He died of lung cancer, said William C. Breed 3d, a principal of Edgewood.


New York City's Foggy Bottom of Foreign Policy; City Council Extends Its Reach Past Potholes to Apartheid and 'Freedom Fighters'
One of the longest, most emotional debates in the New York City Council this year had nothing to do with the city budget, incinerators or any of the other mundane business of running the city.
It involved Puerto Rican revolutionary heroes, United States foreign policy and the sometimes subtle distinction between freedom fighters and terrorists.
After two wrenching hours of debate -- with one Councilman waving a Puerto Rican flag, and Hispanic citizens cheering from the balcony -- the Council overwhelmingly passed a resolution urging the United Nations to ask the United States to free all Puerto Rican "political prisoners," including people convicted of bank robbery and murder.


Governor Picks Aide for Senate Seat
Gov.
Ned McWherter of Tennessee appointed his 65-year-old chief aide today to fill the Senate seat being vacated by Vice President-elect Al Gore.
The appointee, Harlan Mathews, as Deputy to the Governor is a confidante of Mr.
McWherter and has been a figure in Democratic politics in Tennessee for years.


Ring In New With New
New Year's celebrations are different things to different people.
Some prefer quiet dinners by candlelight at home; others choose nightclubs with funny hats and sparklers, and thousands go out to watch the ball drop in Times Square.
But this year, many people in the industry feel, will be a watershed for fashion.
After a relatively stable period, when the jacket reigned supreme for day and evening clothes were on the quiet side, designers are breaking loose.
They are experimenting with new ideas and finding, sometimes to their surprise, that their customers are responding.


Talks With China Mean Jobs for U.S.
To the Editor:
Re "Are These Trips Necessary?" (editorial, Dec. 19): Several weeks ago President Bush asked me to lead a Presidential mission to China, following his decision to resume high-level economic talks with the Chinese.
The driving rationale for the mission was to promote economic growth and jobs in the United States by insuring that American businesses have the support and opportunity to capitalize on the booming Chinese market, growing at 12 percent a year.


Mets Sign Outfielder
The Mets yesterday reached agreement on a minor league contract for free-agent outfielder ERIC BULLOCK and invited him to spring training.
Bullock, 32, batted .305 in 90 games with Indianapolis of the American Association last season and was 0 for 5 in eight games with Montreal.
He has played for Houston, Minnesota, Philadelphia and the Expos and has a career batting average of .205 in 131 major league games. (AP)


Guns at Airports: a Common Problem
Security officers at Kennedy International Airport were surprised Sunday night when a New Orleans-bound passenger told them he had an unloaded handgun in his carry-on bag.
When they verified that he was telling the truth, the airport police arrested the passenger, Harry Connick Jr., the singer and pianist.
Mr.
Connick, who said the unlicensed weapon had been a gift, was booked for criminal possession of a weapon.
Yet while his arrest attracted some attention, such incidents are not unusual.
About seven handguns are confiscated every day at airports across the United States.
At Kennedy, there are four to six arrests for guns each month, said Frank V. Fox, commander of the Port Authority Police at the airport.


Chess
Patrick Wolff struggled successfully all the way to triumph in the United States championship.
Although he had almost no easy games, the 24-year-old grandmaster from Somerville, Mass., and former Yale star, scored 10 1/2-4 1/2 to take the $10,000 first prize of a total $30,000 purse put up by the chief sponsor, Software Toolworks.
Wolff was also awarded the $1,500 Albaugh prize for being the solo winner in the tournament, played Dec. 1-20 in Durango, Colo.
Boris Gulko, a Fairlawn, N.J., grandmaster, and Alex Sherzer, a College Park, Md., international master, shared second place with 10-5.
Grandmasters Yasser Seirawan of Seattle and Dmitry Gurevich of Chicago tied for fourth place with 9-6.


Alien Species Threaten Hawaii's Environment
FOR 70 million years the Hawaiian islands enjoyed blissful isolation, disturbed only once every few thousand years by a species crossing the Pacific to find a new home.
But researchers say alien species are now entering this tropical paradise at many thousands of times their natural rate, causing critical problems.
"The alien species problem is by far the most important problem facing both Hawaii's environment and our agricultural economy and perhaps our entire economy," said Alan Holt, director of science and stewardship for the Nature Conservancy of Hawaii.
Mr.
Holt was a co-author of a recent report on alien species by his group and the Natural Resources Defense Council that was described by environmentalists as the first comprehensive study of this threat.


Millfeld Trading Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


The Los Angeles Art World's New Image
Sue Spaid, a tall young woman who opened a gallery in a tiny storefront on Beverly Boulevard two years ago, is something of a legend in the freshman ranks of the Los Angeles art scene.
Mention her name and people will remark that she has been known to work in a bakery at the minimum wage to keep her gallery going, or that she doesn't have a car.
Ms.
Spaid admits to having "a financial crisis every six weeks," that she operates her gallery on about $2,500 a month and that she has no staff, but "a lot of volunteers." Ask her what she thinks of the current state of the Los Angeles art world, where the recession has taken a high toll among galleries, and she says elliptically, "I think probably things' not being so great is what makes it so great."


Illusions Are Also Left Dead As Child-Killer Awaits Noose
After trying for 17 years to reform the life of Westley Allan Dodd, the State of Washington is scheduled to kill him next week, in what would be the nation's first execution by hanging in nearly three decades.
A slight, hazel-eyed man of 31 who pleaded guilty to torturing, raping and killing three small boys in 1989, Mr.
Dodd saw all manner of psychiatrists, sex therapists and counselors in the years before his killing spree, as the state tried the traditional methods of treating sex offenders.


By Design; New Year, New Spirit
There's a new year coming, and with it a fresh attitude toward dressing.
It's all about lightening up.
So discard your hair shirt.
Instead, try a chiffon blouse with a deep, ruffled decolletage.
If you wear it with nothing underneath, you will certainly be in the avant-garde for '93.
But if you do as Ralph Lauren did in his spring collection and toss the chiffon wisp over a natty striped T-shirt, you'll really be in step with the new mixy mood of fashion.
We have had enough sensible style.
It works.
It will remain.
But now, let's mix in some layers of airy, feminine, even fragile, fashion.
It shows a certain optimism about life in general.


Bills' Kelly to Miss Game Against Oilers
On crutches, and angry and frustrated over a sprained ligament on the side of his right knee, Jim Kelly, Buffalo's All-Pro quarterback, said yesterday he would miss Sunday's first-round playoff game against the Houston Oilers.
Kelly said he also would be unavailable for at least a week after that if the Bills advanced.
Kelly suffered the injury at Houston on Sunday night, where he had led the league's top-rated offense until being sacked by defensive tackle Ray Childress in the second quarter of a game the Bills lost, 27-3.
Had Buffalo won, the Bills would have captured their fifth straight American Football Conference Eastern Division title and earned a bye this weekend.


Potomac Electric Power Co reports earnings for 12mos to Nov 30


With Broncos Ousted, It's Farewell to Reeves
A week after quarterback John Elway contended that Coach Dan Reeves should turn more responsibility for the Broncos' offense over to his assistants, Reeves wound up yesterday yielding the entire coaching job in Denver.
Reeves was fired following a 12-season stint that included six trips to the playoffs, three to the Super Bowl (all blowout losses) and a 1992 mark of 8-8 after a start of 7-3.
Despite the return of the injured Elway on Sunday, the Broncos failed to make the playoffs when they lost to the Chiefs in Kansas City.


'Murderers Must Be Punished for Their Horrendous Acts'
To the Editor:
I read with horror "New York Lifers Groups Argue for Early Parole" (news article, Dec. 13).
Has the Commissioner of Corrections, Thomas A. Coughlin 3d, lost his mind?
Why does he think the law was changed to prevent early parole for murderers?


A 2-Way Street for Sharing Data Between Macs and I.B.M.'s
EXCHANGING files between two computers in a home office or small business is sometimes easiest via the "sneaker net," making a copy of a file on a floppy disk in one machine and walking over to put the floppy into the other one.
You would not want to run a multinational corporation that way, but when the other computer is in the same room, or just down the hall, it is a quick and dirty solution.
Physically linking the computers is more elegant, but not everyone wants to set up a network, even a little one.
Another route is a hardware-software combination like Laplink, a popular and effective way to share files.


Topics of The Times; Fainthearted Republicans
Where do House Republicans stand on ethics?
Actually "stand" is the wrong word; it suggests backbone.
In the case of Representative Joseph McDade, at least, House Republicans have decided to sit on their hands.
Mr.
McDade, the ranking Republican on the Appropriations Committee and its defense subcommittee, was indicted in May on Federal bribery and racketeering charges arising from his official duties.
The House minority leader, Robert Michel, instead of asking Mr.
McDade to step aside, ducked the issue.


Litany of Signals Overlooked in Child's Death
Even in New York City's troubled child protection system, this oversight was remarkable: None of the caseworkers who investigated allegations that Doris Harden had mistreated her children discovered that she had previously served three years in prison for holding down a 7-year-old girl while another young woman sexually assaulted the child with a toilet plunger.
The four workers missed other important details as well: Ignorant of the prior abuse conviction, they initially did not speak with the mother's parole officers, who knew she was a crack user who had refused treatment.
The workers interviewed Ms.
Harden, but never talked to her boyfriends, despite warnings that one of the men was prone to violence and drug dealing.
Fatal Burns
It was one of Ms.
Harden's boyfriends who later said he had accidentally caused what proved to be fatal burns to the groin, buttocks and legs of her five-month-old son, Jeffrey.
The round-faced infant with the soft, fuzzy head of hair died Jan. 17.


Business Scene; Shrinking Goals For Aid to Russia
WITH Yegor T. Gaidar ousted as Russia's economics czar, American experts on Russia are going through a sometimes angry post-mortem: if the Western industrial nations had underwritten Mr.
Gaidar's efforts with $24 billion in loans, would he still be in power today, hastening Russia toward a market economy?
Maybe, but not for many more weeks.
With or without Western money, his days seemed numbered.
Gradually most of the American experts are concluding that the West cannot buy a Western version of capitalism for Russia, although the United States and the other industrial nations spent 1992 trying to do so.
Huge loans were offered, but only if Russia agreed to obey Western rules for building a market system as rapidly as possible.
Mr.
Gaidar agreed, but failed to rescue the economy.
And Western loans to Russia in 1993, if any are made, are likely to have more modest goals.


Let Teen-Agers Know Medical Risks of Birth Control Implants; A Need for Love
To the Editor:
Offering Norplant in Baltimore school-based clinics, discussed in "Teen-Agers Split on Birth Control Plan" (news article, Dec. 5) may be the contraceptive answer for many teen-age girls attempting to stay in school.
But those are the kids who are motivated or driven to do so.


Rebecca Ann Donovan, Professor, 46
Rebecca Ann Donovan, a sociologist and an associate professor at Hunter College, died on Sunday at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center.
She was 46 and lived in Manhattan.
She died of breast cancer, said Robert Bazell, a friend.


Conviction in '80 Slaying Reversed by Federal Court
A Federal appeals court yesterday reversed the murder conviction of Angel Claudio, who is serving a prison sentence of 25 years to life for the 1980 slaying of a Queens high school student, in the latest round of a case that has plodded through the courts for years.
Richard Piperno, a spokesman for the Queens District Attorney, Richard A. Brown, said the District Attorney's office "would seek to overturn the decision and reinstate the conviction" by all means, including a petition for a rehearing, should other legal avenues fail.


Review/Television; Helping Endangered Species Propagate
"Sex and the Single Rhino" does not signal a turn toward the risque by the straight-arrow producers of "Nova." Tonight's offering has to do with ways of assisting endangered species to reproduce.
It is absorbing, not only for the look it provides into the work of biologists concerned over the disappearance of many kinds of animals, but also for the clear and fair way it lays out issues that divide animal lovers.
Although the problems of the Sumatran rhino are accorded particular attention, Mongolian horses, Siberian tigers and other species are not neglected.
Much of the hour is given to a hotly disputed technique of encouraging reproduction known as captive breeding: Take a male and a female rhinoceros, say, out of their jungle home in Java, ship them to a zoo in the West and try to get them to do what is supposed to come naturally.


Frances Lehrich, 92, Lawyer and Magistrate
Judge Frances Williamson Lehrich, a lawyer and former New York City magistrate, died on Sunday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 92.
She died of a heart attack, said her daughter, Jacqueline L. Becker of Boca Raton, Fla.


American Is Accused of Passing Secrets to Philippine Government
A martial arts instructor was arrested on Sunday and accused of obtaining classified documents from a C.I.A. employee in Manila and passing them to the Philippine Government, law-enforcement officials announced today.
The instructor, Joseph Garfield Brown, was arrested at Dulles International Airport outside Washington.
He is an American citizen who works as a part-time tae kwon do instructor for the Philippine Department of Tourism in Manila.


Gunter Grass Considers the Inescapable: Politics
Conversations with writers usually drift from current events to literature to personal lives, back to literature again, then to a bit of the news and on to long discussions of the writer's current work.
But a talk with Gunter Grass, one of Germany's most prominent novelists and essayists, is nearly all about politics, very specifically German politics.
He cannot escape, he said, this shadow that insinuates its way into his writing, his etchings and his conversations.
"I always wish that once there will be a period in Germany where politics is in the corner, but I never had it," said Mr.
Grass, who was in New York City recently to promote his latest novel, "The Call of the Toad" (A Helen and Kurt Wolff Book/Harcourt Brace Jovanovich).


The Pugnacious Domi Is Sent To the Ice Box: Winnipeg
Tie Domi had been invited by the Rangers' coaching staff to dress for only 12 hockey games this season, but the right wing represented something that went well beyond his two goals and no assists.
Domi, with impudent swagger and 95 penalty minutes, liked to think of himself as a true heavyweight, one of the last honorable pugilists in the National Hockey League.
But yesterday, the Rangers traded Domi and another popular, tough forward, Kris King, to the Winnipeg Jets for Ed Olczyk, a pure scorer who is unlikely to tangle with Bob Probert or anybody else.


Bridge
Try an arithmetic problem that is slightly harder than it appears.
What is the highest score possible on a single deal?
Defending a redoubled vulnerable grand slam and defeating it by 13 tricks is worth 7,600, but that is not the right answer.
If the game is social, you can have 150 honors to boot, making the total 7,750.
This represents absolute zero for the opponents.


One Key or 2 for the Car? Innovation Is Unwanted
Standing in the dark next to a locked Buick, arms filled with packages, a shopper inserts the key in the door; it won't turn.
A package falls.
The door opens on a second try, but the key fails to turn in the ignition because it has been inserted upside down.
In the mid-1970's, the Toyota Motor Corporation, followed by other Japanese auto makers, introduced a way to prevent this annoyance: a single key, insertable in either direction, that unlocks the ignition, door, trunk and glove compartment.


AirSensors Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


CHRONICLE
The music aficionados who bought tickets to see SOUTHSIDE JOHNNY perform at the Stone Pony in Asbury Park, N.J., on Sunday night had not a clue to the surprise that awaited shortly after midnight: an appearance by BRUCE SPRINGSTEEN.
The audience screamed, whistled and cheered when the two joined forces at 12:20 A.M. to sing Mr.
Springsteen's "Fever." Forty minutes later, another surprise guest strode onto the stage: JON BON JOVI, who launched into Southside Johnny's "I Don't Want to Go Home."


The Best Case for the Pardons
Surely, reasonable people have said to themselves in the days since President Bush shocked the country with his Iran-contra pardons -- surely the President must have had good reasons.
Surely he would not wish to live forever in history as the President who in effect pardoned
himself.
Surely he must have some plausible arguments for exonerating Caspar Weinberger even before his trial, and other officials after theirs.
There are justifications; some even sound plausible; yet on inspection, they fail.
The arguments are lame, even misleading, and in the end the pardons reverberate with the clank of outrage.


Sports of The Times; When Sal The Barber Pitched
WHEN the Giants-Dodgers rivalry was stirring New York to its National League roots four decades ago, Sal Maglie would stare down from the mound as Jackie Robinson took his time settling into the batter's box.
As soon as the Dodgers' cleanup hitter was ready, the Giants' ace right-hander would step off the rubber and pick up the resin bag.
"Now Jackie was waiting for me," he once said.
"Now I was in charge. You've got to be in charge out there."


U.S. Sends Jets to Iraq Zone From a Carrier Off Africa
The United States rushed today to build up its fighter force near Iraq, taking the unusual step of sending two squadrons of Navy warplanes to Saudi Arabia from an aircraft carrier off the coast of Africa.
The deployment of the Navy planes followed the downing on Sunday of an Iraqi MIG-25 by an American F-16.
American officials said the Iraqi Air Force was flying patrols today.
A senior Pentagon official, who insisted on not being identified, said that there had been Iraqi violations of the flight ban in the southern zone since the MIG was shot down, but that allied planes were not in a position to shoot when they occurred.


Volunteer Fire Brigades Struggle to Survive
When floodwaters swept over Broad Channel, Queens, this month, inundating streets and homes and cutting the island community off from the rest of the city, the rescue effort fell to a ragged group of volunteer firefighters.
The only problem was that their rickety firehouse was nearly waist-deep in water and one of their two aging firetrucks would not start.
"We ourselves needed help," recalled Gerri Reimuller, the president of the Broad Channel Volunteer Fire Department.
"It's hard for us to operate a rescue operation when we need to be rescued."


METRO DIGEST
FAILURES OF AN OVERLOADED SYSTEM
None of the New York City child protection caseworkers who investigated allegations that Doris Harden had mistreated her children discovered that she had served three years in prison for her involvement in a sexual assault on a 7-year-old child.
They didn't know that she used crack, or that one of her boyfriends was prone to violence.
It was one of her boyfriends who, accidentally, he said, caused fatal burns to Ms.
Harden's 5-month-old son, pointing up the flaws of a system where overburdened caseworkers often fail to check up on their charges.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY
In one of the largest cash thefts in history, gunmen confronted a lone guard in an armored car company's warehouse in Brooklyn and made off with more than $8 million.
But nearly all of the bills were sequentially numbered bills.
A1.


COMPANY NEWS
QUANTUM FUND N.V., has acquired a 5.4 percent stake in Universal Health Services Inc., King of Prussia, Pa., a hospital management company, by buying 67,000 class B common shares at $13.875 to $14 a share on Dec. 16-17.


Giving Shelter from a Storm Or Other Trading Disasters
Ken Israel does not exactly revel in disasters.
But fires, bombs, hurricanes, earthquakes, floods, power failures and severed telephone lines are sure good for his business.
His 3 1/2-year-old company, Exchange Resources Inc., sells disaster recovery plans, specializing in mock-ups of securities firms' trading rooms that sit idle until misfortune strikes.
Then, the silent offices become real trading rooms, with the same computer system, video screens and communications links to exchanges around the world as the traders' regular stations.


Let Teen-Agers Know Medical Risks of Birth Control Implants
To the Editor:
"Baltimore School Clinics to Offer Birth Control by Surgical Implant" (front page, Dec. 4) mentions as a side effect of Norplant that it "frequently causes irregular menstrual bleeding." But you fail to point out that these bleeding irregularities can increase the risks of sexually transmitted diseases and infection with human immunodeficiency virus, which cause AIDS.


Beyond the No-Flight Zone in Iraq
Baghdad, not Washington, provoked Sunday's aerial clash over southern Iraq by sending warplanes into a no-flight zone.
U.S. planes responded admirably, showing resolve but also prudence.
The first pair of Iraqi MIG's was turned back peacefully.
One of a second pair was downed after turning to confront American planes.
American resolve will be tested again and again in coming months.
Saddam Hussein still prefers confrontation to compliance, and disregards the cost of his posturing to Iraq and its suffering people.


5 Suspects in Bank Theft Are Linked to an Earlier Robbery
A former lieutenant in the Orange County Sheriff's Department and four other men charged with robbing a bank here on Wednesday also took part in a bank robbery in Westchester County in July, a Federal prosecutor said today.
Kerry Lawrence, an assistant United States Attorney, made the accusation at a hearing in which all seven men charged in last week's robbery were ordered held without bail, pending another hearing next month.


Comet Alert Canceled, Thanks to New Data
DOOMSDAY has been postponed a thousand years or so, at least as far as Comet Swift-Tuttle is concerned.
New evidence suggests that the six-mile-wide mountain of ice and dirt, zipping through space at 37 miles a second, has virtually no chance of colliding with the Earth on its next pass through the inner solar system.
In October, astronomers warned that the comet might hit Earth during that pass 134 years from now, in 2126.


And the Giants Don't Even Deserve an A for Effort
The Giants' frustrating and disappointing 6-10 season is over.
Ray Handley's two-year tenure as a head coach who never quite fit the job may be over in a day or two, and almost certainly by next week.
People have compared this season with 1983, when the Giants finished Bill Parcells's first year as head coach with a 3-12-1 record.
But the current Giants have more talent than that patched-up team and seem to need better coaching approaches, communication and motivation at least as much as they need talent.


Honoring Streisand For Civil Liberties
To the Editor:
Your Dec. 14 Talk of Hollywood (arts pages), on the boycott of Colorado for its anti-gay vote, asks why the American Civil Liberties Union of Southern California would honor Barbra Streisand, a movie star.


Rise of Militants Seen in Algeria As Junta Falters
Almost a year after it took power in a coup, the military-backed Government of Algeria is facing a declining economy, deepening public resentment and mounting armed attacks by Islamic militants, and many Western diplomats here expect it to fall within a year in favor of an Islamic government.
The Algerian crisis is now the most pressing concern of Western diplomats in the region, especially those from France, which has a large Algerian population and might have to absorb waves of immigrants fleeing an Islamic state.
But the diplomats' longer-term concern is for an Algerian fundamentalist government's influence in nearby countries of North Africa, including the West's biggest Arab ally, Egypt. 'A Catalytic Effect' Is Feared
"When Iran became an Islamic state it shook the Arab world, even though Iran is Persian and its rulers are Shiite rather than mainstream Sunni Muslims," a senior Western diplomat said.
"If Algeria is handed over to the fundamentalists it could have a catalytic effect in the region, much as we saw with the collapse of the Communist regimes in Eastern Europe."


Home for the Holidays: Kentucky and St. John's
Kentucky and St.
John's rose last night at Madison Square Garden and tossed aside their opponents like discarding a T-shirt.
The occasion was opening night for the Chemical Bank ECAC Holiday Festival, a college basketball feast that dates to 1952 and one that drew 14,110 fans for the doubleheader that had so many New York trappings.
Kentucky, featuring three metropolitan-area starters and coached by Rick Pitino who once toiled for the Knicks, routed Rutgers, 89-67, in the first game and extended its unbeaten record to 7-0.


166 'Messiahs' Later, A Maestro Takes His Final Bow
David Randolph's final presentation of Handel's "Messiah" in Carnegie Hall on Sunday, his 166th performance of the oratorio, ended much as the first one did in 1961.
There was a dramatic one-second silence, followed by a stupendous double "amen" that seemed almost to levitate the hall.
But the difference this time was that the audience knew it had witnessed the maestro's farewell to "Messiah" on the podium.
The audience gave the 77-year-old Mr.
Randolph and the 230 members of the Masterwork Chorus and Orchestra a four-minute standing, cheering and whistling ovation that out-decibeled Handel.


Progress Software reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Miller (Herman) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 28


Transactions
Baseball  National League
METS -- Agreed to terms with Eric Bullock, outfielder, on a minor-league contract.
Football


Not So, Dykstra Says
LENNY DYKSTRA has acknowledged that he gambles legally in Atlantic City, but has disputed a magazine account that he lost $50,000 at baccarat and had to be restrained from attacking another casino customer.
In an article yesterday, The Philadelphia Daily News quoted the Phillies' center fielder as saying that "the only thing true about the story is that, when I go to Atlantic City, I do play baccarat.


No Headline
It is the first time that I have hope for peace.
I am very happy.
But I don't want either to be President.
These two have killed thousands and crushed our country.
Today is today.
Let them make peace and then we will see. -- NUR AHMED, a 19-year-old Somali, after rival clan leaders met and embraced.  [ A6:3 ]


Accounts
*
Thermador, Los Angeles, to deYoung, Ginsberg, Weisman, Bailey, Irvine, Calif., to handle the kitchen appliance maker's account, previously at Ketchum Advertising, Los Angeles.
Billings were estimated at $1.5 million.


Q&amp;A
The Smell of Snow
Q.
My grandmother used to say, "It smells like snow," and sure enough it would snow by nightfall.
Is there any scientific explanation for this?
A.
Depending on what kind of snow it was, she may very well have been able to smell the wind that heralded it, said Dan Graf, a meteorologist at Pennsylvania State University.


INSIDE
Gore's Senate Seat Filled
Gov.
Ned McWherter of Tennessee appointed his top deputy, Harlan Mathews, to fill Vice President-elect Al Gore's seat.
Page A10.
Israeli Shift on Deportees
The Israeli Army said 10 of the 415 Palestinians expelled to Lebanon this month were wrongly deported and would be allowed to return.
Page A5.
A Military Warning to Iraq
A day after Iraqi planes violated a flight ban in the Shiite south, the United States moved two squadrons of fighter jets from the African coast to the Persian Gulf region.
Page A4.
U.S. and Japanese Images
In a striking reversal from a year ago, a poll shows that the Japanese are losing some economic confidence while Americans see their own economy gaining strength.
Page A4.


Kay Boyle, 90, Writer of Novels and Stories, Dies
Kay Boyle, a short-story writer and novelist renowned for her deft and powerful style and her keen insights into human nature, died on Sunday night at the Redwoods, a retirement community in Mill Valley, Calif.
She was 90 years old and lived at the Redwoods, where she had moved from San Francisco several years ago.
She had been in declining health for a year, said her son, Ian von Franckenstein of Kentland, Calif.


Kronberger Surprise: She's Finished
PETRA KRONBERGER, the world's best woman skier for the past three years, unexpectedly announced yesterday that she was quitting.
"I have reached everything possible in the world of ski racing," the unassuming 23-year-old said in a statement issued by the Austrian Ski Union in Vienna.
"I know that many will say, 'Petra is crazy to renounce all that money.' My health is more important."


Have the House Democrats No Shame?
House Democrats have just awarded themselves five more votes.
Unfazed by the crying need for Congressional reform, the Democratic caucus proposes to let non-voting delegates vote on the House floor.
All five are, of course, Democrats.
Embarrassed by criticism of their greedy grab, the Democrats may try to water it down when the new Congress meets to adopt rules.
But that's no answer.
This maneuver is nothing but shameless political tyranny.


Max Gruenewald, 93, A Rabbinical Scholar
Dr.
Max Gruenewald, international president of the Leo Baeck Institutes and Rabbi Emeritus of Congregation B'nai Israel of Millburn, N.J., died yesterday at his home in Millburn.
He was 93.
He died of cancer, said Jenks Schachter, a friend of the family.


Woman Awaits Posting As a Rabbi in the Army
When she was 38, Chana Timoner achieved one of her career goals: She was ordained as a Conservative rabbi.
Now, at 41, she has achieved another: She is becoming a soldier.
In the process, she is making history.


Corrections
A picture caption on Thursday with an article headed "Meyersville Journal," about a New Jersey family that raises deer as pets, misstated the number of deer the family now has.
It is eight, not nine.


We Have to Protect No-Longer-Pristine Arctic
To the Editor:
Scientists are finding environmental threats to the Arctic in DDT, dioxin, heavy metals, chronic oil leaks, severe air pollution and acid raid deposits.
This goes further than the risks to the Arctic people and environment from radioactive contamination, PCB's, ozone loss and global warming that you report in three Science Times articles Nov. 24.


For Anthony, 2 Games Don't Make a Season
Greg Anthony still hopes to be the Knicks' starting point guard of the future.
He says he still believes he will develop into a consistent floor leader.
That is why Anthony's poor performance last weekend was disappointing, both to the Knicks and to Anthony.
And with Doc Rivers, who has a slightly separated right shoulder, doubtful for a game at Madison Square Garden on Tuesday night between the Knicks (16-9) and Indiana (13-13), Anthony knows his team needs him to make plays, not excuses.


Little Chance For 3 to Flee From Blaze
The fire at a power plant here Friday erupted so suddenly that three workers, who were suffocated by billowing black smoke, apparently had little chance to escape, a fire official said today.
Investigators from the Federal Occupational Safety and Health Administration and the Newark Fire Department today examined the scene of the fire at the O'Brien Newark co-generation plant at 35 Blanchard Street.
The victims were working on a platform in the northeast corner of the plant that housed a glassed-in control room, some offices and a kitchen area when the fire broke out about 8:40 A.M.
Friday.


Resolved: To Do Better Next Year
WHEREAS the new year is imminent, and;
Whereas it is the habit of many people to resolve to do things better in the coming year, and;


Joule's Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Dance; Life's Eternal Mysteries Shaped by Movement
By offering two varied programs on Sunday at the City Center, the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater served as a choreographic showcase for fine dancers.
The evening was devoted entirely to works by Ailey.
In a repeat performance of "Revelations," his tribute to gospel songs, Michael Joy took over the solo to "I Want to Be Ready," giving an interpretation notable for its simplicity and understated eloquence.
Stretched out on the floor, Mr.
Joy became a penitent awed by divine omnipotence.
When he rose to his feet and balanced securely, but never ostentatiously, it was easy to believe that he was a sinner turning heavenward in search of God's mercy.


Power of Natural Pest-Killer Wanes From Overuse
WITH surprising speed, insect pests are becoming resistant to natural toxins that scientists hoped would usher in a new era of biological controls and ring down the curtain on synthetic insecticides.
The natural toxins, produced by a bacterium called Bacillus thuringiensis, or B.t., are widely used in sprays to kill agricultural pests and forest scourges like the gypsy moth and spruce budworm.
B.t. toxin has been hailed as a perfect pesticide because it targets only certain caterpillars without harming either the insects' predators or leaving a poisonous residue on crops or trees.


Super Food Services reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 21


STATES FACE DROP IN FEDERAL BACKING OF AIDS PREVENTION
The Federal Government has notified states that it is cutting money for AIDS prevention programs, and as a result many states are reducing services even as they face a rising demand.
State officials have protested to the Bush Administration.
Federal health officials said that they were considering the protests but that there was little they could do because Congress had limited the amounts available.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.37
2.85
4.12
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.22
3.15
3.91
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.38
3.29
3.91
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.41
6.36
6.36
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.40
7.36
7.44
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.40
8.39
8.60
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.40
6.40
6.67
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Bush Gets a Shiner for Christmas


A Cabbie Who Cared
To the Editor:
On Sunday evening, Nov. 29, a New York City taxi took me from the airport to my hotel and dropped me off.
I dropped something, too -- my wallet in the taxi.


Surgery for Kosar
BERNIE KOSAR will undergo surgery tomorrow to repair his right ankle, which he broke again in the Cleveland Browns' season-ending game at Pittsburgh on Sunday.


Brooklyn Theft Brings Robbers $8 Million Cash
Robbers entered an armored car company's warehouse in Greenpoint, Brooklyn, late Sunday night and made off with more than $8 million in one of the largest cash thefts in the United States, the Federal Bureau of Investigation said yesterday.
The robbers left more than $30 million behind, probably because they could not carry any more, said Federal investigators, who spoke on condition of anonymity.
The investigators said that the F.B.I. was trying to determine whether the robbery was an inside job and that agents planned in the next few days to conduct polygraph tests on several employees of the company, the Hudson Armored Car and Courier Service.


An Unusual (Free) TV Spot Tied to 'Northern Exposure'
ALASKA has always been known for attracting pioneers.
Now, a venture involving two entertainment giants is using make-believe Alaskans in pioneering an unusual approach to advertising and marketing.
For five weeks in November and December, MCA Inc. and CBS Inc. co-sponsored a joint promotion of "Northern Exposure," the hit television series set in the mythical town of Cicely, Alaska, whose picaresque characters evoke comparisons to the residents of Brigadoon, Twin Peaks and Frostbite Falls.
The comedy-drama, 14th in the Nielsen ratings so far in the 1992-93 season, is produced by MCA's Universal Television subsidiary and broadcast by CBS at 10 P.M. (Eastern time) Mondays.


Telecommunications Stocks Skid on a Light Trading Day
Accidents can happen even in light traffic, as owners of telephone stocks and some other well-known companies learned yesterday in an otherwise quiet trading session.
The market as a whole barely budged, with the Dow Jones industrial average up 7.02 points, to 3,333.26, and the Standard &amp; Poor's 500-stock index off 0.62 point, to 439.15.


New Jobs Depend on Fast Economic Growth, Experts Say
The recession is officially over, but the American economy will have to grow more than 3 percent a year -- perhaps much more -- to stop the kind of mass layoffs that have taken place in recent months and to create enough new jobs to employ most of the people who want to work.
That is the almost unanimous view of more than a dozen economists, labor experts and business executives interviewed recently.
Most are doubtful that the economy can expand so robustly on its own -- achieving a growth rate that almost doubles the average performance since 1988 -- without some significant Government spending.


Executive Changes
HOFFMANN-LA ROCHE INC., Nutley, N.J., a unit of Roche Holding Ltd., named Alan L. Rubino corporate associate vice president for human resources.


Tree Fire Kills Girl
An 11-year-old girl was burned to death last night when a Christmas tree caught fire at her aunt's apartment at 1315 Amsterdam Avenue, near 123d Street, in Harlem, Fire Department officials said.
The dead girl was identified as Elaine Pino.
Deputy Fire Commissioner Harry Ryttenberg said the girl was carrying a lighted candle shortly before the blaze and that "moments later the place was totally engulfed in flames." Three adults in the apartment, on the 14th floor of a 21-story apartment building, were unharmed, fire officials said.


GEO International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
Rare Feat for Heat  Harold Miner scored 12 of his 18 points in the fourth quarter last night, and the Heat overcame an 18-point deficit to earn their first victory ever over the Los Angeles Lakers, a 107-96 triumph in Miami.
Miami is now 1-10 against the Lakers in franchise history.
For Miner, who was born and raised in Inglewood, Calif., near where the Lakers play their home games, the game was something special.
"I grew up bleeding purple and gold," said Miner, who played for Inglewood High School and Southern Cal.
"It was a big thrill to beat them, especially with the game being televised back home." The Heat scored their last 10 points from the free-throw line to seal the outcome.
Miami was 24 of 27 from the foul line for the game.
The loss was the fifth in six games for the Lakers.
The game marked the return of Lakers guard Byron Scott, who missed his team's previous 18 games with a sprained right foot. (AP)


Drivefone Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Stephen J. Albert, 51, Composer; Won a Pulitzer for His 'Riverrun'
Stephen J. Albert, a composer of lushly scored, dramatic symphonic music who won the 1985 Pulitzer Prize for his "Symphony Riverrun" was killed on Sunday afternoon in an automobile accident in Truro, Mass.
He was 51 years old and had homes in Newton Center, Mass., and in Truro, on Cape Cod.
Mr.
Albert was pronounced dead at the scene of the accident, said Sgt.
John Thomas of the Truro Police Department.
Mr.
Albert's wife, Marilyn, and son, Joshua, were taken to Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston.
A daughter, Katie, was not injured.


Promises, Promises: Jets Will Be Better in 1993, Says Coslet
Bruce Coslet, the Jets' coach, said he opened his post-season speech to the team Sunday by telling them what a lousy season it had been.
That was just re-stating the obvious for fullback Brad Baxter, who said that knowing the season was finally over was like waking up from a bad dream.
Coslet also promised that next season is going to be better for the Jets.


China Plans Big Layoffs Of Coal Mine Workers
China has laid off 100,000 coal workers and will lay off hundreds of thousands more in the coming years, as part of a broad effort to modernize its energy industry, an official report said today.
The layoffs suggest that the Communist Party is finally grappling directly with the enormously complex and painful problems of industrial revamping.


CHRONICLE
MORTON GOULD may not write music for rock audiences, but let no one say he's not keeping up with the times: his newest composition will be narrated in rap.
Mr.
Gould was commissioned two years ago by the Pittsburgh Symphony Association to create a piece that the Pittsburgh Youth Orchestra is to perform on April 4 in Heinz Hall.


Kenyans Sip Democracy But Find It Bitter, So Far
The campaign for Kenya's first multiparty elections in 26 years ended tonight with charges that brutality and fraud were being used to win votes.
On the eve of the voting Tuesday, President Daniel arap Moi urged supporters not to drink any alcohol, warning that the opposition was plotting to dilute them with hallucinogens to make voters so drowsy that they would oversleep and miss the balloting.


Northeast Bancorp Gets Buyer
After nearly a decade of searching for an out-of-state partner, Connecticut's third-largest banking company, Northeast Bancorp, agreed yesterday to be purchased by First Fidelity Bancorp of New Jersey for $29 million in stock.
Northeast's principal subsidiary, the Union Trust Company, has been plagued by bad commercial real estate loans, and First Fidelity's offer is valued at only $4 a share, half the price the banking company was selling for last Thursday.
Northeast stock plunged $4.50, or 52.2 percent, to $4.125, in over-the-counter trading yesterday; First Fidelity gained $1.75, closing at $45, on the New York Stock Exchange.


A Mental Institution Copes With Bosnia's Horror
The afternoon light was fading when a group of her fellow patients at the Pazaric mental institution carried Adila Pasic's coffin up the barren hillside here on Sunday afternoon.
Without ceremony, without so much as a prayer or a word of farewell for the 55-year-old Miss Pasic, the rough-hewn casket was lowered hastily into into the grave that five of the patients had just finished digging.
Then the burial party hastened back down the hill, chatting eagerly as they went.


Rival Somali Leaders Meet in Capital and Pledge to Halt Fighting
Surrounded by thousands of chanting, singing Somalis, the leaders of this city's two rival clan-based factions met today and renewed promises to end hostilities that have torn this city for two years.
The two leaders, Gen.
Mohammed Farah Aidid and Mohammed Ali Mahdi, had met and embraced once before in early December, but that encounter was at an American diplomatic compound and few except for the press witnessed it.
The meeting today was held in the open, near the line separating the city into rival enclaves, and was witnessed by throngs of residents who gathered without shooting at one another.


Have Drug Stocks Become a Bargain Yet?
Until this year, drug shares had long soared high above the earnings multiples that investors accorded more common stocks.
The growth of health spending, drug prices and earnings seemed to defy all laws known to modern finance and medicine.
Now, with the prospects of tougher cost containment enforced by a new President, the drug business has become suspect.


Jets Give Statements
The National Football League gathered written statements yesterday from Jets cornerback ERIK McMILLAN, his teammate MARIO JOHNSON and referee LARRY NEMMERS in an investigation of McMillan's allegation that Nemmers used a racial epithet in reference to the cornerback during the game against the New Orleans Saints Saturday at Giants Stadium.


Clinton Delays Trip To Work, Pack Up And Fill More Jobs
Pressed by the lofty concerns of assembling a Government and the more mundane business of packing up a house, President-elect Bill Clinton delayed a planned weeklong vacation to the South Carolina coast today to stay home and work.
Mr.
Clinton had been expected to leave Little Rock this evening for six days at the Palmetto Dunes resort on Hilton Head Island to take part in Renaissance Weekend, a four-day, 515-family marathon of networking, group encounters and leisurely sports.


Market Place; A Bright Outlook For Natural Gas
AS the year draws to a close the natural gas industry is crowing about how good 1992 was and even more about how much better the years ahead will be, with a new Administration coming to power in Washington.
Investors who agree have several stocks to choose from.
The American Gas Association said in its year-end review earlier this month that consumption in 1992 would exceed 20 trillion cubic feet for the first time since the mid-1970's.
The increase in usage this year is about 3 percent over last and is the sixth increase in a row, the association said.


'Let's Do Lunch,' Clinton Says, Calculatingly
Clearly convinced that his forays into McDonald's are not enough, and mindful that Washington is perceived as short on ordinary Americans, President-elect Bill Clinton plans to go all out to show that his will be an Administration of and for the common people.
He is shipping them to Washington for lunch.
Inaugural officials said today that they would fly more than 50 people here for what is billed as an "intimate" lunch.
Actually, the expense-paid trip for people whom Mr.
Clinton or Vice President-elect Al Gore or their spouses met during the campaign will last a week and include admission to all the major inaugural events.
The trip will cost more that $500,000 and is being paid by the inauguration committee.


Wage Case At Shearson
Shearson Lehman Brothers Inc., the nation's second-largest securities firm, is being investigated by the New York State Department of Labor for supposed violations of labor laws at a branch office, Mark Molinari, a department spokesman, said yesterday.
Sally Cates, a spokesman for Shearson, an American Express Company subsidiary, declined to comment.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-9 CLAN TERROR IN SOMALI TOWN
Witnesses and diplomats say that more than 100 prominent residents of the Somali city of Kismayu were hunted down and killed this month in three nights of terror.
A clan leader reportedly feared that they might support American troops.
A1 The two main clan leaders in Mogadishu met and pledged peace.
A6 CHALLENGE TO ALGERIA'S LEADERS
Almost a year after it took power in a coup, Algeria's military-backed Government faces growing attacks by Islamic militants and public anger over the economy.
Western diplomats say they expect the regime to fall eventually to a fundamentalist government, which would shake up North Africa's politics.
A1 FORTITUDE AT A BOSNIAN HOSPITAL
For 420 patients at a mental institution near Sarajevo, war has brought deprivation and suffering.
But the inmates seem to experience few of the ethnic strains that brought war to their country.
A3 Negotiators in Geneva discussed a plan for dividing up Bosnia.
A3 A TENSE KENYA VOTES TODAY
The campaign for Kenya's first multiparty elections in a quarter-century drew to a close with charges of brutality and fraud.
A2 JAPAN'S LOSS AND AMERICA'S GAIN
The Japanese are losing confidence that they will be the dominant economic power in the next century, while Americans see their own economy gaining, a poll shows.
A4 ISRAEL TO TAKE BACK 10 DEPORTEES
The Israel Army said that 10 of the 415 Palestinians expelled to Lebanon this month were wrongly deported and would be allowed to return.
A5 U.S.
SHIFTS JETS TO GULF
In a warning to Iraq a day after it violated a flight ban, the United States took the unusual step of sending squadrons of Navy warplanes to Saudi Arabia from an aircraft carrier off the African coast.
A4 ANGLERS IN REVOLT
Barton Stacey Journal: A new debate in England pits the purists against the new entrepreneurs, but it also revolves around a question of nearly cosmic proportion: is a trout still a trout if it is reared mostly by hand rather than nature?A4 The United States and Russia continued talks on nuclear arms cuts.
A8 National A10-12, B6 STATES FACE CUTS IN AIDS FUNDS
The Government has told states that it is cutting money for AIDS prevention programs, and as a result many states are cutting services just as they face a rising demand.
A1 THE MAN BEHIND AN EXECUTION
The State of Washington is scheduled to kill Westley Allan Dodd in what would be the nation's first hanging in nearly three decades.
A1 ALABAMA GOVERNOR IS INDICTED
Gov.
Guy Hunt, whose finances have been under investigation for more than a year, was indicted on 13 felony charges by a grand jury.
A1 GUNS AT AIRPORTS RAISE ALARM
Most of the people arrested at airports for gun possession say they simply forgot they were carrying a weapon.
But experts say the arrests are a disturbing symptom of the proliferation of guns.
A12 A LUNCH FOR THE PEOPLE
The Clinton inauguration team said it would fly more than 50 ordinary Americans to Washington for an "intimate" lunch.
A1 CLINTON POSTPONES VACATION
The President-elect, consumed by the task of assembling an administration -- and the chore of packing up his house -- postponed a South Carolina trip.
A10 GOVERNOR REPLACES GORE
Gov.
Ned McWherter of Tennessee appointed his top deputy to fill the Senate seat that will be vacated by the Vice President-elect.
A10 AMERICAN IS CHARGED WITH SPYING
A martial arts instructor was charged with obtaining classified documents from a C.I.A. employee in Manila and passing them on to the Philippine Government.
A10  Metro Digest B1 FLAWS IN CHILD PROTECTION
The flaws in an investigation of child-abuse allegations against a mother illustrate what experts have long called the Achilles' heel of the child-protection system in New York City and the nation: the frequently poor quality of casework in a bureaucracy staffed by inexperienced, overburdened workers.
A1
Robbers entered an armored car company's warehouse in Brooklyn late Sunday night and made off with more than $8 million in one of the largest cash thefts in the country, the F.B.I. said.
A1 Business Digest D1 Science Times C1-9 Chronic pain fells many, yet lacks a clear cause.
C1 Big science squeezes small-scale researchers.
C1 Power of natural pest-killer wanes from overuse.
C1 Comet alert canceled as a result of new data.
C2 Alien species threaten Hawaii's environment.
C4 U.S. to buy plutonium from Russia.
C6 Personal Computers C6 Peripherals C8 Q&amp;A C8 NASA will 'hammer' probe's stuck antenna.
C9 Sports B8-13 Basketball: St.
John's and Kentucky win.
B9 Nets Turn Back Hornets.
B12 For Anthony, 2 games don't make season.
B12 Pitt upsets U.C.L.A.
B13 Columns: Anderson on Sal Maglie B9 Vecsey on Bob Marley's son B11 Football: Bills' Kelly to miss Oilers game.
B9 Death watch begins for Handley.
B10 Giants need coaching more than talent.
B10 Promises, promises: Coslet offers better future.
B10 Montana returns as 49ers beat Lions.
B11 Redskins limp into the playoffs.
B11 Broncos fire Reeves.
B11 Still no N.F.L. accord.
B11 Hockey: Rangers obtain Olczyk from Winnipeg.
B9 Devils' MacLean flashes old form.
B13 Sports People B13 Arts/Entertainment C11-16 Los Angeles art world changes.
C11 A conductor's last "Messiah." C11 Theater: "Tommy Tune Tonight!" C11 Music: New York Chamber Symphony.
C13 Dance: Alvin Ailey's "Hidden Rites." C14 Word and Image: Gunter Grass on German politics.
C11 "Anatomy of Love," by Helen E. Fisher.
C16 "Sex and the Single Rhino," on "Nova." C16 Fashion B7 Novelty for '93 By Design Obituaries A12-13 Sal Maglie, pitcher.
A12 Kay Boyle, writer.
A13 Stephen J. Albert, composer.
A13 Lawrence Bruce Jr., lawyer and leader of Unicef committee.
A13 Editorials/Op-Ed A14-15 Editorials The best case for the pardons.
Beyond the no-flight zone in Iraq.
House Democrats: no shame?
Topics: Eats like America.
Letters A. M. Rosenthal: Female genital torture.
Daniel Schorr: Will Bush pardon himself?
Howard G. Goldberg: The Contrabury Tales.
Stansfield Turner: Land-based missiles are obsolete.
Neediest Cases B4


Donald G. Sullivan To Leave Thompson
The J. Walter Thompson Company and Donald G. Sullivan, executive vice president of planning and development, said yesterday that by mutual agreement, Mr.
Sullivan would leave the agency after seven years.
The departure takes effect Jan. 31.
Mr.
Sullivan, 51, has been one of five members of Thompson's office of the chief executive.
He has been responsible for strategic planning and two Thompson subsidiaries, Thompson Recruitment Advertising and Brouillard Communications, as well as serving as worldwide director in charge of the important Warner-Lambert account.


Books of The Times; Is It Love, or Just the Imperatives of Reproduction?
Anatomy of Love  The Natural History of Monogamy, Adultery and Divorce By Helen E. Fisher  431 pages.
W.
W.
Norton &amp; Company.


URS Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Getty Petroleum Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Germans Threaten Suit
The German Swimming Federation has threatened to sue the sport's world governing body unless it lifts an 18-month ban imposed on a German swimmer accused of doping.


Review/Music; Traversing A Cycle By Bach
For those who do not automatically find the output of Johann Sebastian Bach to be an endless universe of delight, the prospect of hearing all six "Brandenburg" Concertos in one sitting might seem daunting.
The New York Chamber Symphony, under the leadership of Jaime Laredo, makes the experience quite painless.
The group has made a sturdy holiday tradition out of the cycle; it was, in fact, first formed in 1976 for this purpose.
The performances on Sunday afternoon at the 92d Street Y were not perfect, but neither was creation.
The performance began with the First, Third and Fifth Concertos.
The ensemble seemed imprecise at the outset, but the playing had a warm glow of enthusiasm that overcame doubts about preparedness.
John Van Buskirk negotiated the harpsichord solos of the Fifth with a facility that fell short of brilliance, but the basic idea came across.
While Mr.
Laredo's leadership lacked the forward-driving momentum of modern original-instrument performances, it seldom dawdled.


U.S. Bonds Fall in Light Trading
Treasury bond and note prices declined yesterday in very light trading.
Combined with smaller falls at the end of last week, investors have given up most of the gains that drove the yield on the 30-year bond down to 7.34 percent last Tuesday.


Another Round of Bargaining But No N.F.L. Agreement Yet
Talks aimed at reaching a labor agreement between owners and players in the National Football League got off to a late start in New York yesterday and lasted six hours without reaching a final deal.
Both sides said they would talk again today, presumably by telephone, in an effort to iron out what they hope are the final details in the tentative settlement reached last week.
The settlement would provide a comprehensive free-agency plan, in which players can change teams after their contracts expire, and would end any outstanding litigation.


In With the New, and Out With the Coach
This was the day after the Giants' season ended, the start of a death watch on Ray Handley's career as their head coach.
General Manager George Young will make the decision about Handley, who is almost sure to go after two disappointing seasons.
Although Young offered no timetable for a decision one way or another, there were indications that it could come Tuesday or Wednesday or else next week.
Handley said he met this afternoon with Young and expected to continue talking with him all week.


The Neediest Is Lending Hand to Family
Victoria and Alan H. go to sleep many nights ashamed of how they are raising their three young daughters.
They wish they could nurture the girls by helping them with homework, taking them to museums or pushing them on the swings at the playground.
Instead, the girls are often forgotten.
That is because the girls' parents spend nearly all their time caring for their eldest child, a 10-year-old son who is emotionally disturbed.
The boy often wanders through their apartment in Brooklyn disconnected from reality and unresponsive to other family members.
He smears food on his clothes, is agitated easily and sometimes runs away.
Numerous doctors have been unable to treat him.


Sal Maglie, Star Pitcher of the 1950's, Dies at 75
Sal Maglie, who pitched for all three New York teams during the tumultuous baseball wars of the 1950's and who intimidated batters with hard looks and high, hard fastballs, died yesterday in a nursing home in Niagara Falls, N.Y.
He was 75.
Timothy Gleason, a spokesman for the Niagara Falls Memorial Nursing Home, where Mr.
Maglie had been living since suffering a stroke five years ago, said that the former pitcher had died of complications from bronchial pneumonia.


On My Mind; Female Genital Torture
"They are by far the most emancipated of Muslim women. They wear no veils, often don sleeveless dresses and behave directly toward men, rather than submissively.
"Still, almost all women undergo genital mutilation at a young age to discourage sexual intercourse outside marriage. This ritual clitoridectomy, the removal of the clitoris, greatly reduces a woman's sexual pleasure and is sometimes combined with infibulation, stitching up the vulva until marriage to prevent penetration.


Topics of The Times; Eats Like America
The President-elect of the United States is, as The Times's Marian Burros wrote last week, no Jack Sprat.
He eats fat.
He eats lean.
He eats tacos and chili con queso made with three kinds of cheese and three kinds of peppers.
He eats ribs, baked beans, slaw, sweet potato pie, bagels, doughnuts and potato salad.
Most of all he eats chicken enchiladas.
Where Bill Clinton stands on the standard New York nosh (bagels with lox and cream cheese), Asian food and the cuisines of Italy, France and, say, Afghanistan is unclear.
Having spent most of his life in Arkansas, he is understandably a barbecue and Tex-Mex man.


For a Fee, an Old Friend for a Day
HAROLD ADER was not one to trust in doctors.
Sure, he had stomach troubles.
But he could still drive a concrete truck.
Even after his retirement, when inactivity made the illness seem worse, he refused to see a doctor -- until the day before he died of colon cancer last April.
"After the funeral," said Anna Ader, his wife of 35 years, "I started to feel the walls closing in."


U.N. and The Bosnian Foes Make New Political Attempt in Geneva
A plan for ending the war in Bosnia inched forward here today after an extended series of meetings by leaders of the three major ethnic groups under United Nations auspices, participants said.
The plan, drawn up here on Oct. 27 by two international mediators, Cyrus R. Vance and Lord Owen, envisions dividing Bosnia and Herzegovina -- a republic populated by Muslims, Serbs and Croats -- into 7 to 10 largely autonomous provinces under a loosely organized central government.


Ex-Chief of Airport Council Is Charged in Fraud Case
The former head of a little-known security agency for the region's three major airports was charged yesterday with illegally putting more than $50,000 of the agency's money to personal use.
A criminal complaint filed by Federal prosecutors charged William Stump, 41, who was the executive director of the defunct Airport Security Council, with one count of credit-card fraud and five counts of mail fraud.
He was accused of using the money for such personal expenses as travel, clothes, meals and a country club membership.


Barton Stacey Journal; The Trout Are THIS BIG and Hard to Swallow
On the surface, it is a classic scene from English country life: men in floppy hats and green rubber boots standing silently along the misty shore as they watch their lines drift on the mirror-flat water.
But beneath the pond's calm surface, there is roiling controversy this winter, a fish story that is not just about the big one that got away, but about the big ones that are yet to be caught.
Like other English debates, it pits the purists against the new entrepreneurs, but it also revolves, ultimately, around a question of nearly cosmic proportion: Is a trout still a trout if it is reared mostly by hand rather than by nature?


Bigger Bailout Is Proposed For Insurer
With state officials three days away from deciding whether to grant a heavy rate increase to the state's largest health insurer, Senate Republican leaders proposed today to reduce the size of the increase by raising the amount of a state bailout for Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield.
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo has suggested shoring up Empire's reserves by using $85 million from the state's medical malpractice insurance fund, but the Senate Republicans said today that $150 million should be taken.
Combined with other measures, the Republicans contended that the larger amount could reduce Empire's rate increase request of $424 million to just over $120 million.


Israel to Let 10 Wrongly Deported Arabs Return
The Israeli Army announced today that among the 415 Palestinians expelled to Lebanon more than a week ago, 10 were wrongly deported and would be allowed to return.
An army statement said 10 Palestinians suspected of involvement in anti-Israeli activities had been expelled "without a legal decision to deport them."


10,000 Residents of Dresden Join Candlelit Protest Against Racism
More than 10,000 residents of this historic eastern German city took to the streets today for a silent candlelit vigil against racism and rightist violence.
It was the latest in a series of such demonstrations that have been held across Germany this month.
Well over one million people have taken part.


Corrections
Because of a punctuation error in transmission, a sports article yesterday about the Knicks included a sentence erroneously in a quotation from Coach Pat Riley about Greg Anthony, a Knick guard.
The sentence -- "His biggest problems are upstairs" -- was the article writer's, and should have preceded the coach's comment.


Rain + Cold = Treacherous Trips for Commuters
Thousands of commuters collected new horror stories yesterday as freezing rain left a treacherous layer of ice on roads throughout the New York metropolitan region just in time for the morning rush hour.
Traffic officials said there were few serious accidents -- just hundreds of fender benders that left trucks and cars strewn along roads like jackstraws, tying up those traveling behind them.
The New Jersey Turnpike became a 30-mile parking lot extending from New Brunswick to exits for the Hudson River tunnels and the George Washington Bridge.
Accidents on the Franklin D. Roosevelt Drive on Manhattan's East Side set off a chain reaction of problems: stranding cars for hours on the Triborough Bridge, tying up the Harlem River Drive and backing up traffic in New Jersey that was headed for the George Washington Bridge.


Chronic Pain Fells Many Yet Lacks Clear Cause
CHRONIC pain, in the absence of any discernible physical cause, is the most common reason for lost workdays in this country, yet doctors remain unsure about what causes the complaint, how to treat it, or even if exists.
What do you do when the scans, blood tests and exams indicate nothing wrong, but the patient is incapacitated?


Having Backed Right In, Washington Limps Ahead
The Washington Redskins have been awarded the gift of a playoff game, but they are going to need substantial first aid just to field a team.
Cornerback Darrell Green, for instance, is a former "fastest man" of the National Football League who needed a crutch to enter the locker room today.
Green was beaten on the last-minute pass to the Raiders' Willie Gault Saturday that cost Washington the game, but Green had an excuse: The medication for his sore heel had worn off in the Robert F. Kennedy Stadium chill.


Assix International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Caspian Oil Date Is Set By Chevron
The Chevron Corporation said today that it expected to begin full-scale operations on April 1 in its joint venture with the Republic of Kazakhstan to develop the immense Tengiz and Korolev oilfields on the northeastern Caspian Sea coast.
Tengiz is regarded as one of the world's top 10 fields, with reserves likely to be as much as 35 billion barrels.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Northeast Bancorp is to be acquired by First Fidelity Bancorp of New Jersey, ending a long search by Connecticut's third-largest banking company for an out-of-state partner.  [ Page D1. ]
Milford Fabricating's apprentice program may be a model with valuable lessons for experts planning a national job training policy.  [ D1. ]


Fonar Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Carlos Querejeta, Advertising Executive, 68
Carlos Querejeta, vice president and controller of Serino Coyne, an advertising agency specializing in theatrical accounts, died on Friday at Calvary Hospital in the Bronx.
He was 68 and lived in Manhattan.
He died of cancer, his family said.


WITNESSES REPORT A SOMALI MASSACRE BEFORE U.S. ARRIVAL
More than 100 religious leaders and business executives, a doctor and other prominent residents of this port city were hunted door to door and killed in three nights of terror that began on the eve of the American landing in Mogadishu, Somali witnesses and United States diplomats say.
The killings were directed by the clan leader who controls Kismayu in a move to eliminate educated Somalis who might support the Americans, United States officials in Somalia said in interviews over the past two days.
All the victims were Harti, who have deep roots here and say they regard other clans as occupiers.


Churches Increasing Security to Fight Growing Crime Problem
Every morning at 7:10, the Rev.
Francis Gasparik goes "on patrol," walking up and down the brightly lighted aisles of St.
John the Baptist Church, assessing the damage and evicting troublemakers.
Like many other Roman Catholic churches, St.
John's, a 153-year-old church in midtown Manhattan, recently had to hire security guards to protect against thefts and vandalism, and to reassure fearful worshipers.


Top Member of Colombo Crime Family Is Ambushed in Brooklyn
Trapped in a barrage of bullets, a frontline commander in the deadly street war for control of the Colombo crime family was shot and seriously wounded yesterday in an ambush near his home in Brooklyn.
The man, Gregory Scarpa, was shot in the face and left eye after leaving his home shortly after midnight, the police said.
Two men who the authorities said were low-ranking members of Mr.
Scarpa's crew were also wounded in the attack.
Awaiting Trial
Under a Federal court order, Mr.
Scarpa had been under house arrest and was being monitored electronically while awaiting trial on murder conspiracy and racketeering charges.
The ambush was the second attempt on Mr.
Scarpa's life in 18 months of Colombo infighting.


Czech Philharmonic Faces Perilous Times In Dividing Country
Like the Leipzig Gewandhaus Orchestra in Germany under Kurt Masur, the Czech Philharmonic played a stirring symbolic role in its country's Velvet Revolution in 1989.
By taking a stand for peaceful change, and by playing concerts at great turning points in Czechoslovak history, the orchestra, already the country's best-known musical institution, became a beacon for political liberty as well.
But now, with the country set for formal division at the turn of the year and the harsh realities of capitalism being felt everywhere, the Czech Philharmonic has fallen on perilous times.
Still arguably the finest orchestra in Eastern Europe -- except perhaps for the St.
Petersburg Philharmonic -- it finds itself no longer universally beloved.


For Lubavitch Rappers, Harmony Breeds Peace
THE Hasid was sitting in his study in Crown Heights receiving visitors while upstairs some of his seven children were playing noisily.
Presently, the doorbell rang and a tall black man was led into the book-lined room.
The Hasid rose from the table, stretched his arm high over his head.
"Yo," he said, and the two men slapped palms.
"Communication/ all across the nation/ Let's all sit down and have a conversation," intoned David Lazerson, as students of the small alternative yeshiva he runs in his home listened to the 42-year-old scholar rapping.


A Shaw Berlioz Requiem
Robert Shaw is to lead the Orchestra of St.
Luke's, the Robert Shaw Institute Singers of Ohio State University, the Robert Shaw Festival Chorus and the soloist Karl Dent, a tenor, in a performance of the Berlioz Requiem on Jan. 17 at 3 P.M. in Carnegie Hall.
The performance is to be the culmination of a six-day choral workshop, one of four Carnegie Hall Professional Training Workshops.
Tickets for the concert are $15 to $55.
Information: (212) 247-7800.


Corrections
A report in the Night column in Styles of The Times on Dec. 20 about a premiere party for the film "Toys" misidentified a star of the film.
The star is Joan Cusack, not John Cusack. (A correction in this space on Sunday rendered both performers' names incorrectly.)


U.S. Population Passes 256 Million, Bureau Says
Rapid population growth in the West and a level of immigration unequaled in almost eight decades have pushed the United States population to 256.6 million as 1993 approaches, the Federal Census Bureau reported today.
The national figure for Jan. 1, 1993, is based on a projection of 4.1 million births and net immigration of 846,000 in 1992.
In addition, bureau statisticians subtracted an estimated 2.2 million deaths and added the return of 129,000 American citizens, like military personnel, who had lived overseas.


Clinton Shakes Up Economics Establishment; Reich's Advantage
To the Editor:
You report that Robert Reich, President-elect Clinton's chief economic adviser, is "criticized by trained economists, mostly on the ground that he is a lawyer and his insights lack the rigor and precision that economists provide through their training in mathematics and economic theory" (Business Day, Nov. 21).
Mr.
Reich's merit, and Mr.
Clinton's wisdom in relying on him, rests precisely on Mr.
Reich's nonentanglement in mathematical abstractions and economic theory, which apply at best to a world of perfect competition and have not been successfully adapted to any real functioning economy.


Girl Burned To Death In Apartment
An 11-year-old girl was burned to death Monday night, after a Christmas tree caught fire in her apartment in a Harlem housing project just as her family was to sit down to a candlelight dinner, Fire Department officials said yesterday.
Firefighters found the charred body of Elaine Pino on the floor between the Christmas tree and the doorway in the 14th-floor apartment, said Chief Nicholas Visconti of the 16th Battalion.
She may have been trying to escape, Chief Visconti said.
The child's aunt, Wanda Torres, with whom she lived, and her two cousins, Christopher, 5, and Wanda, 13, fled the apartment unharmed.


Clinton Shakes Up Economics Establishment; Ties to Atlanta's Jews
To the Editor:
A.
M.
Rosenthal in his Dec. 15 column on special interests, makes a great deal of sense.
We do well to recognize that those who serve the public have special interests, and our expectation is that they approach issues with honesty and candor.


CHRONICLE
BARBARA GALANTE and BRIAN DOYLE expect 6,000 or so people in attendance and fireworks in the skies when they are married in Central Park tomorrow before taking off on the five-mile New Year's Eve Midnight Run.
"We realized that the marriage license we had taken out was going to expire," said Ms.
Galante, 38, an office manager for a Manhattan law firm.
"And we thought that New Year's Eve, just before the Midnight Run, which we were planning to do anyway, would be a good time."


BUSINESS TECHNOLOGY: A Year of Transitions; Looking Beyond the Bloodletting in Biotechnology
For biotechnology, 1992 was a year in which the misses obscured the hits.
The industry was beset by financial turmoil, the denial of regulatory approval for two once-promising drugs and rising concern about health-care costs.
Over the entire 12 months, the Federal Government approved only two new biotech drugs.
With its constant appetite for cash, the industry continues to be ruled by the financial markets.
After a roaring bull market in 1991, initial stock offerings by biotechnology companies peaked in January, but after some worrisome industry developments, they screeched to a halt in June.
Still, some $6 billion in new capital had been raised in a mere 18 months, and with a flurry of new stock issues this fall investors seem to be returning to biotech issues.


Many Don't Have the Time Not to Be Fat
To the Editor:
As one who has struggled for years with weight problems, I applaud your "Fat in America" series (Nov. 22-24).
But I was distressed by the callousness of Sylvia Simpson Genske's Dec. 6 letter in response.
While Americans may have the highest rate of overweight in the industrialized world, she is way off base to conclude this is due to laziness and self-indulgence by those afflicted with the problem.


TRANSACTIONS
Hockey National Hockey League  DEVILS -- Recalled Scott Pellerin, left wing, and Bill Guerin, right wing, from Utica of the American Hockey League.
Sent Tom Chorske and Troy Mallette, left wings, and Jon Morris, center, to Utica for conditioning.


Elway to Have Surgery
Denver Broncos quarterback JOHN ELWAY will undergo surgery on his left shoulder Tuesday.
Doctors will shave the bone in his shoulder, which he injured in the season's first game, against the Los Angeles Raiders.
"I guess I'm getting old," Elway said. (AP)


BUSINESS TECHNOLOGY: A Year of Transitions; Japan Inc.'s Struggle To Refill the Pipeline
Nineteen ninety-two will be remembered as the year the bullet train of Japanese technology was derailed.
And there is no certainty that the once-vaunted industrial machine will get back on track in 1993.
With Japan in a severe economic slump, the nation's production of electronic equipment did not simply slow down in 1992, it actually declined -- a whopping 10.6 percent, according to the Electronic Industries Association of Japan.
The trade group predicts growth of only 1.5 percent in 1993.


Results Plus
FOOTBALL  Upset for Fresno State The Fresno State Bulldogs, playing what Coach Jim Sweeney declared the biggest game in the school's history, upset No. 23 Southern Cal, 24-7, last night in the Freedom Bowl in Anaheim, Calif.
The victory by the Bulldogs (9-4) over the favored Trojans (6-5-1) in the first football game between the schools was no fluke.
The Bulldogs' defense, which ranked 98th in the nation by allowing an average of nearly 30 points a game this year, limited the Trojans to 183 yards of total offense. (AP)


Eating Well
Americans pay 200 to 1,000 times more for bottled water than for tap water, even though they often come from the same source.
The bottled version commands a high price because some people think it tastes better, and some think it is safer.
The Food and Drug Administration now says they are entitled to know where it comes from.
So the agency is expected to propose new rules Wednesday for bottled water.
One will define terms like spring water, artesian water and mineral water and require that labels describe them truthfully.
The others will require that bottled water be the equivalent of tap water in quality. (Not all bottled water is as safe as municipal water.)


Clinton Shakes Up Economics Establishment
To the Editor:
"More Advisers, Less Council" (Economic Scene column, Dec. 17) by Peter Passell, on the disparagement by some economists about President-elect Clinton's appointment of Prof.
Laura D'Andrea Tyson to head the Council of Economic Advisers shows much of what is wrong with the economics profession.
Unfortunately, bad manners and sour grapes are not the only problem.


Allbritton Communications reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


R.S. Kilbourne, 87, Conservation Chief In New York State
R.
Stewart Kilbourne, a business and civic leader who served in the cabinet of Nelson A. Rockefeller when he was Governor of New York, died on Sunday in Brunswick, Ga.
He was 87 and lived in Sea Island, Ga.
Mr.
Kilbourne died at the Southeast Georgia Regional Medical Center, said his son, George B. Kilbourne of Palm Beach, Fla.


Strategies for Lifting Spirits Are Emerging From Studies
IN a foul mood?
Try comparing yourself with someone worse off, or giving yourself a treat.
These are among the more successful tactics emerging from research on the methods people use to shake off gloom, anxiety and anger.
The ability to get out of foul moods is a mark of mental well-being.
But new studies show that people differ greatly in their talent at making themselves feel better, with many people habitually turning to tactics that fail or backfire.


How Weight Loss Changes Risks
WHILE most people try to lose excess pounds for esthetic reasons, many also expect to accrue the health benefits long associated with leanness.
But recent studies reveal some surprising facts about the effects of weight loss on risks of developing diabetes, heart disease and cancer.
For example, a six-year study showed for the first time that weight loss can prevent the most common type of diabetes, type II or noninsulin-dependent diabetes.
But the study also showed that people at risk of developing diabetes need only lose about half their excess weight to protect their health.
The study, directed by Dr.
Jose Caro of Thomas Jefferson Medical College in Philadelphia, involved 113 "morbidly obese" patients whose ability to process blood sugar was impaired.


With Design in Mind reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


BUSINESS DIGEST
Business Technology
In a year of industry reshaping, rather than big breakthroughs, Corporate America's biggest research-and-development spenders pared down and scaled back.  [ Page D1. ]  Whether in computers or telephones, biotechnology or Japan Inc., 1992 was a time to regroup.  [ D5. ]
Japan is not buying the number of U.S. chips expected in last year's semiconductor agreement, the United States trade representative said.
Access to Japan's computer chip market will be one of the first trade issues to confront Bill Clinton after his inauguration as President.  [ D1. ]


Clemency Given To Jean Harris In Murder Case
Only hours before Jean S. Harris underwent coronary bypass surgery in a Westchester County hospital, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo today commuted the sentence she received for the 1980 murder of her lover, Dr.
Herman Tarnower, meaning Mrs.
Harris could be freed from prison as early as next month.
As is his custom, Mr.
Cuomo did not specify precisely why he commuted her sentence this year after denying clemency to the 69-year-old Mrs.
Harris three times before.
But a brief statement released by the Governor's office cited Mrs.
Harris's educational efforts on behalf of other inmates, her "above-average behavioral record during her incarceration" and medical problems that "have grown progressively worse."


BUSINESS TECHNOLOGY: A Year of Transitions; A Redesigned Computer Industry
From pentops to massively parallel processors, the computer industry is ending 1992 in turmoil.
No single detail better illustrates the new economic realities of computing than this simple fact: the handful of microchips powering the refrigerator-size, million-dollar KSR-1 supercomputer that Kendall Square Research introduced this year are made in the same Sharp Electronics chip assembly line as the microchips that go into each of Sharp's $500 Wizard pocket organizers.
Trickle-Up Chips
And it won't be long before the most powerful chips will go into the cheapest consumer electronics products first -- a stark contrast to the industry's past practice of introducing the best chips in high-end computers and letting them only gradually trickle down to mass-market devices.


METRO DIGEST
COMMUNAL LIVING FOR THE ELDERLY
The tiny society of Harvest House, where six elderly people and one nun eat, sleep, banter and occasionally squabble together, is an experiment in communal living for old people, part of the emerging patchwork of long-term living alternatives for elderly Americans.
For the relatively healthy elderly, shared housing is slowly overcoming ingrained notions about keeping such people as "independent" -- which can mean as lonely -- as possible.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY GIRL BURNS TO DEATH FROM TREE FIRE
An 11-year-old girl was burned to death Monday night after a Christmas tree caught fire in her apartment in a Harlem project just as her family was to sit down to a candlelight dinner.
The girl's body was found on the floor between the Christmas tree and the doorway in the 14th-floor apartment.
B3.
CHURCH TURNS TO GUARDS FOR SAFETY
Like many other Roman Catholic churches, St.
John the Baptist, a 153-year-old church in midtown Manhattan, recently had to hire security guards to protect against thefts and vandalism, and to reassure fearful worshipers.
B3.
REGION JEAN HARRIS GIVEN CLEMENCY
Only hours before Jean S. Harris underwent coronary bypass surgery in a Westchester County Hospital, Governor Cuomo commuted the sentence she received for the 1980 murder of her lover, Dr.
Herman Tarnower.
The Governor's commutation produced only the latest dramatic moment in what may long be remembered as one of New York's most captivating criminal cases.
A1.
FRIENDS AND FOES OF PRISONER HARRIS
In 11 years as inmate 81-G-0098, Jean S. Harris came to symbolize many things to many people.
There were feminists who saw her as a victim, criminologists who saw her as wrongfully imprisoned, and others who considered her a model prisoner.
B5.
JUDGE OVERTURNS NEW JERSEY LAYOFF PLAN
The New Jersey Supreme Court ruled that the Legislature could cut the budget but could not dictate which state workers should be laid off to make ends meet.
The Legislature had envisioned layoffs for high-paid nonunion managers.
Instead, many union members lost their jobs.
B4.
ELIZABETH MAY GET FEMALE POLICE CHIEF
Mayor-elect J. Christian Bollwage named Mary F. Rabadeau, a former Catholic-school teacher, as his choice for director of the Elizabeth Police Department.
If she is confirmed by the City Council, Captain Rabadeau would become the first woman to lead a major police department in New Jersey.
B4.
GIRL MISSING FROM LONG ISLAND ARCADE
A 9-year-old girl was apparently kidnapped from a video arcade in Nesconset, L.I., minutes after she wandered away from a guardian.
B4.
POWER AUTHORITY SELLS OFF PLANT PARTS
The Long Island Power Authority is dismantling the Shoreham nuclear power plant and selling off used parts to other utilities.
B4.
About New York by Michael T. Kaufman B3 Neediest Cases B4 Chronicle B5


U.S. Escalates War of Words Over Chip Imports by Japan
Japan's promise last year to open its market in computer chips is not producing the level of American sales that both nations said they expected, Carla A. Hills, the United States trade representative, said today.
"This lack of improvement calls into question Japan's resolve to implement" last year's arrangement, Mrs.
Hills said in an unusually strong statement accompanying her quarterly review of Japanese compliance with the pact.
"Japan's efforts simply must be intensified if we are to avert a serious confrontation on this issue."


Alabama Plans to Prove That Patience Makes Perfect
Long before the Crimson Tide of Alabama earned the chance to play for a national championship, the roles of the offensive and defensive units were made clear.
The defense would do the heavy lifting.


An Aide With a Different Image
She's in pumps and perfume, and her male charges wear size 14 basketball sneakers.
"But no kidding, she fits in perfectly," Travis Ford, the starting point guard for the undefeated University of Kentucky Wildcats, said about the 33-year-old assistant coach, Bernadette Locke-Mattox.
"She's just like one of the guys, except that it's kind of nice to smell her perfume. She'd be a real good head coach someday."


Yugoslav Premier Ousted by Foes 6 Months After Return From U.S.
Communists and nationalists combined forces in the federal Parliament today to oust Prime Minister Milan Panic.
The move apparently ended the short but highly unusual political career of Mr.
Panic, an American citizen who many in the West had hoped would somehow take power and end the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The overwhelming no-confidence vote in the Parliament followed the election of Dec. 20, when Mr.
Panic, a Serbian-American millionaire from California, failed in his effort to unseat Yugoslavia's most powerful political leader, President Slobodan Milosevic of the Serbian republic.
He was in fact routed by Mr.
Milosevic in the elections.


Lee Pharmaceuticals reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


4 Senior Appointments In Times Newsroom
Appointments to a group of senior newsroom positions at The New York Times have been announced by Max Frankel, the executive editor.
William G. Connolly and Dennis Stern will be senior editors in the administration group headed by Carolyn Lee, assistant managing editor.
The group's functions include recruiting and training reporters, editors and other news professionals.


If You're the Crew, Having a Ball on New Year's Eve Can Be Hard Work


Girl, 9, Is Called Missing From L.I. Video Arcade
A 9-year-old girl was apparently kidnapped from a video arcade in Nesconset, L.I., minutes after she wandered away from a family friend who was taking care of her, the Suffolk County police said today.
Kattie Beers, who turns 10 on Wednesday, was last seen at about 4:30 P.M. on Monday at the Spaceplex Family Center on Route 25 in Nesconset, when she left the friend to buy tokens or get change for video games, said Officer Randy Jaret, a police spokesman.
The friend, whose name has not been released, immediately had the child paged over the public address system, and when there was no response, called the police, Officer Jaret said.


Critic's Notebook; High-Tech Artworks In High-Tech Bank Building
Glittering and pulsing like a high-tech stained-glass window, Nam June Paik's installation at the Chase Manhattan Bank's new building at 4 Metrotech Center in Brooklyn is not your usual lobby art.
With its 429 television sets -- from 5-inch to 26-inch models -- arranged in a grid that is 18 feet high and 60 feet long, Mr.
Paik's piece is more like the ultimate display in a discount appliance store.
Playing continuously on this imposing wall of televisions are images from Mr.
Paik's own rapid-fire videotapes (here recorded on laser disks), as well as works by other video artists.
Into his frenetic image-stew Mr.
Paik mixes closeups of a piano keyboard, seen sideways and upside down; a gigantic eyeball; and shots of Merce Cunningham, David Bowie, Charlotte Moorman (the cellist who appeared in many of his works) and others.
In a clip by Rebecca Allen, a blank computer-generated mask rotates in space, silently mouthing the words "I love you."


Experts See Big Cash Theft As Inside Job
Federal investigators say they believe that the $8.2 million robbery at a Brooklyn armored car company on Sunday was an inside job, and security experts theorized yesterday that the robbers may have already moved the money out of the country.
None of the 80,000 freshly minted $100 bills stolen from the Hudson Armored Car and Courier Service had surfaced yesterday, despite calls from merchants around the country who wanted to check on bills they had accepted, said William Y. Doran, the head of the criminal division of the Federal Bureau of Investigation's New York office.


Corrections
In yesterday's column the result was misstated.
The declarer lost 13 tricks and was down 11.


The Quilted Giraffe Joins the Dinosaurs
TOMORROW evening, the champagne toasts at the Quilted Giraffe will welcome 1993 on a poignant note.
In the first dawn of the new year, the granite tables in this sleek, trend-setting luxury restaurant in Manhattan, one of America's best, will be cleared for good.
Now, the connoisseurs who for years delighted in the lush beluga caviar beggar's purses, the surprisingly delicious wasabi pizza, the gossamer chocolate souffle tempered with a scoop of ice cream and the buttery pecan squares will have to rely on Proustian taste memories.


One China, Plus Democracy
Two-party democracy arrived on Chinese soil this month, following Taiwan's first fully democratic legislative election.
While Chiang Kai-shek's old Nationalist Party won a majority of seats, the Democratic Progressive Party will now offer significant organized opposition.
That's a historic breakthrough not only for Taiwan, but also for the larger China of which it remains a formal part.
The incoming Clinton administration, promising a democracy-oriented foreign policy, will want to take positive note of Taiwan's encouraging political evolution.
The trick is to do so without needlessly provoking Beijing.


Chaotic Day Is Lost Cause for Rangers
On a night when they had every right to be discombobulated, the Rangers were unable to cope with the chaos of an emotional endgame on the road.
Just as they had come back against the Bruins on Sunday night, the Rangers were themselves victimized tonight by a third-period surge from Washington at the Capital Centre.
They squandered a two-goal lead in the final 13 minutes of that period, then lost, 4-3, in overtime, putting an apt ending to a day that never seemed to fit quite right.


The Pop Life
Jon Pareles
1.
Arrested Development: "3 Years, 5 Months and 2 Days in the Life of . . ." (Chrysalis).
Hip-hop that ambles through melodies and raps, songs and conversations, casually putting across messages about dignity, heritage and self-reliance as it remakes pop structures.


Bad News for Bengals
Backup quarterback DON HOLLAS will be out at least six months with a torn knee ligament and cartilage damage, throwing Cincinnati's quarterback plans into disarray.
The Bengals had planned to go into next season with DAVID KLINGLER as the starter and Hollas as the backup, but might end up looking around for a No. 2 quarterback.
Third-stringer BOOMER ESIASON, who is under contract for an estimated $3 million a year, wants to be traded to a team that needs a starter, and General Manager MIKE BROWN said he would try to oblige him.


StatesWest Airlines Inc. reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


R-Tek Corp. reports earnings for Year to June 30


Bosnian Muslims Want Arms to Fight
To the Editor:
Re "Muslims From Afar Joining 'Holy War' in Bosnia" (front page, Dec. 5): Christians are not considered infidels by Muslims, as you imply.
On the contrary, Jews and the Christians are respected in Islam as the "people of the Book," who also received God's revelations.
Muslim men are allowed to marry women of the people of the Book.


Clinton Arrives in South Carolina for a Working Vacation


Applied Spectrum Technologies Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CHRONICLE
MOTHER TERESA has been honored by Russia for her efforts to care for destitute children.
The Nobel laureate, who is 82, received the 1992 Leo Tolstoy International Award from Russia's consul general on Monday at her mission in Calcutta, India.


Corrections
A sports picture caption in some copies yesterday with an article about the college basketball tournament at Madison Square Garden misidentified the Kentucky player wearing No. 12.
He was Rodrick Rhodes, not Jamal Mashburn.


Nuclear Plant at Shoreham Is Being Sold Piece by Piece
Are you in the market for a used neutron monitoring system?
If so, Richard M. Kessel wants you to know he's sharpened his pencil, cut prices to the bone and he's ready to deal.


Clinton Shakes Up Economics Establishment; Attack on Johnetta Cole
To the Editor:
It would be comic if it weren't tragic: The Forward, which in another generation was a proudly socialist Yiddish newspaper, accuses Johnetta Cole, a distinguished black educator, of belonging to suspiciously left-leaning organizations.
Others, such as A. M. Rosenthal in "The Special Interests" (column, Dec. 15), pick up the charges and demand Ms.
Cole's expulsion from President-elect Clinton's transition team.


Jerusalem Journal; The Bones Are Buried, but the Hatchets Aren't
In theory, it should have been simple.
Traffic was clogging the northeastern corner of town, and so City Hall decided that a new road had to be built.
Nothing in Jerusalem is ever that simple.
You can hardly poke a shovel into the soil of this city without stumbling upon a place where someone lived, or fought, or prayed, or started his journey through eternity a couple of millenniums ago.


Wine Talk
BASEBALL writers used to talk about the Hot Stove League -- the pundits, genuine and self-anointed, who sat around a stove in the off-season, reminiscing, predicting and swapping lies.
There is no real off-season in wine country, but things do slow down a bit around now, which makes it the right time to look back at the year as it wanes and try to guess at a few of the things to come.


Lebanon Rejects Israeli Offer on Relief for Exiles
Lebanon today rejected an Israeli offer to permit the Red Cross to visit the Palestinians trapped in southern Lebanon for nearly two weeks since 415 of them were expelled by the Israeli authorities.
The offer was conditional on the Beirut Government's allowing relief supplies to reach the deportees.
The proposal was conveyed to Prime Minister Rafik al-Hariri by a United Nations Under Secretary General, James O. C. Jonah, after talks in Jerusalem with Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin.
Mr.
Hariri said the Lebanese Government continued to insist that the expelled Palestinians remained entirely Israel's responsibility, ruling out any arrangement for food to be allowed through Lebanese-controlled territory.


Yvonne Brown, Commissioner's Wife, 55
Yvonne Brown, the wife of Lee P. Brown, the former New York City Police Commissioner, died yesterday in Houston.
She was 55.
The New York City Police Department issued a statement saying that Mrs.
Brown had died of cancer.


New Yorker Makes Sparkling Riesling In British Columbia
MOST New Yorkers, it is safe to say, have never drunk holiday toasts with a sparkling wine from British Columbia.
And many, it is safer to say, will usher in 1993 with Champagne and other bubblies inferior to Cipes brut from Canada.
The Cipes brut is a nonvintage sparkling riesling named for the owner of the Summerhill Estate Winery in the Okanagan Valley.
The valley, 125 miles long, lies 250 miles east of Vancouver.
Bottles from the province's 25 wineries have rarely been seen in the United States.


Campus Journal; A Celebrated Band's Legacy: a Stain of Shoplifting
For decades the Ocean of Soul Marching Band at Texas Southern University had been a source of delight, known for its fluid and distinctive performances.
Now it is the focus of an international incident that has tarnished the university's reputation.
The band was in Tokyo on Dec. 6 for a halftime performance in the Coca-Cola Bowl, in which the University of Nebraska beat Kansas State.
The next day, people on the band trip stopped at the Akihabara discount electronics district.
While there, they shoplifted $20,000 in merchandise, the police in Tokyo said.


AT LUNCH WITH: Andrew Morton; Wear Armor if You Want to Say The King-to-Be's Got No Clothes
THERE'S just no accounting for destiny.
Andrew Morton, the author of "Diana: Her True Story," the best seller that's been called the longest divorce petition in British history, had plans to discuss his new-found fame at the Princess of Wales's favorite London restaurant, San Lorenzo, in chic Beauchamp Place.
But Mr.
Morton's mother has suddenly taken ill, and he finds himself abruptly back here, giving interviews in the working-class town where he grew up the son of a picture framer.
The trusted astrologer who told him that his destiny was inextricably linked with Diana's didn't foresee this particular setting as a showcase.


Elderly Share a Home, and Their Warmth
As usual, Mary Daniels, who is 88, started rinsing the dishes as Mike Stenson, 81, scraped the remains of the meat loaf and mashed potatoes into the garbage, and the others, amid considerable chatter, cleared the table and prepared tea and dessert.
The others, that is, except Bill Mahoney, 72, who stayed seated, drumming his fingers on the table in Harvest House, a Long Island group home for the elderly.
"There's too many cooks in there," he said, a bit defensively.
"When I cook, I like to cook alone."


Seton Hall Prevails But Cal Is Upset
As matchups go, this would have been intriguing: Seton Hall vs.
California, Terry Dehere vs.
Jason Kidd.
If there was much interest in the Seton Hall/Meadowlands Tournament that began tonight, that was it.
But the meeting between nationally ranked teams -- and their terrific guards -- won't happen.


A Message for Survival Rides Into the Neighborhood


Pentech International Inc. reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


No Headline
People who boycott Aspen must realize it's like attacking the Jews in the Warsaw ghetto because of the Nazis. -- HARLEY BALDWIN, the owner of a nightclub in Aspen, Colo.  [ B16:5. ] This boycott is going to hurt us badly, and it should.
What has happened in this state is a disgrace. -- RUDOLPH, an owner of another nightclub there.  [ B16:6. ]


Pentech International Inc. reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


Clinton Warns Iraq's Leader Against Testing U.S. Resolve
President-elect Bill Clinton said today that President Saddam Hussein of Iraq was "making a big mistake," if he was trying to test American resolve during the transition of Presidential power.
The remarks, made at the airport in Savannah, Ga., were his first on the issue since an F-16 fighter shot down an Iraqi warplane on Sunday.


Executive Changes
FOSTER WHEELER CORP., Clinton, N.J., named Richard J. Swift president and chief operating officer.
GUARDIAN LIFE INSURANCE CO.
OF AMERICA.,New York, appointed Arthur V. Ferrara chairman and chief executive.


60-Minute Gourmet
THE coveted East Coast bay scallop is making a valiant comeback after the devastation caused by the red tide in recent years, but prices for this saltwater gem are still prohibitive.
So, virtually all of my scallop recipes are designed around the larger sea scallop, which when absolutely fresh and well prepared is excellent in every respect.
Sea scallops are in high season now along the part of the Atlantic Coast roughly from Labrador to southern New Jersey.
Scallop fishermen dredge the bottom as deep as 900 feet.


Accounts
*
Worthington Foods Inc., Worthington, Ohio, to BSB/Leff &amp; Squicciarini Advertising &amp; Public Relations, Dublin, Ohio, to handle its account, previously at Partners &amp; Shevack, New York.
Billings were not disclosed.


BUSINESS TECHNOLOGY: A Year of Transitions; Planning a Future of Telephones Without Tethers
In 1992, the telecommunications industry was not so much on hold as on continuous call-waiting, with the forces of new technology, industry consolidation and government regulation piling up like so many urgent telephone messages.
The industry's most visible story involved something that cannot be seen: radio frequencies used by cellular telephones.
More than 10 million people now subscribe to cellular services, a level once forecast for the turn of the century.
A.T.&amp; T., recognizing the shortsightedness of its withdrawal from the cellular market a few years ago, announced in November that it was negotiating to buy a third of McCaw Cellular, the nation's biggest provider of wireless telephone service in a $7 billion market.
Within a few years, the second generation of wireless phones -- handheld devices that are smaller, lighter and more versatile than today's cellular models -- may well add $30 billion more annually, some telecommunications consultants say.
Known as personal communications, the market will consist of an as-yet-undetermined mix of telephones, computers and low-power radio transmitters.
The Federal Communications Commission may decide in the coming year how to organize markets for these phones, probably in ways intended to promote more competition and lower prices than in the cellular markets.
A Phone for the Subway?
As envisioned by the product planners, people will be able to use wireless phones at their desks, on the street and in places normally blocked off from cellular signals, like elevators and subways.
GTE, Bell Atlantic and Ameritech spent the year conducting large-scale trials to help them design such personal communications services.
The year's less visible story was the continued increase in capacity and speed in communications networks.
With the addition of new undersea cables planned this year, there will be more than 1.1 million voice circuits between the United States and Europe by 1996 and 441,000 to Asia.
And new techniques in data transmission that were widely deployed this year, like the so-called frame-relay format, will raise speeds nearly thirtyfold.
Meanwhile, improvements in laser-fired fiber optics by A.T.&amp; T. and Northern Telecom promise even higher communications capacity, and lower costs.
The technologies place intense pressure on long-distance carriers like A.T.&amp; T., MCI and Sprint and local carriers like BellSouth and Nynex to fill up these huge pipelines.
They spent the year increasing services like caller-identification and information services like stock quotes.
The more people call, the more cost-effective all that increased capacity becomes.
Even telephones intended to remain firmly on the desktop received a facelift.
A.T.&amp; T. introduced a $1,500 videophone in January, and MCI intends to bring out a similar phone, priced at $750, early in 1993.
Larger corporate videoconference systems have improved in quality even as they have dropped in price, to $10,000 from $30,000 only a year or two ago.
It was perhaps fitting that the ugliest proxy fight of the year involved a long-distance company with local telephone holdings, Sprint, seeking to buy the Centel Corporation, a Chicago-based company with both cellular and local-carrier businesses.
Narrowly, the fight centered on whether Centel stockholders were getting a rich enough price for their shares.
But more broadly, the fight involved whether a juggernaut like a Sprint-cum-Centel would be better able to cope with the coming communications revolution than Sprint or Centel alone.
Centel's managers won, narrowly, and the company is scheduled to be merged into Sprint in 1993.
Perhaps the most significant move in the industry was made by the F.C.C., which voted in September to expand competition in local telephone service.
The agency has permitted small communications companies like Metropolitan Fiber Systems to expand sharply their use of the networks operated by the regional Bell companies and other local phone carriers.
The action is very likely the first step toward a day when businesses and consumers will be able to choose local telephone service the same way they now choose long-distance service: from a jostling pack of carriers advertising big discounts and improved service.


College Hockey Report
Tournaments
Wisconsin, the team that lost the national championship to Lake Superior State in last season's final, skated around and through Boston College for a 10-3 victory at the Bank One Badger Showdown at Bradley Center in Milwaukee on Monday night but then was beaten by Boston University, 6-3, last night in the title game.


Clemency Given To Jean Harris In Murder Case
Only hours before Jean S. Harris underwent coronary bypass surgery in a Westchester County hospital, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo today commuted the sentence she received for the 1980 murder of her lover, Dr.
Herman Tarnower, meaning Mrs.
Harris could be freed from prison as early as next month.
As is his custom, Mr.
Cuomo did not specify precisely why he commuted her sentence this year after denying clemency to the 69-year-old Mrs.
Harris three times before.
But a brief statement released by the Governor's office cited Mrs.
Harris's educational efforts on behalf of other inmates, her "above-average behavioral record during her incarceration" and medical problems that "have grown progressively worse."


Kentucky Fried Brings Back Slogan
The Kentucky Fried Chicken Corporation is bringing back a popular slogan as it continues efforts to bolster its business.
"We do chicken right," which ran from 1981 to 1987, returns in television commercials by Young &amp; Rubicam New York that begin appearing this week.
The theme was initially used in a campaign, aimed at black consumers, created by Mingo Jones Advertising in New York, now Mingo Group; it was adopted for the fast-food chain's mainstream advertising in 1982.


Anger and Regret in Aspen as Boycott Grows
The celestial people of Colorado's most exclusive ski resort are sulking.
This is the week when they usually emerge triumphantly from Land-Rovers and Learjets to immerse themselves in fresh powder, endless nights and the adulation of those mortals able to afford $400 hotel rooms and $12 glasses of Scotch.
But this year, bitterness has crept into the thin mountain air.
On Jan. 15, Colorado will become the first state in the nation with a constitution that prevents adoption of laws that specifically protect homosexuals from discrimination.
Amendment 2, which passed in November, will also rescind local anti-discrimination statutes in Aspen, Boulder and Denver.
Although officials worry about long-term damage to the state's $5 billion-a-year tourism industry, a growing boycott has done little to diminish the celebrity presence in Aspen this week.
But it has done much to tarnish it.


Defense Tactic in Sex Abuse Case Defeats Itself
To the Editor:
It is my fervent hope that the prosecution in the Glen Ridge, N.J., trial of four men for sexual abuse of a young woman with an I.Q. of 64 recognizes its advantage in the interrogation of the victim by one of the defense lawyers that you report Dec. 16.


Court Upsets Layoff Plan For Budget
In a victory for Gov.
Jim Florio, the New Jersey Supreme Court ruled today that the Legislature could cut the budget but could not dictate which state workers should be laid off to make ends meet.
The Legislature had envisioned layoffs for high-paid nonunion managers.
Instead, many union members lost their jobs.


BRAZILIAN LEADER QUITS AS HIS TRIAL STARTS IN SENATE
Fernando Collor de Mello resigned as President of Brazil today, ending eight months of political turmoil in Latin America's largest nation only minutes after the Brazilian Senate had begun an impeachment trial he was all but certain to lose.
Three hours after the resignation, Vice President Itamar Franco was sworn in as President by the Brazilian Congress.
Mr.
Franco, a gentlemanly, little-known former Senator, is to serve out the rest of Mr.
Collor's term, which ends in January 1995.  [ Man in the News, page A8. ]


Discovering Something New in Food: Pleasure
MOST people still eat what they want, especially at this time of year, though they do so with trepidation and guilt.
Having a chocolate chip cookie?
Having 10?
Then almost certainly, you're silently berating yourself and promising that when the New Year comes, such terrible lapses will be banished.
The pleasure hasn't disappeared from food, but it has become intricately intertwined with negative emotions since people have become conscious of the problems of cholesterol and fat, pesticides and food poisoning, sugar and salt.


Books of The Times; A Life of Horowitz, Who Molded the Music He Played
Horowitz His Life and Music By Harold C. Schonberg 427 pages.
Simon &amp; Schuster. $27.50.


C.D. Yields Unchanged For Week
Most yields offered on bank money market accounts and certificates of deposit for the week beginning today are unchanged from last week, according to the latest survey by The Bank Rate Monitor.
Analysts at the interest-rate publication said this holiday period would hold no surprises for depositors, since the Federal Reserve shows no signs of changing the current interest rate structure.
And with loan demand down, banks are in no hurry to raise deposit rates to bring in cash.


Review/Television; Finding What's Wrong With U.S. Health Care
Tom Brokaw is tonight's guide to the ailments of what passes as America's health care system.
The hour-long report is no ground breaker, but a description of symptoms can be the beginning of treatment for a condition that worries so much of the nation.
The first stop is the constantly crowded emergency room of Temple University Hospital in Philadelphia, which, like many inner-city hospitals, serves as doctor of first resort for people who can't afford a doctor of their own.
The pictures get across the long waits for most patients and the frantic pace and high burnout rate for the doctors, who tell of treating everything from gunshot wounds to allergies.


Corrections
An article on Sunday about Raymond Diaz, the probable choice of Mayor David N. Dinkins to head the New York City Office of Drug Abuse Policy, misstated part of his work background.
Mr.
Diaz created a substance abuse intervention division in the New York City Department of Correction.


International Airline Support Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Indicted Alabama Governor Behaves as if He Isn't
One day after he became the first Alabama Governor in modern history to be indicted on felony charges, Gov.
Guy Hunt pointedly tried to proceed with business as usual, working in the Governor's mansion and announcing the appointments of two judges.
"State government goes on," said Donald J. Claxton, a spokesman for the 59-year-old Mr.
Hunt, adding that his office had received hundreds of calls supporting the Governor.
"The phones have absolutely been ringing off the hook today, and people are angry at these phony charges that have been brought against the Governor."


More N.F.L. Labor Talks
Representatives for National Football League owners and players continued talking yesterday in an effort to reach a tentative settlement of their five-year-old labor dispute.
Both sides indicated last week that an agreement was imminent, but yesterday they characterized as day to day the likelihood of when an accord could be reached.
Paul Tagliabue, the N.F.L. commissioner, and Jim Quinn, the players' lawyer, spoke by phone yesterday after both men and their negotiating teams met for six hours in New York on Monday.
Although no meeting is scheduled for today, Joe Browne, the National Football League's vice president of communications and development, did not rule out the possibility of another session.


Review/Film; Parents Fighting to Keep Their Child Alive
"Lorenzo's Oil" is the tough-minded, completely gripping story of Augusto and Michaela Odone, parents who responded magnificently after receiving the worst conceivable news about their child.
At 5, Lorenzo Odone began exhibiting symptoms of what would soon be diagnosed as adrenoleukodystrophy, a rare and invariably fatal disease.
The Odones were essentially told that the best they could do would be to make Lorenzo's last days comfortable.
They were told that he would die within two years.
The Odones found that prognosis unacceptable.
And, amazingly, they did something to change it.
This economist and linguist set out to educate themselves to tackle a complex medical mystery, and take on the slow-moving medical establishment in the process.
On their own, they undertook the job of determining what, if anything, would keep their son alive.


Ex-New Yorkers Keep Links To City Via Neediest Cases
They abandoned New York City because they had grown weary of so many facets of urban life: the sidewalks packed with get-out-of-my-way pedestrians, the inescapable noise and pollution, the poverty that greeted them when they stepped onto the street or the subway.
But even though these people have settled into new homes across the country and the world, they remember that their former residence had charms and vitality as well as problems.
They proudly tell their new friends and co-workers that they are ex-New Yorkers.
And they still want to help the city, so they make donations to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.


Sports of The Times; On Ali, L.T., Air Jordan, Santa et al.
OUTTAKES by definition don't fit in.
Doesn't mean they aren't relevant (doesn't mean they are, either).
Just suggests that for various reasons they didn't make the cut in a particular scenario.
Following are some outtakes from one man's notebook during 1992:


Greyhound Cuts Prices Up to 50%
Greyhound Lines Inc., the country's only national intercity bus company, announced price cuts yesterday of up to 50 percent on advance-purchase fares.
The company, based in Dallas, said its "Go Easy Fares" would be 20 percent less than full fares with seven-day advance purchases, 35 percent lower with 14-day advance purchases and 50 percent off with 21-day advance purchases.
These discounts will be good for travel from Jan. 6 to June 4.


INSIDE
Consumers Are More Upbeat
The mood of consumers continues to improve.
One index is at its highest level since April 1991.
Page D1.
Inside Job Suspected in TheftHeist
Investigators suspect the $8.2 million robbery at a Brooklyn armored car company was an inside job.
Page B1.


A New Amity, A New Treaty; Most Threatening Sort Of Weapon Is Banned
In completing a new strategic arms treaty, Washington and Moscow have for the first time agreed to bring their strategic nuclear arsenals into line with their new cooperative relationship.
Throughout the cold war, each side amassed an expanding arsenal of strategic weapons.
But the agreement will drastically cut the size of each side's arsenal and, most important of all, ban the most threatening type of nuclear weapon -- the land-based missile with multiple warheads.
Removing the Hair Trigger
Despite the waning of the nuclear threat brought about by the end of the cold war, the agreement on the second Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty was not inevitable.
And it was a testimony to the difficulty of the Start II negotiations that the final hurdles were not overcome until this week, six months after President Bush and President Boris N. Yeltsin announced that they had reached a basic agreement on the treaty at a June summit meeting in Washington.


The Movers and Shakers Moved and Shook
FOR the advertising industry, 1992 was not quite the annus horribilis that Queen Elizabeth II bemoaned, but it certainly was an annus tumultuous.
Many had hoped 1992 would offer time to catch up and wind down, since it followed a year during which more large accounts and leading executives changed addresses than ever before.
Instead, the turmoil continued, at times reaching a dizzying pace that induced vertigo.


Wheatley TXT reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


BUSINESS TECHNOLOGY: A Year of Transitions; Working as Learning, Learning as Working
On the threshold of a new year and a new Administration in Washington, perhaps no technological issue has more immediacy than, or many long-term consequences as, the training of the nation's manufacturing workers.
The factory of the future will have little in common with Henry Ford's relentless assembly line.
Instead of long production runs of standardized products, production plants will have to be more agile and capable of switching from one product to another quickly and with little loss of efficiency.


Woman Named to Head Police in Elizabeth
Mayor-elect J. Christian Bollwage today named Mary F. Rabadeau, a former Catholic-school teacher, as his choice for director of the Elizabeth Police Department.
If she is confirmed by the City Council, Captain Rabadeau would become the first woman to lead a major police department in New Jersey and one of the few women heading police departments in the country.
A native of Elizabeth, Captain Rabadeau, 44, is a 14-year veteran of the police force "who knows the city intimately and has shown a vision and commitment to improving Elizabeth," Mr.
Bollwage said.
"There was no litmus test for naming a woman."


Bridge
One of the last links with the earliest days of bridge was severed a week ago when S. Garton Churchill died in Hendersonville, N.C., at the age of 92.
He learned auction bridge in 1916 while at school in Ohio, became a convert to the new game of contract in 1928 and lived to be the Grand Old Man of bridge.
In later life he was a Pickwickian figure, known to all as Church.
On the way to one of his three national victories, the Life Master Pairs in 1948, he had a record single-session score of 77.4 percent in partnership with Cecil Head.
He was the first to introduce the important concept of balancing, and his other theoretical ideas, though sometimes bizarre, were thought-provoking.
He did not believe in counting high-card points and was indignant when the American Contract Bridge League required him to enter point-count descriptions on his convention card.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-9  ARMS TREATY TERMS SET  The U.S. and Russia agreed on a nuclear-arms-reduction treaty after Washington compromised on three Russian demands.
A summit meeting on the accord could take place as early as this weekend.
A1  A FITTING BUT DELICATE BALANCE  The new strategic arms treaty aligns the U.S. and Russian weapons balance with their relationship, but working out the details was neither automatic nor uncomplicated.
A1  YUGOSLAV PREMIER OUSTED  Communists and nationalists combined forces in Yugoslavia's Parliament to oust Prime Minister Milan Panic in an overwhelming no-confidence vote.
A1  WINTER SUFFERING IN SARAJEVO  Elderly Bosnians who have survived months under siege in Sarajevo are succumbing to the hardships of winter, and U.N. peacekeeping officials are seeking relief for them.
A6  BRAZIL'S PRESIDENT RESIGNS  Just minutes after the Brazilian Senate had begun an impeachment trial, Fernando Collor de Mello resigned as President of Brazil.
Vice President Itamar Franco was sworn in as his successor.
A1  THE FLIP SIDE OF CORRUPTION  The new leader of Brazil inspires both confidence in a public looking for an honest President and fears about what some perceive as an anachronistic economic policy.
A8  CRIME GROWS IN SOMALI CAPITAL  Shootings, car thefts and other crimes are increasing in Mogadishusince American troops arrived as tension toward the forces rises.
A3  KENYA GOES TO THE POLLS  Millions voted in elections for President and Parliament in Kenya, which has been ruled for 14 years by President Daniel arap Moi.
The vote is seen as a test for multi-party politics in the region.
A3  BEIJING RESTRICTS KOREA TRADE  Beginning in the new year, all North Korean trade with China must be paid for in cash, a measure that will handicap the smaller country, which has no hard currency and is accustomed to bartering with China.
A2  The U.N. accused Khmer Rouge in death of 12 Vietnamese.
A2  Beirut rejected Israel's offer to permit aid to Palestinians.
A5  Jerusalem Journal: Unearthing a theological conundrum.
A4  National A10-12, B16  CUBAN AIRLINER DIVERTED TO MIAMI  The pilot of a Cuban commuter plane flew it to Miami, where all but 5 of the 53 people on board immediately requested political asylum.
A1  A BITTER WINTER WONDERLAND  A growing tourism boycott stemming from Colorado's adoption of an anti-gay measure has done little to diminish the celebrity presence in Aspen this holiday season but has done much to tarnish it.
A1  DRUG FROM RARE TREE APPROVED  After a review lasting only five months, the F.D.A. granted approval for the marketing of Taxol, derived from the Pacific yew tree, as a treatment of ovarian cancer.
A10  An injectable drug to treat migraines won F.D.A. backing.
A10  An unproven gene therapy is being allowed in a cancer case.
A12  SURGE IN WEST'S POPULATION  Rapid population growth in Western states and a level of immigration unequaled in almost eight decades have pushed the nation's population to 256.6 million as a new year approaches.
A12  'STATE GOVERNMENT GOES ON'  The day after being indicted on charges of theft and conspiracy, the Governor of Alabama pointedly tried to proceed with business as usual, working at his desk and announcing the appointment of two judges.
A10  HOME ALONE, IN FACT
An Illinois couple who left their two young children by themselves and flew to Mexico on a nine-day vacation were arrested on child-abandonment charges when they landed at Chicago on a return flight.
A10  FIVE SLAIN IN A SPREE OF VIOLENCE  Five people were killed and four were wounded in what the police in Dayton, Ohio, describe as a spree of "joy killing" by four youths there late last week.
A12  Education Page B6  A public-school teacher who teaches his own children at home.
With a group's help, a Bronx school undertakes self-renewal.
Campus Journal: Tarnish for a once-proud marching band.
Metro Digest B1  CLEMENCY FOR JEAN HARRIS  Only hours before Jean S. Harris underwent coronary bypass surgery, Governor Cuomo commuted the sentence she received in the 1980 murder of her lover, Dr.
Herman Tarnower.
A1  SHARING WARMTH, AND LIVES  The tiny society of Harvest House, where six elderly people and one nun live together, is an experiment in communal living for old people, part of the patchwork of long-term living alternatives for elderly Americans.
A1  Business Digest D1  The Living Section C1-5
Discovering something new in food: pleasure.
C1  The Quilted Giraffe joins the dinosaurs.
C1  Health Page C6  What really works for getting out of a bad mood?
Arts/Entertainment C7-15  High-tech art for Chase Bank.
C7  Perilous times for the Czech Philharmonic.
C7  Film: "Lorenzo's Oil." C7  Sports B7-12  Basketball: Knicks topple Pacers.
B7  Column: Berkow on the year in sports.
B7  Golf: Daly to enter treatment clinic.B7  Hockey: Rangers lose in overtime.
B7  Islanders fall to Maple Leafs.
B9  Obituaries A12-13  Ernest W. Hahn, innovative builder of malls.
A12  Vivienne Segal, musical-comedy star.
A13  Editorials/Op-Ed A14-15  Editorials  A farewell to MIRV's.
New course for City University.
Eighties, Nineties and Oh's.
One China, plus democracy.
Letters  Charles S. Maier: Germany's split personality.
Charlotte Wagner: Reluctant witness.
Sasha Alyson: Fear of the rainbow.
Neediest Cases B4


Ted Shearer, 73, Dies; Cartoonist for 'Quincy'
Ted Shearer, an illustrator, cartoonist and painter, died on Saturday at Northern Westchester Hospital Center in Mount Kisco, N.Y.
He was 73 and lived in Pound Ridge, N.Y.
He died of cardiac arrest, said his son, John, of Golden's Bridge, N.Y.


High-Tech Goliaths Taking Pains to Act Small
In a year of paring down and scaling back by big technology companies, it would have been hard to imagine a worse time for Corporate America's largest spenders on research and development: General Motors and I.B.M.
Thick wallets, it seems, are no match for flexibility and market savvy in the hunt for payoffs from technology investments.
That hard lesson was driven home with considerable force in 1992, undermining the old-line giants and the very notion that size is an advantage in technology industries.
The competitive landscape can shift so quickly that large companies with legions of bureaucrats prove unable to keep up.
Old-line giants like G.M., I.B.M. and General Dynamics are trimming their operations and even selling off large pieces of themselves.


Personal Health
IT is time again for New Year's resolutions, in which millions of people make commitments to self-improvement.
So what will it be this year?
Stop smoking for the umpteenth time?
Lose those extra pounds, an annual pledge that gets broken earlier every year?
Start exercising? (Well, you did make it to February last year.) Learn to relax?
Great idea, but when will you find the time?
The trouble with most resolutions is that they do not come with a battle plan.
Few wars have been won without strategies and goals to guide the troops.


BRIEFS
Common Stock  *
Managed High Yield Portfolio Inc., a newly organized diversified closed-end fund, has filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for an initial public offering of 5.75 million common shares at $12 a share through Shearson Lehman Brothers Inc.
The fund's objective is high current income with capital appreciation a secondary objective.
Shearson Lehman Advisers will serve as portfolio adviser and Boston Co.
Advisers Inc. as administrator.


Plea Bargains Make No Sense in Rapes
To the Editor:
Your Dec. 10 news article about a rape victim in Queens who set a trap to catch her rapist gave me an ugly jolt.
The man convicted of rape and sodomy in this case, George Vargas, attacked me and at least 10 other women nine years ago.
I was luckier than his latest victim because I fought him off early in the incident.


A Farewell to MIRV's
All departing Administrations think about their place in history.
The Bush Administration has had the skill and the luck to close out its term with a truly historic achievement.
The strategic arms reduction agreement announced yesterday by Secretary of State Lawrence Eagleburger and Russia's Foreign Minister, Andrei Kozyrev, would eliminate the most dangerous category of nuclear weaponry and reduce both sides' nuclear arsenal by an impressive two-thirds.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.50
3.27
4.09
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.17
3.22
3.84
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.33
3.38
3.85
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.37
6.41
6.34
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.36
7.40
7.39
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.38
8.40
8.57
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.39
6.40
6.65
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Corrections
A brief article in some copies on Monday about the arrest of the singer Harry Connick Jr. at Kennedy International Airport on a charge of possessing an unlicensed gun referred incorrectly to events that followed.
Mr.
Connick spent the night in jail on Sunday and was released on his own recognizance Monday morning.


Concord Fabrics Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 29


Drug Made From Rare Tree Is Approved to Treat Cancer
The Food and Drug Administration today approved the drug Taxol, derived from the bark of a rare tree, for treating advanced ovarian cancer.
While stressing that the drug is no cure, Federal health officials said it was a major advance against a treatment-resistant cancer that is diagnosed in 21,000 American women annually and kills 13,000.


McDonnell in Deal With I.B.M. Unit
The McDonnell Douglas Corporation, the military contractor and commercial airplane manufacturer, said yesterday that it would turn over most of its information processing operations to an I.B.M. unit.
The companies said McDonnell Douglas would pay the International Business Machines Corporation unit approximately $3 billion over the 10- year life of the contract.


Kenya Votes, a Mirror Perhaps of Democracy in Africa
With the country's political stability hanging in the balance, millions of Kenyans voted today, their first broadly contested election in nearly a quarter-century.
President Daniel arap Moi who has ruled for 14 years, faces seven challengers.
In the race for Parliament, about 700 candidates are contesting the 188 seats in the single house.
Results are expected on Wednesday.


A Would-Be Model for Reviving Ailing Public Schools
Hansberry Middle School, a Bronx fixture scarred by vandals, was racked by low expectations, low attendance and low achievement by the time the school year ended last summer.
But in preparation for the new year, repairs were made, elementary grades were added and a new name and a new outlook were bestowed.


Young Won't Divulge Direction of the Talks
Ray Handley and George Young conferred for much of the day yesterday, and there was still no word when or whether Young, the Giants' general manager, would dismiss Handley after two disappointing seasons as the head coach.
Young would not discuss what was said or in what direction the talks were going or how long they would last.
Still, it seemed sure that the 48-year-old Handley would be terminated after the second year of his three-year contract.
That could happen today or, more likely, early next week.


Seeking Converts, Controversially
Hiroaki Kawaai, a Japanese college student on vacation in New York City last spring, says he was making the rounds of tourist attractions when a Japanese woman approached him outside the Empire State Building.
He was feeling tired and a little lonely on his own in the city, he says, so he welcomed her invitation to have coffee and discuss Japanese history.
He ended up watching 13 videotapes about the Rev.
Sun Myung Moon's Unification Church, and a few days later he called his family in Chiba, Japan, to say he would not be returning home.


A Schoolteacher Pushes Use of Home Schooling
Behind a cedar grove in a house near the beach, the Guterson clan gathers for school at dawn.
Cleared of breakfast bowls, the dining room table is set for class -- English, a bit of geography, some math.
Later, school moves outdoors for a science lesson, firsthand, with the natural wonders of this island near Seattle as a backdrop.
Just before noon, the home-school teacher, Dave Guterson, leaves his family and goes to his job: at a public high school, where he works as a teacher.


Noodles Out, Potatoes In
THERE is a famous French dish of chicken cooked in vinegar; the flavor of this pork-and-peppers dish is quite similar.
Ordinarily, a dish like this is served over noodles, but potatoes are a better choice; they readily absorb the flavors of the pork and peppers.


Cash Only, No Bartering, China Tells North Koreans
The Chinese Government tightened the economic pressure on North Korea today by announcing that all trade beginning in 1993 must be paid for in cash rather than through barter.
North Korea, which is already suffering a severe economic crisis, depends on neighboring China for oil and other supplies.
It has no hard currency to pay its bills and is already in arrears on its $4 billion foreign debt.
Unless it can find other energy sources, its industry may be devastated.


In the Land of Its Origin, Couscous Is More Than a Quick Fix
COUSCOUS, North Africa's answer to pasta, is beginning to star in American kitchens.
And it's not because Moroccan food is suddenly the rage.
It has to do with diet and convenience.
Even before the Federal Government announced its nutritional pyramid this year recommending 6 to 11 servings of grain each day, there was increased interest in grain dishes like kasha, quinoa, barley and various kinds of rice.
But unlike many of these, couscous, a semolina-based cousin to pasta, is almost as easy to prepare as boiling water, or so it would seem.
That is why it is now available on supermarket shelves and featured in cookbooks and on restaurant menus.


Kosar Gets the Nod
BERNIE KOSAR, who underwent surgery yesterday, will remain the Cleveland Browns' starting quarterback in 1993 and most likely for a number of years after that, Coach BILL BELICHICK said during his post-season assessment of the team.


Fedders Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Estelle Bauer, Lawyer, 91
Estelle Bauer, who practiced law for more than 50 years, died yesterday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 91.
She died of pneumonia, said her daughter, Dr.
Joyce Brothers, the psychologist and television personality.


No Headline
After immobilizing two crew members, the pilot of a Cuban commuter plane on a brief domestic flight diverted the craft to Miami International Airport this morning, and all but 5 of the 53 people on board immediately requested political asylum.
The incident, which comes as political and economic conditions in Cuba have sunk to their lowest level since Fidel Castro seized power 34 years ago, is believed to be the first in which a Cuban commercial flight was commandeered and brought to the United States.
Hijacking or Freedom Flight?
Its arrival had United States officials scrambling to find a legal justification for what the Cuban Government today called a "terrorist act" engineered by Washington.
The officials are reluctant to take legal action against the pilot of what they regard as a freedom flight but what Cuba says is a hijacking.


S. G. Churchill, Lawyer, And Bridge Expert, 92
S.
Garton Churchill, a bridge expert and a New York City lawyer, died on Dec. 22 at the Fairview Health Care Center in Fairview, N.C.
He was 92.
His family said he died of pneumonia.


People
*
Martin Tucker, 69, president and chief executive at Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Holdings Inc., New York, the American holding unit of Saatchi &amp; Saatchi P.L.C., will retire, effective Thursday.
His duties will be assumed by Arthur D'Angelo, 41, previously executive vice president for operations and tax.
Mr.
Tucker will serve as a part-time consultant to a Saatchi unit, CME KHBB Advertising in New York.


Dow Falls 22.42, to 3,310.84; Program Traders Pitch In
Investors inspired by a report of higher consumer confidence battled program traders to a draw yesterday in a clash that ultimately produced more noise than movement.
The Dow Jones industrial average, which was up as much as 19 points by early afternooon, closed at 3,310.84, off 22.42, after computerized sell programs barreled in.
The broader market was almost even, with slightly more gainers than losers.


U.S. AND RUSSIA AGREE ON ATOMIC-ARMS PACT SLASHING ARSENALS AND THE RISK OF ATTACK
The United States and Russia announced agreement today on terms for an ambitious nuclear-arms-reduction treaty, paving the way for a summit meeting as early as this weekend between President Bush and President Boris N. Yeltsin.
Rushing to conclude the agreement before the Bush Administration leaves office, and backed by President-elect Bill Clinton, the United States compromised on three technical but important demands by Russia.
Mr.
Bush is to meet Mr.
Yeltsin in Sochi, a Russian resort city on the Black Sea, on his way back to Washington from Somalia, where he is going on Friday.


Retailers Climb; Tiffany Soars
Retailers' sales and stock prices are springing back even as analysts wonder how long the trend will last.
Johnson Redbook, an industry service, said yesterday that sales had jumped 10.4 percent this month, compared with December of last year.


BRAZILIAN LEADER QUITS AS HIS TRIAL STARTS IN SENATE
Fernando Collor de Mello resigned as President of Brazil today, ending eight months of political turmoil in Latin America's largest nation only minutes after the Brazilian Senate had begun an impeachment trial he was all but certain to lose.
Three hours after the resignation, Vice President Itamar Franco was sworn in as President by the Brazilian Congress.
Mr.
Franco, a gentlemanly, little-known former Senator, is to serve out the rest of Mr.
Collor's term, which ends in January 1995.  [ Man in the News, page A8. ]


East to West, U.S. Consumer Spirits Rise
The mood of consumers, which brightened considerably after the election in November, was even more upbeat in December.
The widely followed Conference Board index of consumer confidence jumped to 78.3 points, its highest level since April 1991, soon after the United States won the Persian Gulf war.


Inheritor of Tarnished Presidency: Itamar Augusto Cantiero Franco
Moments before Itamar Franco took the oath of office today to become the new President of Brazil, he handed senators a piece of paper on which he had listed his personal net worth and properties.
It was well-timed gesture, intended to indicate that his Government would not partake of the corruption and bribery that led to the resignation of his predecessor, Fernando Collor de Mello.
And many who know Mr.
Franco say they do not expect such problems in his Government.


A Cash Surge Soon for Municipals
In January it happens.
Billions of dollars will pour into the hands of municipal bond investors and municipal bond funds, leading many analysts to forecast that January, once again, will be a month of rising prices in the municipal market.
The money's source: the expected record $12 billion to $15 billion in calls or redemptions of bonds, and billions more in semiannual bond interest payments, said George Friedlander, a managing director and fixed-income strategist at Smith Barney.


Shootings in Somalia Reflect Rising Tension for U.S. Troops
Shootings and car thefts in Mogadishu, often aimed at military and relief workers, have increased markedly in recent days, underscoring what American military officials say is a heightened tension in the capital.
In the past week, the number of gunshot wounds treated in the main hospital in Mogadishu has jumped from three a day just after the troops' arrival three weeks ago to more than 15, the level recorded the week before the American-led international force arrived, and doctors say that many wounded never make it to the hospital.


Daly Says He Will Enter an Alcohol Rehabilitation Clinic
Six days after being arrested in connection with an alcohol-related altercation at his home, John Daly announced yesterday that he would withdraw from the early part of the 1993 PGA Tour to enter an alcohol rehabilitation clinic.
Daly was charged with third-degree assault after Douglas County sheriff's officers were called to his home in Castle Rock, Colo., in the early morning hours of Dec. 20.
According to an arrest affidavit, Daly's wife of eight months, Bettye Daly, told officers that her husband had been drinking at a party, had lost his temper and pushed her and pulled her hair before breaking several items in the house.
Daly, who was not at home when the officers arrived there, surrendered last Wednesday.


Review/Film; Old and Recent Looks At Roy Rogers and Pals
The appeal of Roy Rogers, Hollywood's second most popular singing cowboy after Gene Autry, was not limited to North America.
An early scene in the Dutch film maker Thys Ockersen's documentary film "Roy Rogers: King of the Cowboys," shows an Amsterdam movie theater crammed with children who are thoroughly caught up in a subtitled Rogers horse opera.
The film maker cheerfully admits that as a boy he, too, was smitten by the Rogers mystique.
He even appears briefly in a cowboy neckerchief and wide-brim hat, riding a stick horse the way he used to as a child.


Antoinette Deland Carter, Travel Writer, 53
Antoinette Deland Carter, a travel writer, died on Friday at the Jacob Perlow Hospice at the Beth Israel Medical Center in Manhattan.
She was 53 and lived in Manhattan.
Mrs. Carter died of cancer, said her husband, Stephen Carter.


Food Notes
Dipless Chips
Some new breads and crackers offer quick and tasty help to party givers this season.
They provide enough crunch and flavor so that harried hosts and hostesses need not even bother assembling a dip.


Corrections
An article on Sunday about Raymond Diaz, the probable choice of Mayor David N. Dinkins to head the New York City Office of Drug Abuse Policy, misstated part of his work background.
Mr.
Diaz created a substance abuse intervention division in the New York City Department of Correction.


Seeking Converts, Controversially
Hiroaki Kawaai, a Japanese college student on vacation in New York City last spring, says he was making the rounds of tourist attractions when a Japanese woman approached him outside the Empire State Building.
He was feeling tired and a little lonely on his own in the city, he says, so he welcomed her invitation to have coffee and discuss Japanese history.
He ended up watching 13 videotapes about the Rev.
Sun Myung Moon's Unification Church, and a few days later he called his family in Chiba, Japan, to say he would not be returning home.


A Cloudy Account On Leafs' Clincher
The winning goal was a little like a traffic accident.
Everyone involved had a slightly different description of how it happened, but everyone agreed on the obvious damage.
It came with 51 seconds left, it was scored by Glenn Anderson and it gave the Toronto Maple Leafs a 3-2 victory tonight over the Islanders before 11,890 at the Coliseum.


Books of The Times; A Life of Horowitz, Who Molded the Music He Played
Horowitz His Life and Music By Harold C. Schonberg 427 pages.
Simon &amp; Schuster. $27.50.


Pioneer Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Document Says Iraq Has Biological Weapons
What appears to be an official Iraqi memorandum contains the first written indication that Baghdad has possessed biological weapons since 1986.
The document, which has been circulated by a Kurdish group, is an order addressed to division units from a commander in Erbil, Iraq.
It instructs all division units to count their stocks of "biological and chemical materials" and to report the inventories back to headquarters by Aug. 8, 1986.


Review/Television; Kennedy Center Awards' Glitter Is Blemished by Film-Clips Dispute
"The Kennedy Center Honors" is the nation's most prestigious and elegant celebration of the performing arts.
American artists are recognized for their life's work with ceremonies at the White House and a celebrity-packed entertainment gala at the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts in Washington.
The latter event, attended by the President and First Lady, has always been taped for network broadcast, inevitably prompting observations to the effect that awards shows, generally tending to be silly, can sometimes be inspiring.
And the 15th-annual telecast of the "Kennedy Center Honors," taped on Dec. 6 and shown tonight at 9 on CBS, maintains the distinguished tradition.
But, unhappily, a discordant note has been sounded this year.
It concerns the tribute to Ginger Rogers, one of six honorees.


Holmes's Next Fight? It's a TV Bout
LARRY HOLMES is 43 years old and no longer earning the paydays he did as the heavyweight champion, but he hasn't stopped fighting.
The onetime champion, who remains hopeful of another shot at the title now shared by RIDDICK BOWE and LENNOX LEWIS, will meet EVERETT (BIG FOOT) MARTIN Tuesday night at Biloxi, Miss., in a bout on the USA cable network.
"I'm hoping I get another chance, but it's a far-fetched idea," Holmes (54-4, 37 knockouts) said yesterday in a conference call from his home in Easton, Pa.
"What I'm getting for this fight you couldn't pay your rent with. The money isn't important. I just want to get my name out there."


In Advertising, 1992 Was a Tumultuous Year


Paul Kirkpatrick, 98, Innovator in X-Ray Use
Dr.
Paul Kirkpatrick, a developer of the X-ray reflection microscope and a retired professor at Stanford University, died Saturday at his home in Palo Alto, Calif.
He was 98.
He died of natural causes, said Joel Shurkin, a spokesman for Stanford.


Anthony Proves to Be Right Medicine for Knicks
The Knicks had one guard who was injured, one guard who was ill and several players who were in foul trouble.
None of that kept the Knicks from winning.
Halting a two-game losing streak and improving on their impressive home record (13-1), the Knicks (17-9) outlasted the Indiana Pacers, 97-91, last night before a capacity crowd at Madison Square Garden.
With Doc Rivers (slightly seperated shoulder) sidelined and John Starks playing with the stomach flu, other players stepped up.
The most notable was Greg Anthony, who started at point guard and scored a career-high 23 points and added 8 assists in 38 steady minutes.
After shooting 1 for 11 in his last two games, Anthony shook his slump and answered the heavy criticism he had received recently with a strong performance.


American Airlines Sets Canada Deal
The AMR Corporation, parent company of American Airlines, said today that it would invest $194 million in Canadian Airlines International Ltd., a struggling carrier based in Calgary, Alberta.
American will also provide Canadian Airlines with administrative services like accounting and data processing for a fee, and the two airlines will offer their customers linked frequent- flier programs.


As Deaths From Cold Rise in Sarajevo, U.N. Commander Appeals for Truce
As signs accumulated that elderly people here are beginning to die from hunger and cold, the United Nations military commander for Bosnia and Herzegovina made an impassioned plea today for an end to the battle for Sarajevo, or at least for a cease-fire until Bosnia's bitter winter gives way to spring.
"It's a question of life and death," Gen.
Philippe Morillon of France, the United Nations commander, told reporters summoned to his headquarters at dusk today.


George R. Hughes, 85, Egyptology Professor
George R. Hughes, an Egyptologist and a former director of the Oriental Institute at the University of Chicago, died on Dec. 21 at the university's Medical Center.
He was 85 and lived in Chicago.
He died of complications of a bladder infection, said William Harms, a spokesman for the university.


Metropolitan Diary
NEW YEAR'S DAY
I go through the house pulling calendars  Off the walls, and leaf through  My newly obsolete appointment book.
It contains the history of my year:  Hopeful meetings, interviews that wasted  Precious hours, a concert when for a moment  Time stood still.
I flip through  The pages again, then store it in the file  Where the years are archived neatly  With the tax returns.
LEWIS GARDNER
Dear Diary:
I was heading west on 45th Street the other day when a hot dog vendor on the southwest corner of Fifth Avenue caught my eye; rather, I caught his.
"Miss, Miss," he yelped, placing himself directly in my way.
"Please, are you going to Sixth Avenue?"
"Yes," I replied somewhat sharply, annoyed that I was being kept from my holiday shopping.
"My wife is short on ketchup," he said.
"Would you mind taking a bottle to her? She's just across the light on Sixth." With that, he put an enormous bottle of Heinz in a paper bag and handed it to me.
I made the delivery, was thanked by the wife and sauntered off to Macy's, pleased that after 10 years in New York I still look nice enough to be trusted.
BARBARA TIERNEY  Margaret Dessau is in her car waiting for a red light at 10th Avenue and 34th Street to turn green.
A man approaches, waving his squeegee at the windshield.
Ms.
Dessau sighs.
This fellow, though, is different from the usual.
"What's the best nation?" he asks with a sly smile.
Ms.
Dessau shrugs.
"Donation!" he says triumphantly.
And then, to top that, "What's the best city?" Again a shrug.
Another grin.
"Generosity!"
Now Ms. Dessau grins. And donates. Generously.
Dear Diary:
The sign has been posted on the door of El Triangulo, a restaurant in Sunnyside, Queens, for some months now.
I keep thinking that it will be changed, but so far, not.
SPANISH SPOKEN SE HABLA INGLES TOM FRENKEL  The scene was East 89th Street where, a few nights before Christmas, Helene Davis and David Paul were walking Sam, their 7-year-old cocker spaniel.
Coming toward them out of the dark was a fellow with a dog.
A large dog.
A
very
large dog.
When it was but a few feet away, Ms.
Davis realized that it was, in fact, not a dog at all.
"Good heavens!" she exclaimed.
"I think it's a donkey!"
At that point the owner of the animal hurriedly handed Mr. Paul a leash.
"Take care of my donkey," he said. "I'll be right back. His name is Max."
With that, he was gone.
The dumbfounded Mr.
Paul held Max's leash.
"Do you suppose we're on Candid Camera?" Ms.
Davis asked.
"I don't know," he replied, "but Sam and Max seem to be getting on well enough."
"Isn't that a donkey?" a surprised passer-by wanted to know.
"Where are you taking a donkey?" she demanded.
"We really don't know," Ms. Davis said.
"What a city," the woman mumbled as she continued on her way.
Ms.
Davis and Mr.
Paul stood there helplessly.
A few minutes later, the donkey's owner returned carrying a plaid blanket.
"He dropped it on the way," he explained.
"Well, we're off to church." He took back the leash and he and Max walked off into the night.
A copy of the menu for Sunday, Jan. 1, 1933, from the Schrafft's restaurant at 227 West 57th Street in Manhattan comes from George Le Sauvage of Port Washington, L.I.
Mr.
Le Sauvage's father (also named George) had joined the company in 1931 as assistant to the president, Frank G. Shattuck.
Mr.
Le Sauvage went to work for Schrafft's in 1953 in food preparation.
His son, John Le Sauvage, is now president of Schrafft's Ice Cream.
Here are some excerpts from that New Year's menu.
SPECIAL DINNER Fresh Shrimp Cocktail Cream of Tomato Soup Melba Toast Queen Olives Minute Steak With Broiled Mushroom Caps Glace Sweet Potato New Peas in Cream Hot Gingerbread Endive and Orange Salad Old Fashioned Strawberry Shortcake Beverage Assorted Cream and Peppermint Wafers


CHRONICLE
B.
B.
KING has been performing the blues for 40 years and bringing his concerts into prisons for 23 years, but a show in Gainesville, Fla., yesterday had special meaning.
Among the members of the audience at the Gainesville Drug Treatment Center, which included inmates from the treatment center, the Santa Fe Community Correctional Center and Gainesville Community Correctional Center, was his daughter, PATTY ELIZABETH KING.
"Yes, this one is very special," Mr.
King, 67, said at the end of his hourlong performance.
Patty King, 36, is serving a three-year sentence for drug trafficking.


Corrections
An article in Science Times on Dec. 22 about a gene, bcl-2, that can make a cell live forever misidentified the scientist who studied the gene in 1987 and noted its connection to follicular lymphoma.
He is Dr.
David Vaux, not Dr.
Irving Weissman.


Bridgford Foods reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 30


Friends of Harris Applaud Decision
In 11 years as inmate 81-G-0098, Jean S. Harris came to symbolize many things to many people.
There were feminists who saw her as a victim, a caring woman who had been emotionally battered by a heartless, selfish man.


New Course for City University
The City University of New York is struggling to cope with rising enrollments and poorly prepared students even as its state and city revenues are declining.
So it is understandable -- indeed, welcome -- that the university plans to review and overhaul its programs.
The goal is to convert a collection of autonomous campuses with redundant courses into an integrated system calibrated to the needs of students and the city.
Faculty members at several campuses are resisting the idea, usually because they stand to lose some part of their traditional domain.
But they would do better to participate in a constructive process to strengthen CUNY.


Taiwan Fund Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


3 Plead Guilty In Insurance Fraud Case
Three people charged with defrauding 43,000 health insurance customers of millions of dollars in premiums have pleaded guilty in Miami.
They participated in one of the largest health insurance scams prosecuted by the Federal Government in recent years, law-enforcement officials said.
The three were indicted last month on Federal charges of cheating workers out of $29 million in premiums.
They are a former executive and two business associates of International Forum of Florida Health Benefit Trust, a company in a class known as Multiple Employee Welfare Arrangements, or MEWA's.


Eighties, Nineties and Oh's
There'll be no doubt tomorrow night, when the world rings in the new year, about what to call it.
The name "1993" is neither ambiguous nor controversial.
If only that were true about what to call the next decade.
Ever alert to the evolution of the living language, this page has over the years meditated on the need for a name.
Now, with the next millennium bearing down hard, whimsical speculation has ripened into practical necessity.
A process of elimination again produces "the 00's," pronounced "the Oh's."


Nets Making a Pitch for Former Knick Cheeks
In an effort to improve production from their bench and add a veteran flavor to the lineup, the Nets are trying to sign Maurice Cheeks, the longtime Philadelphia and former Knicks guard.
According to a front-office offical for another team, who asked not to be identified, the Nets have contacted the agent for Cheeks as well as Cheeks himself.
However, the official said, Cheeks was asking for what the Nets thought was too much money, and talks have come to a standstill.
Also, Cheeks, who played in 56 games for Atlanta last season and is not currently on a National Basketball Association roster, has yet to decide if he wants to get back into professional basketball.


Vivienne Segal, 95, a Stage Star In Roles Sweet to Cynical, Is Dead
Vivienne Segal, a musical-comedy star who appeared on Broadway in "The Desert Song," "No, No, Nanette," and "Pal Joey," died yesterday in Los Angeles.
She was 95 years old and lived in Beverly Hills.
She died of heart failure, said Robert Sidney, a friend.


COMPANY BRIEFS
ALL NIPPON AIRWAYS CO., Tokyo, Japan's second- largest airline, said it would start using non-Japanese pilots because it has too few pilots for a planned increase in flights and routes.
The company said a total of 150 non-Japanese pilots would be provided by 1996 by Ansett Worldwide Aviation Services of Australia.
PACIFIC NUCLEAR SYSTEMS INC., Federal Way, Wash., said it settled a lawsuit in which Westinghouse Electric Corp., Pittsburgh, will pay it $1.375 million.
The suit concerned shipping containers that a Pacific Nuclear unit was contracted to design and build for the Waste Isolation Pilot Plant operated by Westinghouse and the Department of Energy.


Players Share Blame For Handley's Demise
Giants players were hardly surprised when their coach, Ray Handley, was dismissed today.
But some seemed to feel sorry for Handley and said they had to share responsibility for the disappointing play of the last two years.
Pepper Johnson, the inside linebacker who disagreed so often with Handley, said Handley's ouster was inevitable.


Amtrak Sued Over Barring Of Billboard
In a legal battle pitting freedom of expression against the refusal of a government-subsidized agency to accept political advertising, a Manhattan artist says Amtrak has barred him from turning a gigantic billboard at the entrance to Pennsylvania Station into a political critique.
The artist, Michael A. Lebron, is suing the agency, seeking to force Amtrak to display the piece.
Mr.
Lebron, whose acerbic work has hung in subway stations in New York and Washington, says he leased the Penn Station Spectacular, a curved billboard measuring 103 feet by 10 feet that is seen by thousands of people each day as they descend the escalators into the midtown station in Manhattan.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising -- Addenda; Accounts
*
Thomas Howell Group Americas, Atlanta, to Aydlotte &amp; Cartwright, Atlanta, as the first agency to handle the insurance-related service company's account in North and South America and the Caribbean.
Billings were not disclosed.


NAZI VICTIMS FACE DEADLINE ON CLAIMS
With a Thursday deadline looming, descendants of German Jews seeking compensation for homes and businesses lost during the Nazi era may in many cases have to accept cash settlements far below the current value of their lost properties.
Under an agreement signed in May between the United States and Germany, Holocaust survivors or descendants of victims of Hitler whose property was in the former East Germany were given the right either to take a cash for their expropriated property or to ask the Berlin Government formally for its return.


Music Notes
Ecological Correctness
Environmentalism has dawned on the world of classical music.
Michael Reynolds, the cellist in the Muir String Quartet, has started Ecoclassics, a new record label that will donate the profits from its recordings to conservation organizations.
The Massachussetts label has also done away with all the plastic (nonbiodegradable) parts of CD packaging, except for the CD itself.
Instead it is using a cardboard gatefold sleeve, like a miniature LP cover.


Deportations Pushing Israeli Arabs to Join Protests
When Fatima Alayan came home a few days ago, she found her 9-year-old son, Hamed, watching Israeli news reports about the mass deportation of 415 Palestinians to southern Lebanon.
"Mom, who are we, Fatah or Hamas?" her son asked, referring to the the mainstream faction of the Palestine Liberation Organization and the Islamic fundamentalist group.
"We're neither," his mother answered.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising -- Addenda; Miscellany
*
Coca-Cola Co. is revamping the theme for its Diet Coke soft drink.
In a campaign by Lintas New York, the slogan "Taste it all" will replace "Just for the taste," a shortened version of the brand's original slogan, "Just for the taste of it," introduced in 1982.
A subtheme, "One awesome calorie," will appear in ads and on packaging. *
Newsweek magazine will publish a special issue on Jan. 22, called a "Newsweek Town Meeting." It will cover the Inauguration and ask Americans what they want from the new Administration.


INSIDE
A New Signal Of Economic Strength
The Government's Index of Leading Indicators jumped eight-tenths of 1 percent in November, the biggest rise in 10 months.
The latest report provides further evidence that what had been a weak economic expansion now seems self-sustaining.
Page D1.
Giants Dismiss Handley
Ray Handley was dismissed as the coach of the Giants two years after he took over the football team.
Page B7. 'I Have Some Bad News'
It is during the holiday season that AIDS patients often tell friends and family of their illness.
Page A20.


Choice of Arts Chief Deserves Attention
To the Editor:
Amid the flurry of higher-priority Clinton appointments, there is one job about which little has been heard: chairman of the National Endowment for the Arts.
Yet to a constituency important to the country out of all proportion to its numbers, this appointment is critical.
Countries like Britain, France and Russia deal with culture at the cabinet level, with ministers of culture and art, while we relegate it to the National Endowment, with less funds for all the arts than we grant to military bands.


Corrections
An article yesterday about Iraq's possession of chemical and biological weapons misstated the record of United Nations inspectors searching for chemical weapons in Iraq.
The United Nations teams have located and destroyed many chemical weapons in Iraq.


Jordan Finds Saudis Are Unwilling to Forgive
Nearly two years after he supported Iraq in the Persian Gulf war, repeated efforts by King Hussein of Jordan to mend fences with Saudi Arabia and other Arab allies in the war have been rebuffed.
As a result, the King has announced that Jordan will not humiliate itself any further.
In recent weeks, King Hussein has clearly distanced himself from Iraq by calling for the replacement of the current Baghdad Government with a pluralistic, democracy.
And now, a close adviser said, the King "thinks it is time to get beyond the wounds of the gulf war to the new challenges that threaten all Arabs."


For Texas A&amp;M, a Cloud Over Cotton Bowl
The hotel lobby was filled with Texas A&amp;M supporters dressed in their Cotton Bowl T-shirts, some brandishing their class rings, others in A&amp;M baseball caps.
It is bowl week here and, for the second straight year, Aggie fans are out in full force.
This time, though, they have little to celebrate.
Twice let down -- first by the bowl selection committee, then by some of their own -- the Aggie fans have come hard to the knowledge that Friday's game between Texas A&amp;M and Notre Dame is not merely about football, not anymore.


M. Roy Fisher, Art Historian, 61
M.
Roy Fisher, an art historian and a dealer in Old Masters, died on Dec. 22 at the New York University Medical Center.
He was 61 and lived in Manhattan.
He died of complications of leukemia, said his brother Jules.


Chronicle
Making his debut on Broadway, Mayor DAVID N. DINKINS will be playing the role of the aviator Wiley Post in "The Will Rogers Follies" on Jan. 9.
In the Tony Award-winning musical, Wiley Post goads Will Rogers with the line "Let's go flying, Will," leading to the plane crash at Point Barrow, Alaska, on Aug. 15, 1935, in which they both died.
The Mayor is not a newcomer to the show.
Last March, he performed in "The Dave Dinkins Follies," part of an annual spoof with City Hall reporters.
In that performance, the Mayor rode a horse through a hotel ballroom, singing and doing rope tricks with the Broadway cast and dancing into the wee hours.


Review/Film; Innocence Corrupted in Italian Satire
The ghost of Benito Mussolini haunts "Il Portaborse," a satirical comedy about the ascent of a crypto-Fascist Italian politician with a telegenic face and the conscience of a sewer rat.
The rise of this fascinating monster, Cesare Botero (played by Nanni Moretti), is followed through the eyes of Luciano Sandulli (Silvio Orlando), an Italian literature teacher and professional ghostwriter who is sucked into Botero's inner circle.
Money is the lure.
Even with the extra money earned from ghostwriting novels and political columns, Luciano still can't afford repairs on a grand country home whose ceiling rains plaster on his head while he works.


Concern Over Bank Sales of Funds
As a barrage of new television commercials proclaims, Wall Street is coming to your local commercial bank branch.
At a rapid-fire pace, banks nationwide are stepping up their drive to sell stocks and mutual funds.
But as they do, questions are being raised about whether this is in the best interest of the banks or of the customers they serve.
Clearly, mutual fund sales through banks are a trend here to stay.
In the last 18 months, as interest rates stayed low, bank customers have been pulling money out of deposit accounts.
To keep these customers, banks have provided higher-yielding alternatives like mutual funds.
By most tallies, about 10 percent of the $300 billion in mutual funds sold this year will be sold through banks, and the number is expected to grow.


Federal Inquiry Finds Misconduct By a Discoverer of the AIDS Virus
After three years of investigations, the Federal Office of Research Integrity today found that Dr.
Robert C. Gallo, the American co-discoverer of the cause of AIDS, had committed scientific misconduct.
The investigators said he had "falsely reported" a critical fact in the scientific paper of 1984 in which he described isolating the virus that causes AIDS.
The new report said Dr.
Gallo had intentionally misled colleagues to gain credit for himself and diminish credit due his French competitors.
The report also said that his false statement had "impeded potential AIDS research progress" by diverting scientists from potentially fruitful work with the French researchers.


Britain Warns Serbs of Risk of Armed Intervention; Warning by General
Charging that the West is about to hatch the final part of a plot to bring territories of the former Yugoslavia under its domination, this country's top military officer warned today that his forces would resist any military intervention aimed against Yugoslavia or the Serbs of Bosnia and Herzegovina or of Croatia.
"The danger of military intervention has realistically increased in recent days," the Yugoslav Army's Chief of Staff, Gen.
Zivota Panic, said in a statement.
"If intervention comes, we will defend freedom, independence and our territory with all our means."


Nikkei Down For a 3d Year
Somber-suited traders and officials of the Tokyo Stock Exchange gathered today on the trading floor to note the end of trading for 1992 with the rhythmic hand clapping that traditionally occurs at ceremonial occasions here.
Few regretted the passing of 1992, in which the 225-share Nikkei average reached six-year lows and annual trading volume was the weakest in 17 years.


Review/Jazz; Rhythm-and-Blues Quartet In a Multitude of Styles
A few blocks up the street, at the Sheraton Manhattan and the New York Hilton, scholars from around the world argued over semiotics at the 108th Modern Language Association Convention.
But at the Lone Star Roadhouse, the legendary New Rhythm and Blues Quartet was fashioning a different kind of cultural canon.
The N.R.B.
Q. was post-modern when post-modern wasn't cool.
The band started mixing up its roots music referents more than 20 years ago, when it started out on a touring circuit that would make it one of the nation's most beloved live bands.
Tuesday night's show was packed with revelers familiar with the patented N.R.B.Q. method of shifting between pop genres until everyone in the room grows dizzy with delights, and the band delivered a set that satisfied all comers.


Calendar: Workshops, Classes, Tours and a Sale
Family Workshops
Wave Hill, Independence Avenue and West 249th Street, Riverdale, the Bronx; (212) 549-3200.


Local Institutions Share New Cultural Funds
The New York City Department of Cultural Affairs is to receive an additional $1.25 million in 1993, the agency has announced.
The appropriation, which was passed by the City Council at a Dec. 17 meeting, will be divided among 16 local cultural institutions, including the Brooklyn Museum, which will receive $325,000 for its new wing, the Bronx Museum of the Arts, the Brooklyn Academy of Music, the Museum of the City of New York and the Queens Museum of Art.
With these additional funds, the department's total operating budget for the 1993 fiscal year comes to $80.3 million.


Handley's Unhappy Reign Is Brought to an End
The Ray Handley era ended today.
To no one's surprise, the Giants dismissed their head coach after two tumultuous seasons marked by player-coach controversies, confrontations with the news media, inconsistent play and, most galling to the team's supporters, a losing record.
George Young, the Giants' vice president and general manager, announced the dismissal at a news conference at Giants Stadium.
He said he told the 48-year-old Handley on Monday that a change would be made.
At a 10 o'clock meeting this morning, Handley told his assistant coaches of the decision.
An hour later, Handley was gone without comment, and only Young appeared at the news conference.


Ruth Lynch Saunders, Psychoanalyst, 65
Ruth Lynch Saunders, a psychoanalyst and a former magazine editor, died on Monday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 65 and also lived in Siasconset, Mass.
Mrs. Saunders died of cancer, said her son, Anthony D. Saunders, of Stamford, N.Y.


Review/Music; A Program Beyond the Seasonal
For its concert of German Baroque music at the Church of St.
Mary the Virgin on Sunday evening, the Artek Ensemble managed to devise a Christmas program that did not seem the least bit strained or cloying.
The selected works, by Schein, Praetorius, Schutz, Tunder, Sweelinck and Weckmann, would make sense together no matter what the season.
And the performances, under the direction of Gwendolyn Toth, had a youthful flair, even a certain sensuality, that stood out in a season of routine ritual.
Schein's instrumental Suite in G established the virtues of Artek's sound: pungent, sharply textured and fully expressive.
Motets of Praetorius and Schutz followed ("In Dulci Jubilo," "Heute Ist Christus der Herr Geboren"); the voices of Evelyn Simon, a soprano, Daniel Gundlach, a countertenor, and David Frye, a tenor, were not smoothly blended at first, but their ensemble warmed up as the evening went on.
Mr.
Gundlach delivered an impressive solo for Franz Tunder's "Kleines Kindelein." Ms.
Toth, who accompanied at a small console organ throughout, played solo in "Ons Is Gheboren Een Kindekijn," by Jan Sweelinck, teacher of many important German composers of the period.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising -- Addenda; 3 Industry Women On Best-Paid List
Three of the highest-ranking women in advertising have landed on Working Woman magazine's list of the 20 best-paid women in corporate America, published in the January issue.


When Patients Say 'Ah' in Scores of Languages
In a cramped examination room of a Lower East Side health clinic recently, a distraught young mother, who only spoke Chinese, stood holding a tiny baby while a nurse, who spoke only English, examined the child.
The infant had been ill, the mother explained, and a relative had prescribed medicinal tea.
The baby is too young for tea, the nurse said.
The baby is too young for any medicine that the doctor or nurse does not order.
The mother nodded.


Ruland Is Signed by Pistons
The Detroit Pistons signed center JEFF RULAND yesterday to fill the opening caused by an injury to OLDEN POLYNICE.
Ruland, 34, has not played this season after playing 13 games last season with the Philadelphia 76ers before suffering an Achilles' tendon injury.


Drexler Is Placed on Injured List
The Portland Trail Blazers placed their star guard, CLYDE DREXLER, on the injured list yesterday because of recurring soreness in his right knee.
Drexler must sit out the next five games, keeping him on the bench at least until a road game Jan. 9 against San Antonio.
Drexler underwent arthroscopic surgery on his right knee Sept. 17.
He missed most of training camp before returning to begin the season.
The 6-foot-7-inch guard suffered a setback Dec. 1 when he took a fall during a game in New York.
He missed two games later that week but appeared in eight straight contests before missing last Saturday's game against Philadelphia.


Mum's The Word From Coughlin
If Tom Coughlin is a primary candidate to succeed Ray Handley of the Giants, the Boston College coach said today that he was unaware of the pursuit.
He said he has had no contact with any official of the Giants and would not welcome any under the present circumstances.
He repeated this theme over and over.
"I'm the Boston College coach and I'm focusing on the game against Tennessee," Coughlin said.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Dec. 25
Dec. 18
Dec. 27
1992
1992
1991
Gasoline production, daily
7.4
7.2
7.3
Distillate production, daily
3.2
3.1
3.1
Gasoline stocks
213.4
214.8
216.3
Distillate stocks
139.0
137.3
142.9
Crude imports, daily
5.2
6.2
5.0
Product imports, daily
1.9
1.8
1.9
Crude stocks
321.6
330.2
325.5
Crude production, daily
7.1
7.1
7.3
Refinery utilization (%)
87.0
87.4
87.0
Source: American Petroleum Institute


0.8% Rise In Leading Indicators
The Government's forward-looking economic gauge jumped eight-tenths of 1 percent in November, its second straight advance and the biggest in 10 months, the Commerce Department reported today.
The rise in the Government's index of leading indicators was another in a recent series of upbeat figures, and it confirmed the widely shared belief among analysts that what had been a weak economic expansion has probably become self-sustaining, with various elements reinforcing each other.
Last week the recession that began in July 1990 was officially declared to have ended in March 1991.
And since last summer, the economy has unmistakably begun to gather steam. 'A Higher Plateau'
"Things clearly have moved to a higher plateau," said Kenneth T. Mayland, chief economist at the Society National Bank in Cleveland.
"The early months of 1993 look pretty darn good."


U.S. Releases 45 Cubans Who Defected in Plane
Forty-five Cubans who defected to the United States in an airliner on Tuesday were released from Federal custody late tonight after an intense debate in Washington about whether the pilot's diversion of a routine domestic commuter flight violated international hijacking agreements.
The Aero-Caribbean airliner landed at Miami International Airport after passengers overpowered three crew members during a scheduled flight from Havana to the beach resort of Varadero.
The plane's pilot, Carlos Cancio Porcel, was a leader in the defection plan.


Imagine Films reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Political Memo; The New Year at a New Age Retreat: The Clintons in Agreeable Company
The sight of the President-elect and the First Lady-elect arriving here today with monogrammed (BC and HRC) matching overstuffed boxes of work papers to celebrate New Year's Eve by talking about "personal and national renewal" with 1,500 friends invites the question:
Is America really ready for the Renaissance?


2 Hurt by Hit-and-Run Drivers in Brooklyn
Two Brooklyn pedestrians, a 12-year-old girl and a 69-year-old man, were injured yesterday in hit-and-run accidents involving two cars that police said were apparently stolen.
According to Sgt.
Anthony Barlanti, a police spokesman, the girl was struck about 2:55 P.M. at the corner of Borinquen Place and South Third Street, in Williamsburg.


Sentenced to Warn All: Handle Guns With Care
On Spanish-language radio and television stations here this week, a man who learned a sorrowful lesson one year ago is imploring others not to make the same deadly mistake.
The man, Nicolas Conchas, is urging residents of San Jose's Hispanic neighborhoods to shun the dangerous tradition of celebrating the New Year by firing a pistol in the air.


Vice and Virtue in Brazil
Brazil has a new President, sworn in Tuesday after scandal drove out his predecessor.
But the country continues to drift, without decisive political or economic leadership.
That could be the biggest Latin worry facing Bill Clinton.
The crisis can only be resolved by Brazilians themselves.
This week's formal transfer of presidential power from Fernando Collor de Mello to Itamar Franco illustrates the problems.
Mr.
Collor, Brazil's first elected leader in 30 years, resigned ahead of an impeachment trial that convicted him of receiving millions of dollars in illegal payments.
Mr.
Franco, formerly Vice President, hasn't gotten a grip on the office in three months of interim rule and has not grasped the urgency of economic reform.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The U.S. leading-indicators index jumped 0.8% in November, its second straight advance and the biggest in 10 months, the Government reported.
The data support a widely held belief that the economic expansion has become self-sustaining.  [ Page D1. ]


Injury-Plagued Bills Again Turn to Their Super Sub
A misty, fog-cloaked Rich Stadium this afternoon gave an air of gloomy intrigue to the Buffalo Bills' practice for Sunday's American Football Conference wild-card game against Houston.
The Bills didn't need any help from the elements.
A look at the injury report and a glimpse into the Buffalo training room is enough.


Blizzard = California Drought's End? Probably Not


HOME IMPROVEMENT
This week's column answers recent questions from readers. New Phone Jacks for Old
Q.
I would like to install a telephone jack that accepts the plug of a modular telephone.
My problem is that my phone was installed 16 years ago, and when I took the cover off the connection block on the wall, I found that the inner telephone wires were all the same color, a dull gray.
How do I connect the modular jack to the wires color-to-color? -- Stephen Ludkovich, Brooklyn.


From Start, to Finish
The George Bush who flies to Somalia today has plainly snapped out of his post-election blues.
In what might be called Post-Campaign Mode, he's charging toward the Jan. 20 finish line.
After spending New Year's Day with the troops in Somalia, he'll head for Moscow to sign the monumental Start treaty, vastly reducing nuclear arsenals.
In only a few weeks Mr.
Bush has also toughened the U.S. stance against Serbian aggression in Bosnia, and against Baghdad's violations of the no-fly zone in southern Iraq.
This follows his Administration's completion of arduous negotiations with the European Community on farm subsidies, and with Canada and Mexico on a new common market.


N.F.L. Seeks Statements and Reviews Tapes From Jets Game
The National Football League continues to press its investigation into the accusation by Jets cornerback Erik McMillan that Referee Larry Nemmers used a racial epithet during the Jets' final game of the season, against the Saints at Giants Stadium on Dec. 26.
Joe Browne, N.F.L. vice president for communications and development, said that in addition to written statements taken from Nemmers, McMillan and Jets defensive tackle Mario Johnson, who corroborated McMillan's accusation, the league is seeking statements from other players and officials in the game.
The league is also reviewing tapes of the game, Browne said.


Alamar Biosciences reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


B.C. Overcomes Syracuse On Eisley's 3-Point Shot
Boston College 94, Syracuse 93
SYRACUSE, Dec. 30 (AP) -- Howard Eisley sank a 23-footer with six-tenths of a second to play in overtime tonight, giving Boston College a 94-93 victory over No. 12 Syracuse and denying Coach Jim Boeheim his 400th career victory.


Seton Hall Puts Up Its Dukes in Victory
Four minutes passed, and the game looked like a replay from Tuesday night.
Seton Hall had a 10-0 lead against James Madison, the game suddenly looked like a rout and every shot seemed to fall easily.
Then it sort of turned into a hockey game.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.50
2.74
4.61
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.05
3.17
3.86
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.23
3.33
3.87
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.35
6.37
6.41
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.37
7.36
7.46
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.38
8.38
8.60
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.39
6.40
6.70
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Stitching Together Small Pieces of the Past
NINA OLSON is a collage artist who's always on the prowl for old black-and-white photographs, vintage lace and other memorabilia, like Parisian clothing-store labels and decades-old report cards.
She uses these objects in her hand-sewn collages, which she frames or slips under things like glass tabletops.
In the hand mirror shown at left, the artist assembled a photograph of a sailor and a woman embracing, a torn postcard, a hairpin, string and lace.
Working with vintage textiles, she said, gives her a link to generations of unsung women who sewed or quilted.
She added that the collages also connect her to her grandmother, a Lithuanian immigrant who worked in New York sweatshops.
But it's really the fabric that feeds her creativity.
"You can't go wrong with lace," she said.


Federal Inquiry Finds Misconduct By a Discoverer of the AIDS Virus
After three years of investigations, the Federal Office of Research Integrity today found that Dr.
Robert C. Gallo, the American co-discoverer of the cause of AIDS, had committed scientific misconduct.
The investigators said he had "falsely reported" a critical fact in the scientific paper of 1984 in which he described isolating the virus that causes AIDS.
The new report said Dr.
Gallo had intentionally misled colleagues to gain credit for himself and diminish credit due his French competitors.
The report also said that his false statement had "impeded potential AIDS research progress" by diverting scientists from potentially fruitful work with the French researchers.


Chronicle
And if anyone doubted it, those hunks of the World Wrestling Federation have hearts.
The federation and some of its biggest stars have pledged to donate $100,000 to the Red Cross to kick off a campaign for Somalian relief, said VINCENT K. MCMAHON, who heads Titan Sports, the parent company of the federation.
"We can't help being moved by those graphic pictures of the Somalians, particularly during the holiday season," Mr.
McMahon said yesterday in a telephone interview.
He said that all the federation's receipts from the Madison Square Garden Championship on Jan. 29 would go to a fund of the American Red Cross for food, medicine and relief supplies in Somalia.
A majority of the 30 wrestlers appearing in the event will also give all or part of their individual purses, ranging from about $2,000 to $10,000, Mr.
McMahon said.


Bernstein's Mother Dies
Jennie Resnick Bernstein, the mother of Leonard Bernstein, who contributed lyrics for a segment of his last musical work, died on Tuesday at Beth Israel Hospital in Boston.
She was 94 years old and lived in Newton, Mass.
The family said she died after a stroke.


Chronicle
When "The Secret Garden" closes on Broadway this Sunday, fans can still find something of the same magical atmosphere in the "secret garden" in East Harlem.
This southern nook of the Conservatory Garden, on the northeastern side of Central Park, on Fifth Avenue at 104th Street, got its name because of a statue of Mary and Dickon, the main characters of the Frances Hodgson Burnett story.
Now there is a new connection.
JED COHEN, who plays Dickon in the show at the St.
James Theater, has donated money for water lilies for the garden, as his part in the traditional end-of-the-show gift giving.


3 Sides in Negotiations To Save Recording Studio
New York City officials, recording-industry representatives and real-estate executives have so far been unable to work out a compromise that would halt the closing of a well-known recording studio in Manhattan.
The facility, B.M.G.
Studios, is scheduled to shut down on March 31 when its parent company, the media conglomerate Bertelsmann, moves to new offices at 1540 Broadway, near Times Square.
"I hope that by next week we'll have a plan to get all the parties together in an effort to save the studio," said the Rev.
Wendell Foster, a City Council member from the Bronx who is chairman of the council's committee on international and intergroup relations and special events, which oversees cultural affairs.


Police Query 2 in Search For Girl, 10
As the authorities continued to search for Katie Beers, the 10-year-old who disappeared from a Long Island video arcade on Monday, a lawyer here said today that the police were focusing on two of his firm's clients as possible suspects in the case.
One of the men, Sal Inghilleri, is the estranged husband of Katie's godmother, Linda Inghilleri, with whom Katie lived for most of her life.


When Can the Mentally Ill Be Locked Up Against Their Will?
To the Editor:
The case of Larry Hogue, a crack-addicted homeless veteran, known as "the wild man" on Manhattan's Upper West Side, has sparked new debate about balancing the individual civil liberties of the mentally ill with society's welfare.
This problem often gets played out through the laws regulating the involuntary civil commitment of a person to a psychiatric hospital.
Two recent statements by you on these laws seem misleading.


REPORT BY POWELL CHALLENGES CALLS TO REVISE MILITARY
In his most comprehensive assessment of the future of the armed forces, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff has rebuffed the kind of consolidation that President-elect Bill Clinton has called for in the roles and missions of the separate services.
In a report setting forth his vision of the military after the cold war, Gen.
Colin L. Powell recommends a number of innovations, including the creation of a new command to conduct joint training of forces from the different services for intervention in regional crises.
The new command could also support United Nations peacekeeping operations and oversee disaster relief operations.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  QUIET INTERLUDE IN NEW YORK
As 1992 draws to a close, business in New York City, as in many cities across the nation, has become paralyzed by end-of-the-year torpor.
As the city's empty office complexes tower above avenues crowded with tourists and shoppers, the contrast between action and inertia is at its most striking.
Page A1. 5 INDICTED IN ROBBERY OF KOREAN CHURCH


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; 1992: The Year Mundane Became Commonplace
All too often during 1992, advertising agencies chose derivativity over creativity, producing work that shamelessly recycled the tried-and-true, like celebrity endorsements, uplifting jingles or special effects.
Rare Examples of Innovation
So applaud those all-too-few instances when agencies stretched and produced fresh, innovative, even risky, output.
Like the campaign from Cotton Inc., in which America's cotton growers infused their heretofore relentlessly upbeat image campaign, with serious, even tough, vignettes, like a woman banging on the door of a closed savings and loan, or a gang member's funeral.
If cotton is "the fabric of our lives," as the ads proclaim, it makes sense to present all aspects of life.
Agency: Ogilvy &amp; Mather New York.


Foreign Affairs; The U.N. Chief's Dilemma
Can't work with the U.S., can't work without it.
That is the dilemma the United Nations Secretary General, Boutros Boutros-Ghali, faces as he grapples with America's role in U.N. peacekeeping and peacemaking operations since the cold war's end.
Without U.S. leadership and power, the U.N. lacks muscle.
With it, the U.N. loses its independent identity.


Today's TV Listings
Television listings appear today on page B15.


Paris Journal; The Face That Charms France: Is That Egg on It?
Through a combination of scandal and seductiveness, a somewhat disheveled news anchor named Patrick Poivre d'Arvor has become the most talked-about personality in France and the focus of what is being widely described as a moral crisis affecting the nation and its news outlets.
Embroiled in the dubious financial affairs of an indicted Lyons businessman and accused of faking an interview with President Fidel Castro of Cuba, Mr.
Poivre d'Arvor, who presents the nightly news on France's most popular television channel, is now making more headlines than he reads.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising -- Addenda; People
*
Steve West was named to the new post of senior vice president and creative director at Vicom/FCB, San Francisco.
He had been vice president and group copy supervisor at Lally, McFarland &amp; Pantello, New York. *
Michael Walsh, senior vice president and media director at Ketchum Advertising, Pittsburgh, was promoted to the new position of director of media, operations and finance.


Bush Off on Foreign Trip, With Russia on Agenda
After announcing he will meet with President President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia on Saturday, President Bush began a foreign trip Wednesday to Saudi Arabia, Somalia and Russia on what he called a purely humanitarian -- and not personal -- mission of good will.


Knicks End Year With a Clean Sweep
Only an extraordinary comeback could have saved the Knicks tonight.
Somehow, they pulled it off.
They trailed by 17 points in the third quarter.
They were on the road.
Their best player, Patrick Ewing, was in foul trouble.
And their starting point guard, Doc Rivers, was back in New York nursing a slightly separated right shoulder.


Tisch Puts No Barrier in Parcells's Way
Bob Tisch, who less than two years ago paid $75 million to buy half of the Giants, said today that he will leave the decision on the team's coach to General Manager George Young.
But, that said, Tisch had warm words for the former coach Bill Parcells and added, "Bill has to decide if he'll come back or if he wants to stay in TV."
Tisch appeared to have no objection to bringing back Parcells, who quit suddenly on May 15, 1991, just a few days before the Giants were to have a key minicamp.
Although Young never has publicly blamed Parcells for leaving the Giants at a bad time, his distress at Parcells's decision has been obvious.


Review/Art; Before the New World Met the Old
"The Ancient Americas: Art From Sacred Landscapes," at the Art Institute of Chicago through Sunday, is one of several major exhibitions to observe the quincentenary of Columbus's discovery of, or encounter with, the Americas.
But it may be the only one to do so by ignoring Columbus altogether.
Turning its back on the Old World, "The Ancient Americas" focuses on the arts and, to some extent, the architecture of the New, offering a stunning overview of visual culture in the Western Hemisphere in the 2,500 years before Columbus landed.
Its approach differs considerably from that of "Circa 1492" at the National Gallery last year, which included Aztec and Incan art in a survey of world cultures at the time of Columbus's journey, but which still tended, perhaps inevitably, to give European achievements the bulk of attention.


AdvaCare Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Brazilian Vows to Fight as New Leader Takes Over
The day after he resigned as President of Brazil and hours after being convicted of corruption by the Senate in an impeachment trial, Fernando Collor de Mello lashed out at his political opponents today, defended his Government and promised to appeal his conviction to the Supreme Court.
In an evident attempt to upstage Brazil's new President, Itamar Franco, Mr.
Collor went on national television this morning directly after Mr.
Franco had made his inaugural speech to the country and while he was holding a news conference.


Defenses Are Putting Ball in Their Courts
Making the interception was the hardest task for Henry Jones.
Like many defensive players during the 1992 season, what Jones did afterward was exceptional.
"I just happened to be watching that tape with a friend of mine," said Jones, the Buffalo Bills' strong safety, of his interception and rollicking 82-yard return for a touchdown in Buffalo's 38-0 victory in Week 3 at home against Indianapolis.


Bush Criticizes Press Treatment Of His Pardons
President Bush today sharply attacked as "stupid" and "frivolous" news reporting and commentary on his Christmas Eve pardons of six Iran-contra defendants.
He said his pardons of Caspar W. Weinberger, the former Defense Secretary, and five others should not give anyone the impression that Government officials were above the law.
He said his own record of serving the nation "honorably, decently and with my integrity intact" should quell any such concern.


Review/Pop; Proud Children of the 60's Spirit
The Spin Doctors could be described in the same way the existence of an uncharted planet can be predicted by the actions of other planets around it.
The band, which has become enormously successful recently with its single "Little Miss," is purely logical.
Part of a movement toward rock authenticity by a few bands that have attracted a growing audience, the group benefits from the lingering Anti-Milli Vanilli Effect.
"All the music is played by human beings; there are no machines," said the band's singer, Chris Barron, on Tuesday night during the first of three sold-out concerts at the Beacon Theater.
He was greeted by a cheering house.


A Taxing Tax Credit for the Poor
The earned income tax credit is a jewel of an anti-poverty weapon.
It supplements the earnings of low-paid parents.
And it encourages work, because the credit goes only to workers.
The only flaw is that many families don't know they're eligible and don't apply.
That problem could mushroom with 1992 filings because of a changed policy in the Internal Revenue Service.


Informers in Italy Accusing Ex-Premier of Ties to Mafia
Giulio Andreotti has been one of Italy's most durable politicians.
He served in each of Italy's 50 governments since 1948, seven times as Prime Minister.
And with his power base in Sicily, he helped anchor postwar Italy in the Western alliance.
But now, at 74, he is on the outside of the Government, his role reduced to a seat in the upper house of Parliament.
His role as a member of the Christian Democratic party is crippled, and he faces the possibility that federal magistrates and a parliamentary committee investigating organized crime in Italy may subject him to questioning.


Kenyan Leader Is Reported Ahead in Voting
Early returns in Kenya's first multi-party elections in 26 years gave President Daniel arap Moi a narrow lead today in the presidential race.
With tabulations in from 41 of Kenya's 188 voting precincts, Mr.
Moi had 372,138 votes.
Among his main challengers in the elections on Tuesday, Kenneth Matiba had 336,881 votes, Oginga Odinga had 115,873 votes and Mwai Kibaki had 114,243 votes.


Editorial Notebook; The Truth, Out of Control
As if President Bush's Iran-contra pardons weren't bad enough, partisans now deride Lawrence Walsh, the special prosecutor, as a zealot, "out of control." Elliott Abrams, one of those pardoned, has made that charge since he pleaded guilty last year to two counts of contemptuously withholding information from Congress.
Indeed, the subtitle of his new book, "Undue Process," sounds the theme of the Christmas Eve pardon message: "A Story of How Political Differences Are Turned Into Crimes."
Mr.
Abrams, a former Assistant Secretary of State, thinks his Congressional testimony about Iran-contra was merely permissible fencing, far from perjurious contempt.
He blames that inflation on Prosecutor Walsh, whose independence supposedly gives him unaccountable power and unlimited resources.


Britain Warns Serbs of Risk of Armed Intervention
The British Foreign Secretary, Douglas Hurd, delivered his sharpest warning to Serbian leaders today, declaring that their "bloody-minded cruelty" had raised the risk of military intervention in Bosnia by the Western allies.
While he argued that he still "distrusted" the idea of the West's trying to force a settlement in the former Yugoslavia, Mr.
Hurd said continued action by the Serbs, as well as the growing risk of a wider conflict in the region, had forced what he described as "a change" in Western attitudes.


Health Professionals reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Illinois's New Senator Under Fire On Issue of Boyfriend's Conduct
Carol Moseley Braun, whose victorious campaign for the United States Senate this year was stoked largely by women indignant over the handling of the Clarence Thomas hearings, has come under fire after reports that her campaign manager -- a man she is dating -- sexually harassed women on her staff.
Ms.
Braun, who returned to Chicago today from a four-week African vacation with the aide, Kgosie Matthews, told reporters that a lawyer she hired to investigate the accusations found no basis for them.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-13  BOSNIAN SUFFERING PREVAILS  After nine months of fighting, at least 150,000 people dead or missing, 1.5 million made homeless, scores of towns and villages razed to the ground and numberless atrocities, few people in Bosnia and Herzegovina have any confidence that an end to the suffering is at all near.
A1  BRITON WARNS SERBS ON CRUELTY  The British Foreign Secretary, Douglas Hurd, delivered his sharpest warning to Serbian leaders, declaring that their "bloody-minded cruelty" had raised the risk of military intervention in Bosnia by the Western allies.
A13  CHINA BUYS IRON COMPANY  A Chinese state-owned corporation has bought Peru's struggling state-controlled iron company for $312 million.
A1  BETTER CONDITIONS IN SOMALIA  The tenacity of a handful of relief organizations, including the International Committee of the Red Cross, has eventually eased the tragedy at the center of Somalia's famine, and the influx of American marines has added the element of security.
A1  BUSH'S FOREIGN MISSION  Three weeks before his term ends President Bush set off for Saudi Arabia, Africa and Russia on what he called a purely humanitarian mission of good will.
A7  NEW SECURITY IN SOMALIA  On the eve of President Bush's visit to Somalia, United States Marines stepped up security in Mogadishu, securing a contested bridge outside the city, flushing armed squatters from a former American Embassy building and setting up weapons checkpoints on major streets.
A8  U.N.
SEEKS ASYLUM FOR HAITIANS  The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees has drafted a proposal for Western Hemisphere countries to grant temporary asylum to Haitian boat people.
The High Commissioner is trying to take advantage of President-elect Bill Clinton's campaign promise to stop forced repatriation.
A1  KENYA CHIEF AHEAD IN VOTING  Early returns in Kenya's first multiparty elections in 26 years gave President Daniel arap Moi a narrow lead in the presidential race.
A6  IMPEACHED BRAZILIAN LASHES OUT  The day after he resigned as President of Brazil and hours after being convicted of corruption by the Senate in an impeachment trial, Fernando Collor de Mello lashed out at his opponents, defended his Government and promised to appeal his conviction to the Supreme Court.
A10  Syria said its Jews can receive exit visas.
A2  Mass deportations touched on fears of Israeli Arabs.
A3  India opposition is planning months of protest.
A9  A venerable Italian politician found his role reduced.
A10  Paris Journal: An anchorman became France's cause celbre.
A4 National A16-21  TWO VISIONS CLASH  In his most comprehensive assessment of the armed forces' future, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff has rebuffed calls for the kind of sweeping change envisioned by President-elect Clinton.
A1  INQUIRY FINDS GALLO MISCONDUCT  A three-year Federal investigation found that Dr.
Robert Gallo had intentionally misled colleagues to gain credit for himself as the co-discoverer of the AIDS virus.
A1  'I HAVE SOME BAD NEWS'  Of all the emotional horrors inflicted by AIDS, among the worst is telling family members.
And it is during the holiday season when it especially comes to the fore, blurted out at dinner, shouted in anger, whispered in tearful chats.
A20  BUSH RESPONDS ON PARDONS  The President attacked as "stupid" news reporting and commentary on his pardon of six Iran-contra defendants.
He also hired former Attorney General Griffin Bell to represent him in dealings with the Iran-contra prosecutor.
A16  DEADLINE ON HOLOCAUST CLAIMS  Because of scant publicity and a deadline that passes today, American descendants of German Jews who lost their homes and businesses to the Nazis may have to accept cash settlements well below the value of the properties.
A18  CAROL BRAUN UNDER FIRE  Carol Moseley Braun, whose successful race for the Senate was stoked in part by women indignant at the handling of the Clarence Thomas hearings, has come under criticism over reports that her campaign manager, whom she is dating, has sexually harassed women on her staff.
A18  PIRACY OR FREEDOM FLIGHT?
As 48 Cubans who defected to the United States in a commandeered airplane were released from custody in Miami, after Washington debated whether they could be freed without violating international hijacking agreements.
A16  SURPRISING HEPATITIS FINDING  A study shows that once a person is infected with the hepatitis C virus, the virus remains in the blood for years, even when there are no signs of liver inflammation.
A20  Political Memo: The Clintons at the Renaissance Weekend.
A21  A warning on guns, after a sorrowful lesson about them.
A16  Ling-Ling the giant panda died at the National Zoo.
A18  Metro Digest B1  THE IN-BETWEEN SEASON  The days between Christmas and New Year's have become an undeclared holiday for millions of workers -- as shown by the many blithe recorded messages that companies have left on their phones to ward off business calls until 1993.
A1  Business Digest D1  The Home Section C1-9  Oh, the differences when two people both work at home.
C1  Leaking oil tanks: an unseen hazard.
C1  In the dressing room with Dana Carvey: Every night live?
C1  Fixing satinwood is not for the average amateur.
C4  Arts/Entertainment C11-26  Serious arts not selling.
C11  Film: "Il Portaborse." C18  Music: The Spin Doctors.
C11  Rhythm and Blues Quartet.
C12  Word and Image: Books from Czechoslovakia.
C21  Sports B7-14  Basketball: Kentucky captures Holiday Festival.
B7  Knicks complete sweep of Pacers.
B12  Boston College surprises Syracuse.
B14  Nets defeat Timberwolves.
B14  Seton Hall wins Meadowlands tournament.
B14  Columns: Anderson on the Giants B7  Football: Giants dismiss Handley.
B7  Tisch leaves coaching decision to Young.
B7  Bills' Jones will be factor in playoffs.
B8  Bills dogged by injuries.
B8  N.F.L. continues investigation on McMillan's charge.
B8  Regional ski report B13  Sports People B10  Obituaries B6  Editorials/Op-Ed A24-25  Editorials  From Start, to finish.
Vice and virtue in Brazil.
A taxing tax credit for the poor.
John P. MacKenzie: Abrams.
Letters  William Safire: Office pool, 1993.
Leslie H. Gelb: The U.N. chief's dilemma.
Fearless forecasts.
Neediest Cases B5


Nets Are Talking to Cheeks
Apparently concerned about production from their reserve players, the Nets have talked to longtime Philadelphia and former New York Knick guard Maurice Cheeks.
And although the conversations with Cheeks were described today by Coach Chuck Daly as "very, very general, no big deal," it is an indication that New Jersey is concerned about the backup point guard position.
Late Tuesday night, a general manager who asked not to be identified said that some in the league were speculating that Cheeks, who last played with Atlanta last season, wanted to return to professional basketball and that the Nets had spoken with him.
Today, Daly said that recent talks had taken place between Willis Reed, the Nets' general manager, and Cheeks.


Bridge
Only one American tournament can claim to be the last of the Old Year and also the first of the New Year.
It is the New York Winter Regional, which begins today at the Vista International Hotel in the World Trade Center in Manhattan with the following schedule of major events:
Today, Bracketed Knockout Teams, 10:30 A.M. (and continues); Stratified Pairs, 10:30 A.M. and 2:30 P.M.


Groping for Answers In Tailgate Shooting
A Catholic priest groped with a question at a funeral Mass in Queens for Pamela Mascaro yesterday, a question that her family and friends have been struggling with since the 32-year-old mother was shot and killed during a tailgating incident on Friday.
"On a cruel Christmas night, a young woman dies in a senseless and stupid tragedy," Msgr.
Thomas J. Gradilone said in a homily at Our Lady Queen of Martyrs in Forest Hills.
"Our first instinct is to ask, 'Why?' "


A Strong Tonic For Drug Stocks
A nod from the Government can revive the prospects of any pharmaceutical company, as Glaxo Holdings and Cytogen found after winning approval for new medicines this week.
The buying was heavy and enthusiastic yesterday, but in an industry that has turned unpopular, both stocks remain well below their highs for the year.


Elway Denies Role in Coach's Dismissal
Denver Broncos quarterback JOHN ELWAY denies playing any role in the decision by the club's owner, PAT BOWLEN, to drop Coach DAN REEVES.
Elway, speaking Tuesday on KOA radio in Denver, said that any suggestion that he had a role in Reeves's dismissal was "totally, absolutely false."


Garden Q. &amp; A.
Clivias, for Connoisseurs
Some months back, I wrote about the rare yellow-flowering clivia (Clivia miniata citrina or flava), which has straplike evergreen leaves and spectacular funnel-shaped flowers that are easily brought into bloom on any partly sunny windowsill.
I said that I knew of several nursery operators trying to propagate them but that I had yet to hear that any of the plants were ready for sale.
These plants take at least a decade to reach flowering age, when the yellow color can be confirmed.


Economic Scene; Old Dragon Waits: The Deficit, Stupid
BILL CLINTON has picked his way through the political thicket and is on the verge of reclaiming Camelot.
But to retain the loyalty of his subjects over the next four years, he'll have to fight the dragon that has been breathing fire on his predecessors: the $300 billion Federal deficit.
The challenge looks more and more daunting, as Mr.
Clinton emphasized at the Little Rock economic teach-in two weeks ago.
The Congressional Budget Office has reassessed long-term deficit prospects three times since the last attempt to deal with the monster, the October 1990 budget deal.
Each time, the results looked more threatening.


Collegians Get a Break On the Slopes in January
There is no better time to be a college student who skis than the first few weeks in January, when ski areas throughout the East offer discounted lift tickets, low-priced ski weeks and an abundance of activities aimed at the college crowd.
All you need to participate is a valid college identification card and time off from studies on weekdays, Jan. 4-8, 11-15 and 18-22.
January is usually a slow month, so ski areas organize special events for skiers and this year, according to marketing executives, more ski areas are offering price breaks to college students.


Anthony C. Mottola, Fordham Dean, 77
Anthony C. Mottola, an educator and a retired dean of the Fordham University Graduate School of Education, died on Saturday at Lehigh Valley Hospital in Allentown, Pa.
He was 77 and lived in Caldwell, N.J.
He died of heart failure while visiting his family, said his son, Paul.


Arrow International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


This Way, That Way
RICHARD DEON'S new street signs are meant to lead urban walkers to the cultural attractions of Long Island City and Sunnyside, Queens.
In the City Signs program begun in 1990 by the Public Art Fund in cooperation with the New York City Department of Transportation, an artist participates in a six-month sign-making program.
Richard Deon, the second artist to take part in City Signs, was chosen from among 50 people in an international competition to design the signs, which are expected to be installed next month.
The 40 blue, orange and black signs, which are 24 inches in diameter, will lead walkers on a four-mile loop that includes artistic and historical institutions like the Socrates Sculpture Park and the Thalia Spanish Theater.
The signs, to be posted at bus stops, subway entrances and other spots, give the distances to nearby sites and point in their direction.


RESULTS PLUS
BASKETBALL  Suns Win 14th in Row


TRANSACTIONS
Basketball  National Basketball Association
PORTLAND TRAIL BLAZERS -- Placed Clyde Drexler, guard, on the injured list.
Football  National Football League


Marine Force in Somali Capital Intensifies Security for Bush Visit
On the eve of President Bush's visit to Somalia, United States marines stepped up security here in Mogadishu today, seizing and securing a contested bridge outside the capital, flushing armed squatters from a former American Embassy building, and setting up weapons checkpoints on major streets.
The security measures came as Mr.
Bush prepared to arrive in this devastated city for a two-day New Year's visit with some of the thousands of troops he dispatched this month as part of an American-led intervention force to protect the delivery of food aid.


COMPANY BRIEFS
NISSAN MOTOR MANUFACTURING CORP.
USA, Smyrna, Tenn., will make 2,000 extra Altima sedans during the first quarter of 1993 to satisfy increased demand.
Production will total 40,220 Altimas during the period, a company spokesman said.
BETHLEHEM STEEL CORP., Bethlehem, Pa., said it had signed a four-year $500 million secured revolving credit facility with a group of 19 domestic and international banks.


Rosalind Lorwin, 66, Psychology Professor
Rosalind A. Lorwin, a professor emeritus of social psychology at San Diego State University and a former mayor of Del Mar, Calif., died Thursday at her home in Del Mar.
She was 66.
She died of cancer, said her daughter, Susan Feierabend Peters, of San Francisco.


Foes' Vehemence May Be Helping Dinkins
For months, Mayor David N. Dinkins has been on the defensive, fending off a relentless series of attacks, first from the police officers' union, angry over his handling of the unrest in Washington Heights last July, and then from the Lubavitch Hasidim, bitterly critical of his leadership during the racial violence in Crown Heights last year.
But the image of a Mayor under siege may obscure another political reality about the last four turbulent months.
Elected officials and political consultants say Mr.
Dinkins may actually have benefited in an important way despite -- in fact, because of -- all the highly charged criticism.


Concord Fabrics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 29


Special Hearths for Special Houses
THE architect Graham Gund, of Cambridge, Mass., not only designs houses, but he also designs fireplaces for some of them.
In a St.
Louis house that was finished last year, he created Italian-marble fireplaces for the circular dining room (at right), the study, the living room and the kitchen.
The shapes of the fireplaces are meant to carry along the sweeping alpinelike design of the two-story house's balustrades and millwork.
The fireplaces are highly polished and act as contemporary counterpoints to traditional furnishings.


Polish Parliament Sidetracks Abortion Ban
For the second time in two years, Parliament refused tonight to bow to pressure from the nation's Roman Catholic Church and postponed a vote on a bill that would ban abortions, Poland's chief form of birth control.
Parliament voted to send the bill back to committee for a final vote on Jan. 7.
The measure calls for a ban on abortion in almost all cases, including rape and incest, and would impose a two-year prison term on any doctor who performed the procedure.
Women would face prison sentences for self-administered abortions.


Corrections
An obituary on Tuesday about Claude E. Forkner, an internist and former professor at Cornell University Medical School, omitted a survivor.
He is a son, Dr.
Claude E. Forkner Jr. of West Cornwall, Conn., and Scottsdale, Ariz.


Emily M. Gnichtel, 56, Active in Philanthropy
Emily Martenet Gnichtel, who was active in New York philanthropic organizations, died Tuesday evening at St.
Barnabas Medical Center in Livingston, N.J.
She was 56 and lived in Madison, N.J., and at the Onteora Club in Hunter Township, N.Y.
She died of heart failure after a short illness, said her husband, William Van Orden Gnichtel.


Carter Is Activated by Vikings
CRIS CARTER, the Minnesota Vikings' top receiver despite missing four games with a broken collarbone, was activated from the injured-reserve list and is expected to play next Saturday against the Washington Redskins. (AP)


At the First Tee


Group Criticizes New York City On Quality of Its Lead Testing
An advocacy group and elected officials criticized New York City yesterday for using a lead test on children that is known to be inaccurate, saying the outdated method may have missed thousands of cases of lead poisoning.
The New York Public Interest Research Group said a survey of 33 of the city's health clinics that screen children for lead poisoning found that only one clinic used a newer, more accurate and more expensive test that the Federal Government has recommended since October 1991.


Review/Opera; Musical Chairs at 'Onegin,' By Design and by Chance
A combination of illnesses and scheduled cast changes has made the Metropolitan Opera's current run of Tchaikovsky's "Eugene Onegin" into the operatic equivalent of a revolving door.
When an ailing Thomas Hampson bowed out of the title role, Dwayne Croft and later Sergei Leiferkus took over, and when Mr.
Leiferkus left the production, Mr.
Croft took up the role again.
Wendy White was to have sung her first Olga on Monday evening but was ill, so Birgitta Svenden retained that role.
And since the production was last reviewed, new singers have taken up most of the other roles, and James Levine has taken over the conducting from Seiji Ozawa.
A listener might have expected so many changes to make for a diffuse "Onegin," but the performance Mr.
Levine led on Monday evening was anything but that.
Mr.
Croft and Jerry Hadley, as Lenski, were not only both in fine voice but also conveyed the subtleties and tensions in their characters' shifting relationship.
All of the principals, in fact, touched on the inner passions and torments that lie within the Pushkin poem and which Tchaikovsky's music magnifies so splendidly.


Somalia 1992: Picking Up Pieces as Famine Subsides
Six months ago, in the gray, sullen mornings of the Somali winter, this town was cloaked in such death and desperation that a sudden and sizable infusion of well-organized assistance seemed the only solution against mass starvation.
Help came, but slower and more sparingly than needed, and tens of thousands, mostly women and children, perished from hunger as aid agencies persevered against gangs of gunmen to feed the destitute.
The Worst Was Over
The tenacity of a handful of relief organizations, particularly the International Committee of the Red Cross, eventually eased the tragedy at the epicenter of the Somali famine.
When President Bush arrives here Friday he will find a place transformed.
The stationing of American marines here two weeks ago added the element of security -- critical to longer-term success -- to a town that was already better off.


Edward Johnson, 69, Lawyer and Ex-Envoy
Edward L. Johnson, a former Foreign Service officer and a lawyer who was an authority on ship financing, died on Monday at his home in Larchmont, N.Y.
He was 69.
Mr.
Johnson died of heart failure, said a son, Christopher L. Johnson of Columbus, Ohio.


At Prison, the Cheers Come for Jean Harris
The state prison where Jean S. Harris has spent the last 12 years was edged by a thick cushion of fog today, and workers and visitors leaving the dreary brick buildings had to shield themselves against a chilly rain.
But there was cheer among many that came from knowing something glaringly wrong, at least in their minds, had finally been set right.
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo had commuted Mrs.
Harris's sentence for the 1980 murder of her lover, Dr.
Herman Tarnower, just three years before she would have been eligible for parole.
Mrs.
Harris, whose doctor said today that she was recovering well from heart surgery on Tuesday, may be set free as early as next month.


Review/Opera; New Stepmother in 'Jenufa,' But the Same Grim Crime
Kostelnicka, the infanticidal stepmother in Janacek's "Jenufa," is a character like no other in opera.
The deed she commits is hideous, the swiftness of the act frightening, but she does not have the aspect of a villain.
In her insane urge to rescue her stepdaughter's reputation, to save Jenufa by murdering Jenufa's child, she somehow saves herself from unambiguous damnation.
The forgiveness she receives is the linchpin of a matchless dramatic structure, one in which the most lurid deed is committed by a woman but the anterior crimes are committed by men.
Anja Silja, singing at the Metropolitan Opera for the first time in more than a decade, had mixed success as Kostelnicka in a cast change on Tuesday night.
From her entrance in the middle of Act I, she seemed a bit off the mark.
The character first enters almost unnoticed, marching across the stage and then off again with a single cold remark.
Then, a few minutes later, she stops a scene of drunken merriment dead in its tracks with a fierce monologue of scorn.
Ms.
Silja caught the coldness very well, but her second entrance did not cast the proper shadow of overpowering authority.
The role is something of a vocal nightmare, and Ms.
Silja's lyric-dramatic soprano did not have enough fullness of tone in the upper register.
The acting was finely shaded and intelligent, but a certain demonic spark was missing.
These are intangible qualities, but "Jenufa" depends upon them to make its fullest impact.


Donors to the Neediest Cases Pay Tribute to Slain Principal
In his career as a teacher and principal, Patrick Daly touched the lives of thousands of young children in Red Hook, Brooklyn, a desolate neighborhood awash in drugs and guns.
His work inspired so many people that his slaying earlier this month seemed to jolt New York City as well as the nation.
Since Mr.
Daly was killed in the cross-fire of an apparent drug dispute, several contributors have sent money to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund in his memory.
In letters to the fund, the donors explained that even though they never knew Mr.
Daly, they felt they must do something to sustain his vision of a city where all children have the chance to thrive.


WHERE TO FIND IT
"IT'S the sentimental attachment," said Stewart Unger, explaining why people often take their old watches to his Manhattan shop, Time Will Tell, for repairs.
"People inherit them."
There are other reasons.
Old-fashioned pocket and wristwatches with oldfangled mechanical movements are popular with collectors and those who want timepieces that aren't run by batteries.
Some people like watches that tick.
Some like classic watch faces from the 1920's and 1940's.
And some simply like watches that wind.


Home Video
Asked about tapes they'll offer in the future, video dealers invariably tick off a list of new feature films to rent.
This year, though, many also talk about other things: children's videos, exercise tapes, sports events, documentaries, old television shows and instructional videos, to name a few.
In 1993, dealers say, video-store inventories will broaden significantly to include many special interests.
Stores have always carried tapes other than movies, of course, but now diversity has become good business.


Every Night Live?
FOR some time now, Dana Carvey has been cultivating this vision for himself: His creative fires unleashed, he is making big, bright movies, a modern-day Danny Kaye or Peter Sellers; a young, raw Jerry Lewis; fast and smart, cometlike, a throwback, bringing the 50's alive, the 60's alive, blazingly filling up the summer nights the way his idols once did.
"Huge," he says of his dream.
"It would be huge." And difficult to surrender.
But now, the door to his dressing room at Rockefeller Center is closed, and he is contemplating a different vision.
He is sitting slightly forward in a big black recliner, and his legs are up.
His hair is matted, as usual, as if he had fallen off a sled and lost his winter hat.
"Yeah, yeah," he says slowly.
"I'm thinking about the talk show."


Arts Presenters Shift From the Serious To the Profitable
Gurtman &amp; Murtha Associates, well known in the concert management business for having handled bookings for Vladimir Horowitz, the Stuttgart Ballet and other distinguished artists, has a new client this season: the Amazing Kreskin, a so-called mentalist, or mind reader.
"I never thought I'd be handling Kreskin," said James Murtha, vice president of the firm, who cut his teeth working for the legendary impresario Sol Hurok.
"But we don't want to get caught with 400 classical artists signed up and no bookings. We have to listen to what the performing-arts presenters want."


Colgate Names Sweeney as Coach
EDWARD SWEENEY, who compiled a 56-22-3 mark as coach of Division III Dickinson for the last eight seasons, was named head coach at Colgate yesterday, suceeding MIKE FOLEY. (AP)


The Finger on the Pulse of the Roadways
During rush hour on Monday morning, when nearly every road in the metropolitan area was slick with ice, the equipment in a red-carpeted room here transformed two men into traffic officers patrolling a 500-square-mile intersection.
Monitoring reports of fender benders pouring in from police radios and over the phone, they pinpointed trouble spots and alerted scores of transit and police officials throughout the region.
Though Monday was busier than normal, what was taking place is what happens 24 hours a day, 365 days a year, here at the headquarters of Transcom, a consortium of transportation and public safety agencies in New York and New Jersey.
Final Piece of Network
Over the last seven years, Transcom has grown from a tentative experiment in traffic control into an almost indispensable element of the region's complex transportation network.
And on Jan. 1, the final piece of that network will be fit into place as the Connecticut Department of Transportation joins the consortium.
In return for a contribution to Transcom's $5.1 million budget, Connecticut will be plugged into a network that continuously monitors traffic conditions, construction schedules, road closings, accidents, weather-related incidents and any other event that might disrupt traffic on the estimated 6,000 miles of highway and 2,000 miles of track within the 500-square-mile metropolitan area.


In India, Misery and Corruption Fuel Violence; Built by Babar
To the Editor:
As a specialist on Mogul architecture and author of a book on its history and development between the 16th and 19th centuries, I was shattered by "Hindu Militants Destroy Mosque" (front page, Dec. 7).


Police Investigating if Killing Was Connected to Testimony
A 26-year-old Brooklyn man was shot in the face and killed when he answered his door on Tuesday, a day after he testified before a grand jury against a man who robbed him of $200, the police said yesterday.
In a complicated case involving the dead man, his neighbor and an acquaintance of the neighbor, investigators are trying to determine whether the shooting was linked to the victim's grand jury testimony.


Harriett Swenney Crowley, Aid Administrator, 79
Harriett Swenney Crowley, a retired editor who was also an administrator of American aid to third world countries, died Dec. 16 in Hendersonville, N.C.
She was 79.
She died after a stroke, a son, Peter Howard Crowley, said.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising -- Addenda; Thompson Is Out At Northwest Air
Northwest Airlines said that it had dismissed the J. Walter Thompson Company, which for the last year and a half had handled the corporate portion of the airline's account, with billings estimated at $25 million.
The airline's decision, which it attributed to an inability to resolve disagreements over compensation and account management, followed by a week a report in the trade publication Adweek that a split was imminent.
Burt Manning, chairman and chief executive at Thompson in New York, wrote in a memo that the decision came "despite our mutual best efforts" to reach "an ongoing working agreement acceptable" to both parties.


Holidays and the Bad Tidings of H.I.V.
Jeannie Pejko and her husband consider theirs a close marriage.
But when Mrs.
Pejko fell ill, she could not tell her husband the cause.
Finally, he trailed her to the doctor's office near their Chicago home and burst into the examining room.
"What's wrong with my wife?" he demanded.
The doctor froze.
Mrs.
Pejko (pronounced PAY-ko) broke down, burying her face in her hands.
"I have AIDS!" she shouted.


Essay; Office Pool, 1993
About last year's dreary set of prognostications: Hence, loathed Melancholy!
Next year is another day.
1.
Most unexpected good news will be (a) Charles and Diana reconcile; (b) "right to intervene" to stop anarchy or genocide becomes international law; (c) ostentatiously informal President Bill becomes known as William Jefferson Clinton, delivers suitably short inaugural address.


It's a Showcase Day But What's On Display?
Gene Stallings sounded as if someone had put too much Tabasco in his gumbo.
The coach of Alabama's Crimson Tide, five days before the No. 1 versus No. 2 meeting with Miami in the 59th Sugar Bowl, was talking about distractions, that dirty coachspeak word, especially when a national championship is on the line.


In Need of Service? Try Calling Next Year
"You have reached the Bantam Doubleday Dell publishing group. Our offices will be closed until Monday, Jan. 4, 1993. On behalf of our company, we wish you a happy holiday season."
Beep.


Spontaneous Abortions Occur Frequently
To the Editor:
In "The Interrupted Process" (letter, Dec. 21), Dr.
J.
P.
Bowman expresses his wish that scientists "stay away from matters requiring ethical and moral judgment."


U.N. Drafts Asylum Plan for Haitian Boat People
The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees has drafted an ambitious proposal for countries throughout the Western Hemisphere to grant temporary asylum to Haitian boat people.
The High Commissioner is trying to take advantage of President-elect Bill Clinton's campaign promise to "stop the forced repatriation of Haitian refugees" even as United States immigration officials make plans to carry out the Clinton policy.'


Syrian Jews Can Emigrate, Envoy Advises Jesse Jackson
Syrian Jews can still receive visas to leave the country, Syria's Ambassador to the United States has told the Rev.
Jesse Jackson.
In a letter sent to Mr.
Jackson on Dec. 22, a day after the two met in Washington, the envoy, Walid al-Houalem, wrote: "Concerning the matter of Syrian Jews' exit visas, which you raised with me yesterday, I want to assure you that the Syrian Government's decision of April 1992 to allow Syrian Jews to travel still stands."


Price Tag: Housecleaning


Wolves an Easy Target in Nets' Road Show
It was a big victory over a sorry team.
But the Nets will take it.
And who says the road is tough?
Not the Nets.
At 9-5 away from home this season, they love the road.
They would make a great commercial for a hotel chain. ("Hi, we're the New Jersey Nets, and room service is just fine with us.") After routing the Minnesota Timberwolves tonight, 118-92, in front of 18,032 at the Target Center for their largest margin of victory this season, the Nets started their five-game road trip with what they wanted most: a rousing triumph.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
HELPING grown children leave home when they finished school, started a job or married used to be thought of as handing them a one-way ticket.
They would surely visit or come home for the holidays, and in their absence, their old bedrooms could be put to other uses.
But a relatively large number of parents of grown children have discovered that those tickets have turned into round trips.
Grown-up offspring return because they have divorced or lost a job or can't afford an apartment or simply long for the comforts of living with their parents.


Five Indicted In a Robbery At a Church
Five men who law-enforcement officials say are members of a Korean gang gaining a foothold in Queens were indicted yesterday on charges that they robbed a Korean church congregation at gunpoint.
Queens prosecutors said the men are members of the Korean Flying Dragons, a wing of the Chinatown-based Flying Dragons gang, which is preying upon the Korean community in Flushing, Queens.


It's Art, and It Works
TOM OTTERNESS said he made a lamp out of his black plaster dodo-bird sculpture (below) because he liked the idea of an extinct bird giving off light.
It also suggests a globe, with latitude and longitude lines on it.
"Maybe it symbolizes too much," the sculptor said.
The lamp is $600 at the Apartment Store, a new shop that sells functional artwork.
The store is part of Exit Art/The First World, a nonprofit gallery at 548 Broadway, between Prince and Spring streets, (212) 966-7745.
The shop also has Ursula von Rydingsvard's graphite-coated cedar chest ($2,500) that bears her telltale carved style.
Charlie Hewitt has made wooden clocks and prints and paintings that echo the images on the clocks (he's big on fish).
They range in price from $950 to $1,750.


Peruvian State Iron Company Finds a 'Private' Buyer: China
This old mining town in the southern desert, for decades home to Peru's struggling state-controlled iron company, has a new owner in what Government officials and investment bankers describe as a one-of-a-kind acquisition.
The buyer is a Chinese state-owned corporation, which with the permission of the Communist leaders in Beijing competed with Western financial interests to take over the iron maker.
In a single stroke, the Chinese became the second-largest foreign investors in Peru, behind an American company, the Southern Peru Copper Corporation.


Bond Sales Set an Annual Record
It has been a record-breaking year in the bond market.
Corporate bond sales reached a high of $301 billion, almost outdoing the last two years combined, according to preliminary totals from the Securities Data Company.
For 1991 and 1990 together, the sum of new corporate issues was $307 billion.


Gerber Sells Its Buster Brown Unit
The Gerber Products Company said yesterday that its Buster Brown children's apparel subsidiary, which it put up for sale last summer, would be acquired next month by Buster Brown's management and two investment groups.
Terms of the deal were not announced, but Wall Street analysts estimated the value at slightly less than $100 million.


War's Pendulum: A special report.; Bosnia 1992: New Puzzles In the Jigsaw of Violence
It is one of the paradoxes of the Bosnian war that after nine months of fighting, the strongest call for peace is coming from the Serbian forces, universally condemned as the aggressors, and the greatest resistance to a settlement is coming from the country's Muslims, who have won international sympathy for their suffering at Serbian hands.
The United Nations and most Western countries, fearful of a widening war, are trying to bring about a cease-fire and negotiations on dividing Bosnia and Herzegovina into cantons to keep the warring ethnic groups apart.


Broad Gains for Stocks As Dow Advances 10.26
Stocks scored measured gains across the board yesterday, led by smaller stocks and some larger companies that have been out of favor with investors.
The Dow Jones industrial average rose 10.26 points, or 0.31 percent, to close at 3,321.10.
Investors continued to favor smaller stocks, however, as the Nasdaq index set its second straight daily record, advancing 2.84, or 0.42 percent, to 671.85.


Rev. Robert Banome, Bronx Priest, Dies at 62
The Rev.
Robert Banome, a Roman Catholic priest who fought drug addiction and urban decay in blighted neighborhoods of the South Bronx, died on Monday.
He was 62.
He died in the rectory at St.
Anthony's Church, where he was pastor.
The cause of death was cancer, said Sandra Ruiz Butter, who took over Father Banome's duties as acting director of the Tremont Commonwealth Council in June when his illness worsened.


Humphries's Status Still Uncertain
Chargers quarterback STAN HUMPHRIES, who suffered a dislocated left shoulder in the regular season's finale, took his normal number of snaps in practice yesterday but it is not certain if he will start Saturday's home playoff game against Kansas City. (AP)


3 Suspected in Attacks
A New York City Housing Police official said last night that a series of sex crimes and robberies in the Sumner Houses, in Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, over seven months could be the work of three men.
Chief Vincent Pizzo said that on Monday, a man forced two girls, 8 and 10, from the elevator to the roof, where they were sexually assaulted.
And since June 15, four women have been reported raped and six people robbed in the project.
The assailants were armed with knives, though they sometimes warned that they had guns.


Fidelity Medical reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


Leaking Oil Tanks: An Unseen Hazard
EVERY year, thousands of people convert their home heating systems from oil to natural gas, but environmentalists and government officials say that if they leave the old tanks in place, they are creating the potential for serious pollution problems.
Tanks in basements are usually removed because they take up so much room.
A 275-gallon tank, for example, would make more than ample space for a washing machine.
The larger tanks that are buried under the front lawn, however, are mostly forgotten, waiting to rust away and leak.
Most states do not regulate tanks under 1,000 gallons in size, so the extent of the problem is unknown.


Alex Quaison-Sackey, Ghanaian Official, 68
Alex Quaison-Sackey, the first diplomat from a black African nation to serve as President of the General Assembly of the United Nations, died Monday at Korie Bu Hospital in Accra, Ghana.
He was 68 and lived in Accra.
Mr.
Quaison-Sackey died of a pulmonary embolism, said a son, Dr.
Egya Quaison-Sackey of Baltimore.


Corrections
An obituary on Dec. 22 about Rosel H. Hyde, a former chairman of the Federal Communications Commission who died on Dec. 19, misstated the number of years he headed the commission.
He was chairman from 1953 to 1954 and again from 1966 to 1969; the service was not continuous.


HINDU PARTY TALKS OF TYING UP INDIA
Riding a tide of Hindu nationalism, India's Hindu fundamentalist opposition party has decided to instigate months of nationwide strikes, demonstrations and political disruption in an effort to paralyze the Government and force elections.
The decision, made in the last week by the Bharatiya Janata Party, comes in the wake of the destruction by Hindu militants early this month of a 16th-century mosque and then a week of sectarian violence that left more than 1,200 dead across the country.
The ferment has produced a swell of public support for the party's aggressive Hindu nationalism.


Super Rite Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 28


Hepatitis C May Be Hidden Epidemic, Studies Show
In a finding that has surprised medical scientists, a new study shows that once a person is infected with the hepatitis C virus, which causes the most common form of viral hepatitis in the United States, the virus remains in the blood for years, even when there are no signs or symptoms of liver inflammation.
In contrast, just a small portion of people infected with hepatitis B, which also causes hepatitis, go on to become chronic carriers.


Critic's Notebook; The Line Between Dramas And Lies
Television's current Amy Fisher Film Festival can be evaluated on several levels, not least the one that raises questions about liars and lies.
The three slapdash docudramas, one each for ABC, CBS and NBC, are indeed instantly disposable programs.
But far less dismissible is the spectacle of commercial television pouncing feverishly and in some instances recklessly on the story of a 17-year-old Long Island girl who shot and disabled the wife of the man she said was her lover for over a year.
Ratings, of course, are at the heart of the matter.
And no network has yet gone broke overestimating its audience's appetite for sleaze.
Monday's broadcast of NBC's "Amy Fisher: My Story" was one of the highest-rated television movies this season, second only to the two parts of "The Jacksons: An American Dream" on ABC.
Sunday at 9 P.M., CBS's "Casualties of Love: The 'Long Island Lolita' Story" will go head to head against "The Amy Fisher Story" on ABC.


Sports of The Times; The Search For What Was Missing
DOWNSTAIRS, outside the Giants' locker room, Ray Handley's parking space was as empty as his two seasons as coach.
Upstairs, behind a batch of microphones in the media lounge, George Young mentioned that he had a "list of candidates" to succeed Handley.
Other than that, the Giants' general manager wasn't about to get specific.
"I'm still looking for a guy with thick skin, who's somewhat maladjusted," Young was saying now with a sly smile.
"Someone who's a bit of a masochist because that's what the job is."


Cimarron Petroleum reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


New Director at the Joyce
Linda Shelton has been appointed executive director of the Joyce Theater, effective Jan. 11.
Ms.
Shelton, who is general manager of the Joffrey Ballet, served as manager of the Twyla Tharp Dance Foundation from 1983 to 1988 and later worked in administrative jobs at International Production Associates and Entertainment Corporation.


Western Star reports earnings for Year to Oct 31


Gardenia Memorial
A memorial service for the actor Vincent Gardenia is to be held on Monday at noon at the Promenade Theater, Broadway and 76th Street.
Mr.
Gardenia, who was 71, died on Dec. 9 in Philadelphia while touring with the play "Breaking Legs," which opened in New York at the Promenade in May 1991.


In India, Misery and Corruption Fuel Violence
To the Editor:
"Time to Undo Damage of Indian Partition" (letter, Dec. 16) fuels the fires of hatred consuming India, an impoverished country torn by ethnic and religious conflict and civil war in three major states.
The last thing India needs is to resurrect pan-Indian theories calling for annexation of Pakistan and Bangladesh to create the Mother India of Hindu mythology.


With Arms Accord Ready, Bush Embarks on a Final Foreign Trip


British Phone Plans One-Month Rate Cut
BT, formerly known as British Telecommunications P.L.C., plans to mark the Jan. 1 unification of European markets by giving its customers a nearly 23 percent one-month price cut for calls to many countries on the Continent.
It is a move that BT's European counterparts, all government-owned and averse to lower prices, are unlikely to match.
BT said yesterday that starting at midnight tonight a four-minute call to 20 countries, including France, Germany and Italy, will cost the equivalent of $1.50, down from $1.94.
The offer will end Jan. 31 and applies to what the company calls its "cheap rate" periods, weekdays 8 P.M. to 8 A.M. and on weekends.


Skating Rink Thrives As Fads Come and Go
AS a group of teen-age girls raced by, shrieking with delight, Jonathan Vining, 5, gingerly took his first steps onto the classic wooden roller-skating rink, clutching the railing.
But before long, Jonathan was venturing out, grinning broadly with each tumble onto the floor -- knee and elbow pads helping to absorb the shock.


Fearless Forecasts
"There is no reason for any individual to have a computer in their home."


Argentine's Art Delivers Ecological Messages
In a studio on a quiet street here, there are striking paintings of the giant Amazonian anteater; Argentina's national tree, the ombu; lime-green dolphins, and upside-down maps of South America with rivers the only boundary demarcations and flowing blood red.
But the studio's owner, Nicolas Garcia Uriburu, Argentina's most noted environmental artist, has employed much larger canvases to convey his artistic message.
Last fall, entering an inlet of water in the Buenos Aires port in an inflatable speedboat, he began dumping brick-red powder into the coffee-colored water, which immediately became laced with streaks of fluorescent green.
The fountain in the middle of the inlet soon lifted the colored water, sending jets of green into the sky.


No Headline
Back in the days of Ebenezer Scrooge, people were forced to work through the holidays, but as societies become more affluent, workers expect time off. -- MARTIN N. BAILEY, productivity expert at the Brookings Institution.  [ B2:1. ]


Market Place; Banner '92 Ends in Burst of Investment in Stocks
The mutual fund industry is ending its best year ever with a buoyant December, fund executives said yesterday, and one poll of fund buyers shows more buying interest now than at any time in the last three years.
The reports of strong sales in December, in stock mutual funds and particularly in sales of municipal bond funds, came as the Investment Company Institute reported that sales of stock funds set a record in November, with $9.9 billion pouring into such funds.


Ringing in the New Year
CELEBRATIONS IN MANHATTAN TIMES SQUARE The lighted ball will drop at the stroke of midnight.
This year's ceremony also includes a light show, 3,000 pounds of confetti and 75,000 wishes from city school children being dropped from 13 buildings in the area.
The celebration will be broadcast on six television channels.


In India, Misery and Corruption Fuel Violence; Kashmiri Activist Dead
To the Editor:
On Dec. 5, the day before the attack on the Ayodhya mosque by the forces of Hindu bigotry and spurious nationalism in India, Hriday Nath Wanchoo was shot dead in Srinagar, Kashmir, by three unidentified gunmen.
Mr.
Wanchoo, the most important human rights activist in Kashmir, devoted all his time to documenting human-rights violations committed by Indian security forces.


I.B.M. Plans a Campaign To Give Its Image a Boost
Stung by critical press accounts of the most difficult business year in its history, I.B.M. will run advertisements that try to communicate directly to its customers the company's self-image as a leaner, more responsive computer giant.
Beginning today in The Wall Street Journal and following in The New York Times on Sunday and in 10 other publications on Monday, the computer maker will run a two-page advertisement that tries to answer the question "What's really going on at I.B.M.?"


Leonard Jacobson, Architect Affiliated With Pei, Dies at 71
Leonard Jacobson, an architect who worked with I. M. Pei on some of the most important museum projects of this century, died on Saturday at his home in Briarcliff Manor, N.Y.
He was 71 years old.
His office, Pei Cobb Freed &amp; Partners, said he died of a heart attack.


Books of The Times; 2 Kinds of Subversives Inside Czechoslovakia
On the Sky's Clayey Bottom Sketches and Happenings From the Years of Silence By Zdenek Urbanek Translated by William Harkins. 232 pages.
Four Walls Eight Windows. $17.95.
Truck Stop Rainbows By Iva Pekarkova Translated by David Powelstock. 279 pages.
Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $22.
No wonder the Communist regime in Czechoslovakia wouldn't allow the quietly subversive short stories in Zdenek Urbanek's "On the Sky's Clayey Bottom" to be published before the Velvet Revolution unbound the printing presses a few years ago.
A character in one of the stories, "The Vedantist," says: "I'm amazed at how easily our people give in. Churchill was right when he said that 5 percent of Czechs are scoundrels and 95 percent cowards. But maybe it's all planned that way. Everything that surrounds us: where we live, people, including the people among whom we live -- all that is our karma. Our destiny, you understand, according to Hindu philosophy. The total repayment for all the acts we've committed in our past lives."


In India, Misery and Corruption Fuel Violence; New Delhi Steps In
To the Editor:
Re "Hindu Militants Destroy Mosque Setting Off a New Crisis in India" (front page, Dec. 7):


Money Market Funds' Yields Rise on Seasonal Factors
Yields offered by tax-exempt and taxable money market funds were higher in the latest week, as seasonal factors continued to exert upward pressures.
In its most recent survey, IBC/ Donoghue's Money Fund Report showed tax-exempt yields sharply higher for the week that ended on Tuesday.
Analysts say that by the end of the year, $10 billion to $15 billion of municipal bonds will have been called.
In the new year, however, tax-exempt yields are expected to fall back.


St. John's Sets an Ambush But Kentucky Avoids the Trap
Deep into the second half, Kentucky found itself in a dog fight with a team that had lost to Fordham and barely beaten Hofstra.
Well, homecomings sometimes are not as triumphant as people imagine they will be.
Rick Pitino's Kentucky Wildcats did wind up beating St.
John's last night at Madison Square Garden, 86-77, to win the E.C.A.C.
Holiday Festival, but it was every bit the struggle that Jamaal Mashburn's 1 for 13 shooting would suggest.
The Redmen trailed by only 5 points, 75-70, with 3 minutes 58 seconds left in the game.


Wooden, but With Grace
IN the coastal town of Westport, Mass., Rosanne Somerson designs furniture that is as organic looking as the acres of cornfields outside her studio.
Ms.
Somerson is a graduate of the Rhode Island School of Design and the acting head of its graduate program in furniture design.
She is having a solo show at the Peter Joseph Gallery, 745 Fifth Avenue (near 58th Street), from Jan. 21 through Feb. 27.
Prices for her furniture range from about $10,000 to $45,000.
The sideboard above, about $40,000, will be included in the show.
Like Ms.
Somerson's other work, it is made of exotic woods: bleached rift oak (a domestic American wood) and curly purpleheart (from Africa and, yes, purple).
The hardware and wood panels are framed in textured copper leaf.
A large bowl on top, shaped somewhat like a canoe, has a presentation tray inside it, and the chest contains shelves, drawers, a display area and concealed cubbyholes, revealing Ms.
Somerson's penchant for "mysterious places."


