Consumers Gain Back Some Confidence
Consumers turned markedly more optimistic in March.
The Conference Board said yesterday that its consumer confidence index jumped to 54, from 47.3 in February, its biggest gain in a year.
The rebound in the closely watched Conference Board measure matches a sharp rise, reported two weeks ago, in the University of Michigan's consumer sentiment index for the first half of the month.
Nonetheless, the new polling results cheered stock investors early in the day, lifting the Dow Jones industrial average more than 20 points before other factors prompted prices to slip back.


Mylex Corp.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Falcon Cable Systems Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Sports of The Times; Will Hockey Shoot Itself In the Skate?
GEE, I hope the hockey players and their obtuse 19th-century owners do not go out today, at a time of year when sports fans are so vulnerable to emptiness and boredom, with nothing else to talk about.
Except, except, except, the Mets, who are currently on a strike of their own, refusing to talk with any reporters.


Review/Television; The Last Days of 'Edge' on PBS
If you haven't yet caught "Edge," public television's monthly pop-culture magazine, try doing it tonight at 9 on Channel 13.
There's not much time left.
A co-production of WNET and the BBC, "Edge" will have only one more show to go, on May 13, and then it's electronic-graveyard time.
Life on public television, never easy, seems to be getting almost impossible these days.
Any broadcaster will admit all too readily that television news magazines demand considerable time to develop a personality and an audience.
CBS's "60 Minutes" was several years old before it struck top-10 pay dirt.
More recently, ABC's "Prime Time Live" was nearly hooted off the air before settling into its current comfortable niche.
NBC has just announced a 52-week commitment to its latest magazine effort, "Dateline NBC," starring Jane Pauley.
Overnight successes just don't happen in this genre.


I.C.H. Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


First City Trustco reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Fate Gets Ready to Play Another Trick on the Rangers
If a strike does not ruin these Stanley Cup playoffs for the Rangers, then it will be something else.
Something outrageous, and cruel.
A puck will hit Mark Messier in the ankle during practice at Rye Playland.
He will be out for, say, two months.


Ralph E. Shikes Is Dead at 79; Publisher, Editor and Art Writer
Ralph E. Shikes, a publisher, an editor and the author of several books on art, died on Saturday at Calvary Hospital in the Bronx.
He was 79 years old and had homes in Manhattan and Lakeville, Conn.
He died of cancer, said his wife, Ruth.


U.S. Arrests 7 in Plot to Sell Ex-Soviet Arms to Iraq
In what American officials described as a strike against a growing worldwide arms bazaar in the former Eastern bloc, an elaborate sting operation has led to the arrests of six former high-ranking Polish Government officials and a California arms dealer accused of plotting to sell nearly $100 million in high-powered rifles and anti-aircraft missiles to Iraq.
The investigation, featuring a team of Government agents posing as representatives of the Iraqi Government, uncovered a smuggling ring that maintained it had access to caches of weapons the Soviet Army had stored in Poland, Germany and Czechoslovakia, according to court records and United States law enforcement officials.


The Lampoon Moves West
The National Lampoon has closed its New York office, dismissed its staff and moved the magazine to the Los Angeles offices of its parent, J2 Communications, a spokesman for J2 said yesterday.
"We'll staff up out here," said Duncan Murray, vice president of marketing for J-2, a producer and distributor of home video programs, which acquired the 22-year-old humor magazine in 1990.


Comcoa Inc. reports earnings for Year to Jan 26


A Wave of Waivers
Pitcher LES LANCASTER of the Chicago Cubs was among 10 players placed on unconditional release waivers yesterday and third baseman KEVIN SEITZER signed with Milwaukee just hours after clearing waivers.
Yesterday was the final day for major league teams to release players with nonguaranteed contracts without paying their full 1992 salaries.
Lancaster, who was signed at $1.1 million, was the fourth player with a million-dollar contract let go during spring training, joining Seitzer, pitcher BILL LANDRUM and shortstop ALVARO ESPINOZA.


President, Co-Founder Of Abaxis Resigns Post
Abaxis Inc., a medical devices company trying to develop a portable blood analyzer to give doctors data in minutes instead of days, said yesterday that its president and chief executive, Richard K. Leute, had resigned and been replaced by the company's chairman, Gary H. Stroy.
Mr.
Leute, who helped to found the company, resigned last Friday as an officer and director because of "personal reasons," Mr.
Stroy said.
Mr.
Leute, 54 years old, remains a consultant to the company, which is based in Mountain View, Calif.
Mr.
Stroy, 49, remains chairman.


Carena Developments reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Clinton Gas Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Book Notes
'Mao II' a Winner
"Mao II," Don DeLillo's dark novel positing that terrorists have supplanted writers as the shapers of the American psyche, has won the 1992 PEN/Faulkner Award for Fiction.
The 12th annual award was announced yesterday by Robert Stone, chairman of the PEN/Faulkner Foundation in Washington.


The Candidates On Television
Where voters can find the Presidential candidates and hear their views on television today:
The Cable News Network plans live coverage of portions of foreign policy speeches by Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas about 11 A.M. and by President Bush.
Plans for the President's speech are not firm.
The two speeches will be featured on CNN's "Inside Politics '92" at 4:30 P.M.


Redistricting Must Not Disregard Women
To the Editor:
"Musical Chairs in Congress" (editorial, March 23), on the need for equitable reapportionment of New York City's Congressional districts, omits the lack of fair representation for New York City's women.
Yes, Hispanic citizens, who are about 25 percent of the city's population, make up only 7 percent of the city's Congressional delegation.
However, though women make up more than 50 percent of the city's population, there is only one woman (from Staten Island) in the entire city delegation of 14 -- the same 7 percent.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-15  I.M.F. BACKS RUSSIAN AID PLAN
The International Monetary Fund endorsed Russia's economic plan, paving the way for President Yeltsin's Government to receive up to $4 billion of aid over the next year and beginning early in May.
A1  VICTORY FOR YELTSIN
In a political victory for Yeltsin, 18 of 20 main subdivisions signed a federal treaty that will form the basis of a post-Soviet country.
A8  U.N.
VOTES LIBYAN SANCTIONS
The Security Council voted to ban air travel and arms sales to Libya in two weeks, as well as other sanctions, unless Colonel Qaddafi's Government surrendered agents implicated in the bombings of a Pan Am flight over Scotland in 1988 and a French airliner over sub-Saharan Africa the following year.
A1  FURTHER CHAOS SEEN FOR QADDAFI
Sanctions would worsen the indecision and disorganization that have been the hallmarks of Qaddafi's 23-year rule, Arab diplomats say.
A12  ONLY LIBYA TO BLAME, U.S.
SAYS
U.S. investigators say physical evidence in the bombing of Pan Am 103 points to Libya alone as responsible for the terrorist attack.
A12  GERMAN CABINET MEMBER QUITS
The German Defense Minister, an ally of Chancellor Helmut Kohl's, resigned after a scandal over arms shipments to Turkey.
A3  SPAIN AND THE JEWS
In a poignant ceremony in the Madrid synagogue, President Herzog of Israel and King Juan Carlos of Spain prayed together, symbolizing their people's reconciliation and marking the 500th anniversary of the explusion of Jews from Spain under the pressure of the Inquisition.
A14  MEXICAN POLICE AND HUMAN RIGHTS
In a case that international human rights groups consider a test of Mexico's commitment to end abuse by the police, the Government human rights agency has called on the Attorney General to arrest 13 federal agents for murder.
A3  Noj Journal: Albania village a symbol of rage over collectivism.
A4  British editors infuse their views into the news.
A6  An Ulster Catholic hopes British vote will push moves for peace.
A7  U.S. gives its nod toward Romania's moves to democracy.
A11  Macedonia is at brink of independence after 1,400 years.
A15  National A16-23, B8  BIG DESEGREGATION RULING
The Supreme Court gave hundreds of formerly segregated school districts a potential new legal tool for returning to local control after decades of operating under Federal court supervision.
A1
News analysis: The ruling left guessing about the impact.  B9
The Justices rejected Montana's reapportionment challenge.
B8  CLINTON AND BROWN ASSURE CITIES
In a meeting at Gracie Mansion in New York, the Democratic Presidential contenders promised more than a dozen of the nation's mayors increased help to urban areas.
A1
In New York, Clinton has a "Southern problem." A20
News analysis: Why Clinton wants to debate.  A21
Campaign Trail: Cuomo's latest Freudian slip.  A20  FOR CLINTON, A TENUOUS MAJORITY
Governor Clinton's campaign has now gained the support of a bare majority of Democrats around the country, according to a New York Times/CBS News Poll, which also found a continuing cloud of reservations about him.
A1
In Clinton's Arkansas, schools have improved but still lag.  A22
Brown was a substantial winner in the Vermont caucuses.
A22  BATTLE OVER PERQUISITES GROWS
A week after President Bush excoriated Congress as unaccountable and beholden to special interests, a House subcommittee assailed the White House for refusing to disclose what it costs Mr.
Bush and his aides to travel around the world aboard Air Force One and other Federal aircraft.
A23
A new audit at the House post office found continuing problems.
A23  TURN IN IRAN-CONTRA INQUIRY
Iran-contra prosecutors have interviewed senior Pentagon officials from the Reagan Administration in recent weeks, examining for the first time what role the military may have had in the affair.
A19  PROTECTION AGAINST THE HEAVENS
A NASA team called for an international effort to save Earth by deflecting any killer asteroid headed for the planet.
A18  TOUGHER LICENSING OF TRUCKERS
A trucking industry already short of drivers is losing thousands more of them as of today, the deadline for drivers of big rigs to get new licenses with stricter requirements.
A16  RACE SURFACES AT BEATING TRIAL
A prosecutor unexpectedly introduced the issue of race at the trial of four white police officers accused of assaulting a black motorist in Los Angeles.
A16  Education Page B9  After many successes, Tufts's president is stepping down.
Metropolitan Digest, B1 CLOSE TO A BUDGET
Using a time-honored method for closing a budget deal, state leaders today produced more money for schools and for New York City with an array of last-minute fiscal maneuvers that all but guaranteed the swift conclusion of marathon budget negotiations.
A1  CHANGING UNDERWORLD GUARD
If John Gotti symbolizes organized crime's powerful past and its beleaguered present, Chen I. Chung, who the authorities portray as a leader of a Queens-based Asian-American gang called the Green Dragons, may represent its future.
Both men are on trial now in Brooklyn.
A1  Business Digest, D1  The Living Section C1-10
Same old dinner?
That's fine.C1  Adventure shapes the menu C1  Arts/Entertainment C14-20  Seville Expo outlines its performance plans.
C15  Art: Eakins with context.
C15  Music: Medieval music of Christians and Jews.
C15  Oscars broadcast.
C15  Sports B10-15  Basketball: N.B.A. won't discipline Jordan.
B12  Boxing: Tyson loses bid to leave prison.
B11  Basketball: Bulls snap Knick streak.
B11  Hockey: Curse of the Rangers.
B11  Health Page C12  Personal Health: Avoiding unnecessary postoperative pain  Obituaries D25  Ralph E. Shikes, art writer  Tom Kahn, leader in labor and rights movements  Editorials/Op-Ed A24-25  Editorials A24  Borrow more?
Yes, to grow.
Double trouble for the Kurds.
High salaries for health.
Topics: Oscar night.
Letters A24  Anna Quindlen: Just say yes.
A25  Kosta Tsipis: Offshore threat -- cruise missiles.
A25  Sandra M. Gilbert and Susan Gubar: A simple bedtime story.
A25


'Free' Macedonia Faces Hostile World
In the tumult that has destroyed Yugoslavia, Macedonia has defied its bitter history of conflict by remaining at peace.
For 1,400 years, the Slavic people who live here in one of the most jealously eyed stretches of territory in the Balkans have had a host of distant conquerors.
A strategic crossroads on the land routes that connect the Adriatic to the Black Sea, and Europe to the Middle East, Macedonia was a dominion of the Serbs, of the Ottoman Turks, and of the Nazis in World War II, among others, before it became a republic of Communist Yugoslavia in 1944.


Oscar Won by Documentary Gives G.E. Boycotters a Lift
Organizers of an effort to boycott products of the General Electric Company because of its involvment in the nuclear weapons business said yesterday that they had received a big lift on Monday night when "Deadly Deception," a film about the subject, won an Oscar for best documentary short subject.
The group, Infact, based in Boston, has produced 5,000 copies of the film on videotape since it was released in June 1991 and has helped arrange a 50-city tour of commercial theaters in which "Deadly Deception" is shown with another documentary, "Building Bombs," about a Government nuclear bomb factory in South Carolina.


Issues in N.H.L. Labor Face-Off
Free Agency
Originally, the players said it was their key issue, and they demanded major reforms.
Now, they seem ready to give up most of their requests for change and have agreed to modest alterations in the current formula, not all of them in their favor.
Group I players, who are under the age of 24 or have played fewer than five years professionally, would still be able to solicit offers from other teams.
But the former team would have the right to match any offer, a new provision that favors the owners.
If the teams don't agree on a transfer of players to replace the departed player, they submit proposals to an arbitrator, who decides, as has been the case in previous years.


In Surprise, Race Issue Is Raised in Beating Trial
A prosecutor today unexpectedly introduced the issue of race at the Rodney G. King beating trial, accusing one of four white Los Angeles police officers charged with assaulting Mr.
King with referring to black people as gorillas.
The prosecutor, Terry L. White, raised the subject in a brief hearing before his cross-examination of Officer Laurence M. Powell, the man who struck most of the blows against Mr.
King on March 3, 1991.


Fumes Decision Hurts Petroleum Industry
To the Editor:
"President Bush told business executives," you report (front page, March 14), "that the Government would not require automobile manufacturers to install pollution-control devices on new cars to capture gasoline fumes released into the atmosphere during refueling."
This extremely distressing decision defies economics, technical facts, efficient environmental protection and the clear intention of Congress.
It can only make things worse for the economically strained United States petroleum industry, which has lost more than 400,000 jobs in the last decade, four times that of the automobile industry.


Canada Sets Gradual End To Curbs on Foreign Beer
Under strong American trade pressure, the Canadian Government announced today that it would end discrimination against imports of foreign beer over the next three years.
The Government also said it would dismantle internal restrictions on the brands of beer that can be sold in each province.


WINE TALK
"IT'S out here somewhere," the driver said, peering through the rain at the muddy dirt road.
All we could see, except for the downs undulating off into the early spring mist, were fat Herefords gazing impassively at the sight of a taxi pretending to be a Land Rover.
"Ah, there it is!" the driver exclaimed, pointing down into a hollow so deep that the farm buildings in it were hidden by the slope dropping away from the side of the road.
Cautiously, we began our descent.
We had found Breaky Bottom.


Fresenius USA reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Applied Power reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Theater in Review
The White Bear  Ubu Repertory 15 West 28th Street Manhattan Through Sunday By Daniel Besnehard; translated by Stephen J. Vogel; directed by Peter Muste; set by John Brown; lighting, Greg MacPherson; costumes, Carol Ann Pelletier; sound, Phil Lee and David Lawson; production stage manager, David Waggett.
Presented by Ubu Repertory Theater, Francoise Kourilsky, artistic director.
WITH: Peter Bretz, Kathryn Rossetter and Nicolette Vajtay.
Love at sea, in more ways than one, is the theme of "The White Bear" by Daniel Besnehard, the second of five new French plays in translation being showcased in a spring festival at the Ubu Repertory Theater.


Behind the Counter; Learning Hard Lessons at the Mall
Janice V. Matte does not complain, except to mention that if her husband still had his management job, she would probably be at home tending her garden on their two acres in Redding.
Instead, at 54 years old, she is out on J. C. Penney's sales floor at the Danbury Fair Mall from Saturday to Wednesday every week, selling draperies for other people's windows.
It is her husband, Larry, who hints at their disappointment since he was caught in the first wave of layoffs at the United Technologies Corporation.


Corrections
An article yesterday about Bill Clinton's record as governor of Arkansas misstated his salary.
It is $35,000 a year.
A proposal to increase it to $60,000, and to raise the salaries of other state officials has been approved by the state Legislature and the Governor.
It will be put to the voters on a ballot in November.
The article also misstated the date that his first term in office began.
It was 1979 not 1980.


Where Adventure Shapes the Menu
LET the faint of stomach get their food kicks from the season's first shad roe or soft-shelled crabs.
Let them chart vicarious adventure by tasting blackened alligator tail or sea urchin mousse at the very best restaurants.
To members of the Explorers Club, this is lite adventure.
The club's 3,000 members from around the world live to scale mountains or navigate the Amazon, to walk on the Moon or on the ocean floor, and they are as partial to uncharted gastronomic territory as they are to unmapped geography.
Delectables like stir-fried grubs, paillard of penguin and braised tiger tidbits are de rigueur at an Explorers Club banquet.


Sanctions on Libya Likely To Fuel Qaddafi's Chaos
The United Nations sanctions imposed on Libya today appear likely to worsen the indecision and disorganization that are already hallmarks of Col.
Muammar el-Qaddafi's 23-year rule.
But even though the stepped-up pressure may embolden competing factions within the Libyan Government in pursuing their divergent agendas, it is unclear whether the sanctions will bring about the kind of internal collision that the West appears to hope for as a prelude to the fall of Colonel Qaddafi.


Acquisition by Digital Reinforces Role of PC
The Digital Equipment Corporation said yesterday that it had acquired 800 Software Inc., a personal- computer software distributor in Berkeley, Calif.
The acquisition is another indication of Digital's commitment to becoming a large player in the direct-mail personal computer business.
Steven D. Brown, co-founder and chief executive of the privately held 800 Software, said Digital had approached him last fall about the acquisition.
Neither he nor Digital would disclose the financial terms of the agreement, but he said that 800 Software would become a subsidiary of Digital and that it would keep the same management team and strategy.


Can Ninja Turtle Owner Rescue Orion Pictures?
Billy Crystal, the host of the Academy Awards, summed up the financial plight of Orion Pictures on Monday evening when he joked that the company, whose bankruptcy has coincided with a string of Oscars, "can't afford another hit."
Jonathan Demme, the Oscar-winning director of "Silence of the Lambs," put it a little more sadly: "I know everyone feels the incredible irony of what's happened to Orion."


It Was Libya, U.S. Insists. Syria? Iran? Probably Not.
United States investigators insist that the evidence in the bombing of Pan American Flight 103 points so far to Libya, and only Libya.
But they acknowledge that a telling string of coincidence and circumstance continues to suggest that Iran and perhaps Syria may have played central roles.
And they strongly deny that Iran or Syria have been excluded from their inquiry for political or diplomatic reasons.
The Detonator
Libya was first tied to the Pan Am bombing in 1990, when investigators in Scotland found a fragment of the detonator that triggered the plastic explosive that destroyed the Pan Am 747 jet, killing 270.
That fragment was identical to 10 detonators that had been seized from Libyan agents in Senegal in early 1988, 10 months before the Pan Am bombing.


N.B.A. Won't Discipline Bulls' Jordan
After meeting with Michael Jordan in New York yesterday, Commissioner David Stern said the National Basketball Association had found no cause for disciplining the Chicago Bulls' star following an investigation into recent reports linking him to high-stakes wagering on golf matches and poker games in Hilton Head, S.C., where Jordan has a vacation home.
Saying there was "no evidence that Michael has ever gambled on N.B.A. games," Stern reported that Jordan understood "the gravity of the situation" and would be more careful about his associations.
Stern added that Jordan was not under investigation by any law enforecement agency.


Healthplex Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Conner's 4th in a Row Gives Him Overall Lead
Dennis Conner, who last month looked as if he had lost his habit of winning America's Cup races, has rediscovered his old ways.
Today, in the trials for prospective cup defenders, Conner's Stars &amp; Stripes beat America3, one of Bill Koch's two contenders, by 45 seconds.
It was the fourth time in a row that Conner had whipped a Koch boat here.
In the final two matches of the last round of defender-trial races, Conner beat America3 and Defiant, one of Koch's older yachts.
On Saturday, the first day of this round, in effect the defenders' semifinals, Conner defeated Kanza, Koch's newest cup yacht.


House S.&amp; L. Proposal Has No New Financing
Unable to persuade a majority of the House to support a bill authorizing another $25 billion for the sale of savings and loan institutions taken over by the Government, the top Democrat and Republican on the Banking Committee introduced a much more modest bill this afternoon.
The new plan includes no new money but, like the original bill, would erase an existing ban on spending after midnight tonight the $17 billion already authorized for the bailout and not already disbursed.
The $17 billion will allow the sales to continue through next fall and possibly past the elections in November.


Cellular Communications reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Chrysler Opens Plant, Makes a Point
The Chrysler Corporation officially opened its Jefferson Avenue North plant today in the heart of this depressed city, bucking the conventional wisdom of the auto industry.
While Japanese auto makers were settling in the rural mid-South during the 1980's, hoping to avoid unions, urban problems and the costs associated with an older work force, Chrysler embraced all of them.
It forged ahead with a 1.75-million-square-foot building on the east side of Detroit that will employ up to 2,100 workers when it reaches full production of Jeep Grand Cherokee utility vehicles.
The total cost of developing the new car and constructing the assembly plant is $1.2 billion.


Simms to Return to Giants After Bucs Sign DeBerg
Phil Simms's last hope for a trade disappeared last night when the Tampa Bay Buccaneers signed 38-year-old Steve DeBerg, starting his 16th season as a National Football League quarterback.
It means that Simms, who will turn 37 this season, will return to the Giants as the backup quarterback behind Jeff Hostetler, who was his backup until last year.
Vince Testaverde, the Bucs' quarterback for five years, has played erratically, and the Bucs were hoping to sign Simms to challenge for the job.
But Simms was one of the 37 players the Giants protected from Plan B free agency.
Even though his contract has expired, he is a restricted free agent, and the Giants can keep him by matching an offer from another team.


Youth Sought In 5 Slayings Is Arrested
The search for the suspect in the killings of five people in Queens ended yesterday 300 miles away in Rochester where a teen-ager was arrested in the slayings of three more people in a local crack house, the police said.
The suspect, Etheridge Pierce Jr., 17 years old, was arrested Monday night in Rochester and charged with the killings of two women and a man in a suspected drug house that had been under police investigation for a couple of months, the police in Rochester said.


Double Trouble for the Kurds
When Iraq's powerful, modern army wages high-tech war against overmatched Kurdish guerrillas, killing and uprooting innocent civilian populations, Americans know what to call it.
Ugly repression, verging perhaps on genocide.
What then should Americans think when Turkish forces attack Kurds in southeastern Turkey?
Or when Turkish planes bomb Iraqi Kurdish areas, as they have at least five times in the past month?


Protests Mar Candidates' Debate
The debate of Presidential candidates last night was marred by protests inside and outside the hall.
Larry Agran, the former Mayor of Irvine, Calif., who has repeatedly complained that his candidacy for the Democratic nomination is being ignored by the news media, was arrested after demanding to be included in the debate, the police said.


Borrow More? Yes, to Grow
How's this for spit-in-your-eye logic?
Two weeks ago the Congressional Budget Office calculated that the already dismaying Federal deficit would rise this year by an alarming amount.
Yet in the face of that, a group of 100 economists, including six Nobel laureates, calls on Congress to borrow billions more.
It may sound screwy, but in fact the call makes compelling economic sense.
Yes, the stratospheric deficit needs to be controlled.
But there are some things more important than reducing it quickly.
What matters is less the size of the deficit than what the borrowed money is used to pay for.
That's why the economists call for investing in infrastructure and education.


U.S. GAINS PLEDGE ON EX-SOVIET ARMS
The former Soviet republics with battlefield nuclear weapons told the United States today that all of the weapons would be transferred to Russia by July 1, senior Defense Department officials said.
The pledges, which followed threats from Ukraine that it was suspending transfers of its nuclear weapons, came in a series of private meetings Defense Secretary Dick Cheney held today at NATO headquarters with senior defense officials from Russia, Ukraine and Belarus.


Quotation of the Day
"It may seem odd to choose the anniversary of a separation for a meeting of such profound significance. But the history of all peoples and, without doubt, that of Spain, is full of lights and shadows." -- KING JUAN CARLOS.  [ A14:1. ]


By Slim Margin, Hoboken Rejects Waterfront Plan
After two referendums and weeks of fierce debate, residents here today rejected a waterfront redevelopment plan with the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey that supporters called a financial boon and opponents described as a monstrosity.
Now the future of the historic waterfront, which docked the world's first steamboat and once teemed with 10,000 jobs, is again an open question.


Battleship Missouri Is Decommissioned -- Again


New Coach at Oregon
JERRY GREEN, assistant coach at Kansas for the last four seasons, was named head basketball coach at Oregon yesterday.
Green, 49 years old, was previously head coach at North Carolina-Asheville, where he was 150-108 in nine seasons.
He was the No. 1 assistant to ROY WILLIAMS at Kansas and was among the Jayhawks' chief recruiters.
Green succeeds DON MONSON, 58, dismissed March 18 after Oregon finished the season 6-21, the Ducks' worst record in 21 years. (AP)


Executive at Y. &amp; R. Quits in New York
Young &amp; Rubicam said yesterday that Steven J. Farella, the executive vice president and media director at Young &amp; Rubicam New York, had left the agency "by mutual agreement."
An agency spokesman said that the departure of Mr.
Farella, who joined Y. &amp; R.'s New York office in June, was effective immediately.
Mr.
Farella, who had been executive vice president and director of corporate media services at Wells Rich Greene BBDP in New York, could not be reached for comment.


The Debate On Insurance Rages On In Trenton
Tapping into the public's anger over high car-insurance rates, Jim Florio made auto insurance reform one of the major themes of his successful campaign for governor in 1989.
Now, a year and a half after Mr.
Florio introduced sweeping changes in the state's automobile insurance law, the administration is claiming progress, the largest insurer in the state says it is leaving in a huff and insuring a car remains as perplexing as ever for millions of drivers.


Therapy in Suicide Case Defended by Psychiatrist
A Harvard Medical School psychiatrist accused of seducing a patient and causing his suicide said today that her treatment of him was "somewhat unconventional." And she insisted that dozens of pages of her handwritten sexual fantasies that were found in his apartment had been obtained illegally when he broke into her office.
Dr.
Margaret Bean-Bayog, an assistant professor of psychiatry at Harvard, said in a written statement that she had developed a "unique" therapy for the patient, Paul Lozano, a student at the medical school.
When "conventional psychotherapy" failed for a year, Dr.
Bean-Bayog said, she put herself in the role of "a benevolent mother who would not abuse him," giving him a stuffed bear, children's books and flashcards with messages directing him to him to think of her as his mother.


CUC International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Pubco Corp.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


John Adams Life Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Envirosource Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Walgreen Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Devcon International reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Biomira Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Goals for Racial Inclusion Elude Latest Crop of Young Doctors
THE nation's new crop of physicians, 14,030 men and women, gathered last Wednesday at 137 medical schools for the anxious moment that would decide much of their future and also give an indication of the future character of American medicine.
It was "match day," the day senior medical students across the nation were handed envelopes telling them where they would go as residents.
The decision is based on a computer match of students' choices with preferences of 695 teaching hospitals.


Prices of Treasury Issues Mixed
Prices of Treasury securities were mixed in light trading and interest rates were little changed yesterday, as most market participants waited for the start of the second quarter to take new positions.
Reaction was fairly muted to a healthy eight-tenths of a percent rise in the Government's index of leading economic indicators and a survey by the Conference Board showing consumer confidence increased in March.


The Pop Life
The two long-awaited new albums by Bruce Springsteen, "Human Touch" and "Lucky Town" (Columbia), officially went on sale across the country at 12:01 A.M. yesterday, and record stores that stayed open for the event reported scenes ranging from midnight madness to something akin to tales from the crypt.
The two HMV stores in Manhattan did "phenomenal" business, said Steve Barrett, the East Coast regional marketing manager for the chain, which heavily promoted the release of the albums.
The chain offered both CD's for $20, or both cassettes for $12 between midnight and 2 A.M., and a total of about 750 fans braved the rain and chill to come out and buy them.


Senate Strongly Backs Transplant Of Tissue From Aborted Fetuses
The Senate voted overwhelmingly today to allow Federal financing of tissue transplants using cells from aborted fetuses.
The 72-to-23 vote was against an amendment offered by Senator Orrin G. Hatch, Republican of Utah, to keep a ban on such financing in effect.
The vote offered a margin wide enough to meet the requirement of having a two-thirds majority to overcome a promised veto by President Bush, something that Congress has not done.


Electrochem Industries Frutarom Ltd.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Jud Stern Wed To Yifat Cohen
Yifat Cohen, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Rachamin Cohen of Tel Aviv, was married yesterday to Dr.
Jud Marshal Stern, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Abraham Stern of New City, N.Y.
Rabbi Eliezer Weiss officiated at the Great Synagogue in Jerusalem.


Mayor Goes to Work -- This Week in the Bronx


Cellular Products reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


A Lost Cause
To The Living Section:
Regarding "In France, Wine and Pate Days Seem Numbered"  [ March 4 ] , alas, yet another great lost cause.
Dr.
Serge Renaud is to be commended for his brave rear-guard action, and his awkward defense is matched only by this wise limerick that dates at least from the indulgent Edwardians: There once was a gourmet of Crediton Who ate pate de foie gras; he spread it on A chocolate biscuit And said, "I'll just risk it." His tomb gives the date that he said it on.
HARVEY GUTHRIE  Mount Hermon, Mass.


Hall Financial Group Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Avon Picks Executive For a Top Sales Post
Avon Products Inc. yesterday named Walker Lewis president of its domestic direct selling business and executive vice president of the company.
Mr.
Lewis fills the position vacated in February by E. V. Goings, who left because of differences in the company strategy.


Trico Products Corp.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Furr's/Bishop's Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 28


Computer Tests Pump More Miles Into Tires
Tire makers have devoted considerable research over the years toward producing a tire that would last longer than what had been the industry standard of about 50,000 miles.
In what may become the new standard, Groupe Michelin S.A. of France, at its research center in Greenville, S.C., recently introduced a tire backed by an 80,000-mile warranty.
The company developed the tire through computer-aided design, creating supercomputer programs to develop and test hundreds of possible designs before building prototypes.
Rather than add new layers of rubber, researchers at Michelin found that small changes in the configuration of the grooves could signficantly enhance the tire's durability.


Corrections
An illustration yesterday in Science Times showing the Earth's interior misstated the depth of the liquid core lying between the solid core and the mantle.
It is 1,400 miles, not 4,580 miles; thus the Earth's diameter is about 7,920 miles.


Ampal-American Israel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Unicorp American Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Court Victory Hailed in District That Won Desegregation Case
For many black and white residents of DeKalb County, the Supreme Court decision today on the school system's progress in eliminating racial discrimination and inequities brought a sense of relief that they need not anticipate extensive busing programs or transfers of their children in the next school year.
As a practical matter, said Melvin Johnson, associate superintendent in the DeKalb County school system, the decision was a victory for the district, whose enrollment is 64 percent black.


Move Against 47th St. Photo
A major creditor of 47th Street Photo Inc., the TransAmerica Commercial Finance Corporation, yesterday filed a motion to have the New York discount photo and electronics chain's Chapter 11 bankruptcy converted to a Chapter 7, which would liquidate the company.
A spokesman for 47th Street Photo said the motion was intended to harrass the company into negotiating a settlement with TransAmerica, a partly secured creditor that is owed $7.2 million.


Breaking Date With Doomsday Rock
A NASA team called yesterday for an international effort to save Earth from killer asteroids.
In the plan, ground-based telescopes would scan the heavens to warn of impending danger as work began on interceptors that would deflect a doomsday rock headed for the planet.


Control of TB Depends on AIDS Testing
To the Editor:
"AIDS Patients, Facing TB, Now Fear Even the Hospital" (front page, March 15) is right on target.
Almost half the cases of the dangerous new wave of drug-resistant tuberculosis have occurred in patients infected with H.I.V., the AIDS virus.
For these patients, with their suppressed immune systems, most of the tests normally used to detect TB are unreliable or misleading.
The early diagnosis of H.I.V. in the individual with tuberculosis is a crucial public health intervention that will have a major impact in trying to limit the spread of TB, but it cannot take place without mandatory reporting and mandatory testing for H.I.V. in patients and in health care workers at hospitals and in other health settings.
H.I.V. is not a reportable disease in the states where most cases of it occur.
Only clinical AIDS -- when the patient becomes sick -- is reportable in all of the 50 states.


American Real Estate Partners reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Helene Curtis Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Mar. 27
Mar. 20
Mar. 29
1992
1992
1991
Gasoline production, daily
6.8
6.9
6.6
Distillate production, daily
2.8
2.7
2.8
Gasoline stocks
222.0
222.6
211.5
Distillate stocks
97.8
101.8
97.6
Crude imports, daily
5.1
5.7
5.1
Product imports, daily
2.1
1.2
2.3
Crude stocks
342.6
344.2
341.5
Crude production, daily
7.3
7.3
7.5
Refinery utilization (%)
84.4
84.4
81.3
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Miscellany
*
Lewis &amp; Gace, Fort Lee, N.J., and McCann-Erickson Worldwide, New York, have formed a global alliance to combine their media resources in the health-care and consumer areas.


Personal Health
AS many patients discover, one of the most distressing aspects of surgery is the often debilitating, humiliating and dehumanizing effect of postoperative pain.
The situations are common.
The nurse responds to a request for further relief with "Your doctor does not want you to have anything stronger" or "You can't get any more pain medication for another two hours." Or the patient who is awakened at night by pain has to wait for hours until the night nurse responds and the medication takes effect.
Or, perhaps worst of all, the patient's intensifying or unrelieved pain is dismissed as imaginary or unavoidable.


With Song in His Heart, Noah Quits Davis Cup
When YANNICK NOAH announced yesterday that he was resigning as the nonplaying captain of the French Davis Cup team, it wasn't because -- as it might appear -- of France's stunning quarterfinal loss to lowly Switzerland over the weekend.
He retired because tennis is simply no longer his primary interest.
Noah said he had made the decision to quit three weeks ago, because he wanted to concentrate on his new singing career.


MCorp reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


500th Anniversary of Jews' Expulsion From Spain Is Observed


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Waived Eric Hetzel, pitcher, for the purpose of giving him his unconditional release.
BOSTON RED SOX -- Waived Dana Kiecker, pitcher, for the purpose of giving him his unconditional release.
Assigned Paul Quantrill, pitcher, and Eric Wedge, catcher, to Pawtucket of the International League.
CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Waived Jerry Browne, infielder; Mike Aldrete, outfielder, and Shawn Hillegas, pitcher, for the purpose of giving them their unconditional releases.
MILWAUKEE BREWERS -- Agreed to terms with Kevin Seitzer, third baseman, on a one-year contract.
Optioned Joe Kmak, catcher, to Denver of the American Association.
Placed Julio Machado, pitcher, on the restricted list.
MINNESOTA TWINS -- Optioned Terry Jorgenson, third baseman; David West, pitcher; and J.T.
Bruett, outfielder, to Portland of the Pacific Coast League.
Sent Bernardo Brito, outfielder, to their minor league camp for reassignment.
Placed Paul Abbott, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list.
TEXAS RANGERS -- Optioned Brian Bohanon, pitcher, to Oklahoma City of the American Association.
TORONTO BLUE JAYS -- Placed Dave Stieb and Mike Timlin, pitchers, on the 15-day disabled list, retroactive to March 27.
Placed Rance Mulliniks, infielder, on the 15-day disabled list, retroactive to March 28.
Optioned Ed Sprague, catcher, to Syracuse of the International League.
National League
CHICAGO CUBS -- Waived Les Lancaster, pitcher, for the purpose of giving him his unconditional release.
CINCINNATI REDS -- Waived Tim Layana, pitcher, for the purpose of giving him his unconditional release.
MONTREAL EXPOS -- Placed Darren Reed, outfielder, on the 15-day disabled list.
Waived George Canale, infielder, for the purpose of giving him his unconditional release.
Optioned Mel Rojas, pitcher, to Indianapolis of the American Association.
PITTSBURGH PIRATES -- Sent John Wehner, third baseman; Carlos Garcia and Jeff Richardson, infielders; Brian Dorsett, catcher, and Rick Reed, pitcher, to their minor league camp for reassignment.
SAN DIEGO PADRES -- Waived Craig Worthington, third baseman, for the purpose of giving him his unconditional release.
SAN FRANCISCO GIANTS -- Agreed to terms with Roger Craig, manager, on a one-year contract extension through the 1993 season.
Placed Mike Benjamin, infielder, on the 15-day disabled list.
Placed Andres Santana, infielder on the 60-day disabled list.
Purchased the contracts of Craig Colbert and Jim McNamara, catchers, from Phoenix of the Pacific Coast League.
Announced that Rafael Quirico, pitcher, has cleared waivers and has been offered back to the New York Yankees.
Waived Eric Gunderson, pitcher, for the purpose of giving him his unconditional release.
Released Rafael Novoa, pitcher.
Basketball  National Basketball Association
HOUSTON ROCKETS -- Removed Hakeem Olajuwon, center, from the suspended list.
Football  National Football League
BUFFALO BILLS -- Signed Eric Fairs, linebacker, and Chris Williams, nose tackle.
HOUSTON OILERS -- Signed Jerry Gray, defensive back.
NEW ENGLAND PATRIOTS -- Signed Randy Austin, tight end, and Rob McGovern, linebacker.
NEW YORK JETS -- Signed Pat Beach, tight end; Roy Hart, defensive tackle, and Marcus Turner, defensive back.
SAN DIEGO CHARGERS -- Signed Eugene Marve, linebacker, and Sean Vanhorse,cornerback.


Review/Music; Medieval Interactions Of Christians and Jews In Melody and Text
The politics of cultural interaction have become so heated in recent years, the demands for cultural recognition so confrontational, that the portrayal of cultural influence and imitation in Sunday night's concert by the Boston Camerata at Merkin Concert Hall seemed almost pastoral.
The program, titled "The Sacred Bridge," explored the connections between medieval Judaism and Christianity, the ways in which melodies and text emigrated from one religious world to the other.
Arab culture was also included in the confluences of artistry and belief, in selections from medieval Spain.
The interactions seemed to have the natural ease of streams running together; they provided uncanny glimpses of the evolution of religious culture in the West.
A Spanish Jewish song, for example, "Cuando el rey Nimrod," celebrates the birth of Abraham and the coming of the prophet Elijah, but its text uses Christian imagery of star signs marking portentous births, and its melody is Turkish in character.
The influence of Moslem music could also be heard in "Des oge mas quer eu trobar," a 13th-century narration of the Nativity; it is found in a collection of Spanish songs about the Virgin illustrated with images of Christian, Jewish and Moslem musicians performing together.
Another song in praise of the Virgin, derived from a Provencal troubadour song, bore a remarkable resemblance to a Jewish prayer, pleading for an answer from the God of Abraham in an "hour of anguish." And both religious expressions resemble a French folk song, "Le Roi Renaud."


Integrated Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Sprint Offers Liability Limit For Corporate Phone Fraud
The Sprint Communications Company, the nation's third-largest long-distance carrier, said today that it would limit the liability of large corporate customers for the huge bills rung up by phone-service thieves who manipulate a company's telephone switching equipment and voice-mail systems.
Typically, such thieves call into a company on one of its toll-free "800" numbers and then figure out the codes necessary to obtain an outgoing line that can be used to call anywhere in the world.
These telephone "hackers" often sell plundered telephone codes to illegal operators who then sell overseas calls to hundreds of people at a time.
Sprint officials said this sort of fraud approached $1 billion a year.


Extended Pact for Craig
The San Francisco Giants yesterday gave Manager ROGER CRAIG a one-year contract extension through the 1993 season.
Salary terms were not disclosed.
Craig, 62 years old, has managed the Giants since September 1985, guiding the club to two National League West titles and a National League pennant in that time.
Craig holds the San Francisco club marks for games managed (988) and victories (513). (AP)


Rumors Hit Alexander's
Shares of Alexander's Inc., the embattled New York retailer, tumbled yesterday as rumors that the company was preparing to file for bankruptcy protection traveled around the garment industry.
Roanne Kulakoff, a spokeswoman for Alexander's, said the company would not comment on speculation.
The stock dropped $1.125, to $15.375, on the New York Stock Exchange.


Knicks Once Again No Obstacle for Bulls
The Chicago Bulls remain an imposing obstacle the Knicks cannot conquer.
Winning their 11th consecutive regular-season game against New York, the Bulls never trailed last night and prevailed, 96-90, before a capacity crowd at Madison Square Garden.
A mesmerizing long-range shooting exhibition by John Starks, who set a team record by making eight 3-point shots, was not enough for the Knicks.
Neither was a 27-point first half by Patrick Ewing.
When it mattered most, the Bulls (59-13) played like the defending champions they are, and the Knicks' seven-game winning streak ended.
Michael Jordan (36 points) and Scottie Pippen (27 points, career-high 18 rebounds) led the way for Chicago, which smothered Ewing in the second half, holding him to just 4 points.


Fibreboard reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Food Notes
Brooklyn Tea Party
While Congress and various Federal agencies are dithering over a seafood inspection bill, customers can rest easy knowing that their tea is still being Federally inspected, just as it has been since 1897.


Oilgear Co.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Hotel Investors reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Mark IV Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Big Texas Bank Seeks a Buyer
The financially troubled First City Bancorporation of Texas said today that it hoped to find a buyer for the Houston-based banking company without requiring immediate aid from the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.
Analysts were uncertain such a deal could work.
Analysts estimate that First City needs at least $300 million to meet minimum capital standards because of loan losses.
The company said it would report an operating loss for the first quarter ended today.


Reading &amp; Bates reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Asian Street Gangs Emerging as New Underworld
Each morning as John Gotti swaggers into a packed Brooklyn courtroom wearing his trademark silk tie and sneer, a baby-faced 23-year-old named Chen I. Chung impassively enters a similar, if almost empty, courtroom two floors below.
To prosecutors and criminologists, this is like the changing of the underworld guard.
Although both men are charged with racketeering and murder, Mr.
Gotti, the reputed leader of the Gambino crime family, symbolizes organized crime's powerful past and beleaguered present.
But Mr.
Chung, whom the authorities portray as a leader of a Queens-based Asian-American gang called the Green Dragons, may represent its future. 'Expansion Is Coming'
"Gotti and the established groups are in decline, but the Green Dragons are a manifestation of a new, unorganized crime group trying to establish itself," said Peter Kwong, the author of two books on Chinese-Americans.
"Their expansion is coming. We are witnessing an eventual real menace to the whole society."


Electro Rent reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Gosta Oldenburg; Retired Diplomat, 98
Gosta Oldenburg, the Swedish Consul General and Dean of the Consular Corps in Chicago until his retirement in 1959, died last Tuesday at New York Hospital.
He was 98 years old and lived in Manhattan in recent years.
The cause of death was not immediately available.


Michigan Freshmen Aren't in It Just for the Experience
Two months beyond his 19th birthday, Jalen Rose sat in a folding chair on the floor of Crisler Arena, the home of the University of Michigan Wolverines, the place that Rose and his four peers have turned into their stage.
A portable television camera was set up before Rose.
One wire crept his chest; another was attached to his ear.
He is only a little more than halfway through his first spring semester as a college student, but his words were soon to be beamed to all those living rooms, on a news program he does not watch.


INSIDE
Avoiding a 'Doomsday Rock'
An international effort should get under way to spot and divert any asteroids that threaten a catastrophic collision with the Earth, a NASA panel said.
Page A18.
Top German Official Resigns
The German Defense Minister, who is an ally of Chancellor Helmut Kohl, resigned after a scandal over arms shipments to Turkey.
Page A3.
Tarnished Partnerships
With increasing litigation against law and accounting firms, some people are finding that becoming a partner is no longer magic.
Page D1.


Noj Journal; Just Smashing Communism (Got Carried Away)
The farmhouses of this dirt-poor village near the bottom of one of the deep gorges that cut through the mountains north of Tirana, the capital, encircle shattered buildings, piles of rubble, exposed cement floors that serve no purpose anymore and neat stacks of building blocks and roof tiles.
The scene, which recurs in villages throughout Albania, suggests the wreckage of an earthquake, where cleanup work has begun.


Makers of Sparkling Wines in a Label Fight
A LABELING dispute that centers on the comparative quality of sparkling wines made by two different methods has become unusually politicized, drawing the attention of United States Representatives, Senators and even a former Cabinet officer.
The disagreement pits four big producers that make $3 to $7 sparkling wines by a method called the bulk process against the National Association of Beverage Importers, which represents French Champagne shippers and American producers who use the classical methode champenoise.


Dime Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Indicators Up Again, By 0.8%
The Government's chief forecasting gauge advanced eight-tenths of 1 percent in February, a second straight rise that left little doubt that economic recovery, although probably not robust, was taking hold.
The increase in the index of leading indicators was broadly based and was accompanied by the first meaningful rise since last spring of a related index that measures current economic activity.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  A CHANGING OF THE GUARD
Each morning as John Gotti swaggers into a packed Brooklyn courtroom wearing his trademark silk tie and sneer, a baby-faced 23-year-old named Chen I. Chung impassively enters a similar, if almost empty, courtroom two floors below.
But despite the lack of attention paid to his trial, Mr.
Chung and other well Asian-American gang leaders may well represent the future of organized crime, prosecutors say.
A1.
GOTTI CASE GOES TO THE JURY
The jury in John Gotti's racketeering-murder trial is to begin deliberations this morning, after the judge excused one juror from the case and then gave the remaining panel members their final instructions.
The judge, I. Leo Glasser of Federal District Court in Brooklyn, declined to disclose his reason for dismissing the juror, a woman designated as Juror No. 3.
But he said it did not involve any wrongdoing by any of the parties in the trial.
B3. 48 HELD IN ARSON-FOR-PROFIT CASE


Lasmo Plc reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Dev-Tech Corp. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Manville Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Call Him Sgt. Tomba
If ALBERTO TOMBA continues to ski with such masterly results, it may not be long before Italy crowns him the commander of the country's military elite.
For the second time in two Olympiads, the 25-year-old Tomba has been awarded a promotion in rank in the Carabinieri, the Italian paramilitary police.
You may call him Sergeant Tomba now.
Defense Minister VIRGINIO ROGNONI officially conferred the new rank during a special ceremony in Rome attended by Tomba's Carabinieri colleagues from the Italian Olympic team. (Reuters)


Quarterly Loss at HomeFed
The HomeFed Corporation said today that it had lost $35.6 million in the fourth quarter of 1991 and that it had not met a deadline set by Federal regulators to strengthen its financial condition.
HomeFed, the parent of HomeFed Bank, a savings and loan institution based in San Diego, said it would ask the Office of Thrift Supervision for more time to raise new capital.
The Federal regulatory agency had set today as the deadline for the company to raise additional capital, which is the buffer a financial institution keeps against losses.


Florio Says He Will Veto Wage Bill
In a move aimed at putting the new Republican legislature on the spot, Gov.
Jim Florio announced today that he would veto a Republican bill to delay a new state minimum wage -- after workers have already begun getting bigger paychecks.
The Governor's veto will come after the full wage increase goes into effect on April 1, meaning that if the Republicans did override it, they would look like the Grinch who stole Christmas.
Republican leaders today differed on what they would do now, but it appeared that the full increase would stay in effect.


Charter Power Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Today Is the Day Truckers Face Tougher Rules
Starting today, the nation's 4.5 million truck and bus drivers must have a new license to stay on the road in all 50 states, a move aimed at keeping track of violations and weeding out the unsafe drivers.
So far, about 3 percent of the nation's truck drivers have failed the extensive and, in parts, complicated written examination and road test required to get the new license.


U.S. Offers Measure of Approval to Romania
Romania, the former Communist country most regarded with suspicion by the United States, is receiving a measure of approval from Washington for recent steps it has taken toward a more democratic government.
"Progress has occurred in Romania," said an Administration official who specializes in Balkan affairs.
"The situation is by no means perfect, but they have made progress."


Deliberations Set to Start In Gotti's Rackets Trial
The jury in John Gotti's racketeering-murder trial is to begin deliberations this morning, after the judge excused one juror from the case yesterday and then gave the remaining panel members their final instructions.
Judge I. Leo Glasser declined to disclose his reason for dismissing the juror, a woman designated as Juror No. 3.
But he said it did not involve any wrongdoing by any of the parties in the trial of Mr.
Gotti and his co-defendant, Frank Locascio, in Federal District Court in Brooklyn.


Signal Apparel Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Japan Lowers Its Discount Rate to 3.75%
The Bank of Japan today lowered an important lending rate by three-quarters of a point, a day after the Government announced a package of measures to stimulate the sagging economy.
But the stock market, reflecting the sagging confidence of the business community, reacted coolly.
After falling to a five-year low on Tuesday, the key Nikkei index of 225 stocks was lower again today, off 300 points in the first hour of trading.


High Salaries for Public Health
New York City lacks a president for its beleaguered public hospital system and New York State lacks a health commissioner.
One big reason is reluctance to pay the high salaries needed to attract top candidates.
That's dangerously penny-wise and pound-foolish.
A city commission appointed to find a replacement for Dr.
J.
Emilio Carrillo, who resigned as head of the Health and Hospitals Corporation last fall, says it can't come up with a qualified list.
The commission blames low pay -- only $129,000 per year to supervise 16 hospitals.
Chief executives of single private hospitals may earn two or three times that much.


L&amp;N Housing reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


With These Words, Spain Banished Jews
Five hundred years ago today, King Ferdinand and Queen Isabella signed an edict expelling the Jews from Spain.
They sought to justify the action by arguing that Jews continued to proselytize among former Jews who had converted to Christianity.
Here are excerpts from the edict, as translated by The New York Times from the Spanish.


Sharper Image reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


48 Charged in Garment District Arson Ring
Forty-eight people, including several independent insurance brokers, claims adjustors and businessmen in the Garment District in Manhattan, were arrested yesterday and charged with running what the District Attorney called one of the nation's largest full-service, arson-for-profit rings.
The Manhattan District Attorney, Robert M. Morgenthau, said the ring arranged for insurance, set fires and then obtained payments for the damaged businesses.


PBS Series Will Stroll Into 'Virtual Reality'
A glimpse of "virtual reality," the emerging technology that gives computer users the illusion of being physically surrounded by the video images they are viewing, will soon be offered to television audiences.
An episode of a PBS documentary series about the computer, which begins on Monday evening, examines a few practical applications of virtual reality.
The segment delves into research at the University of North Carolina's Graphics and Image Lab, where architects used high-speed three-dimensional computer graphics to take a simulated walk through a church two years before building it, and where scientists constructed room-size models of molecules to allow detailed study of molecular structure.


Betty Ourisman; Philanthropist, 66
Betty Lou Haydnet Ourisman, a former board member of the Arena Stage and Ford's Theater in Washington, who was long active in philanthrophic and cultural organizations in the capital area, died yesterday at Georgetown University Hospital in Washington.
She was 66 years old and lived in Chevy Chase, Md.
She died of breast cancer, her family said.


Economic Scene; The Great Search: A Perfect Tax
ARE Americans ready for another sweeping overhaul of taxes -- something, perhaps, like Jerry Brown's flat tax?
The answer may not matter much to candidate Brown, who needs recognition as a champion of change far more than he needs a practical plan for cutting the Gordian tax knot.
Indeed, Mr.
Brown's campaign staff has conceded as much: "The nuts and bolts" of the flat tax, said a Brown campaign spokesman, "are still to be determined."
But the answer matters a lot to economists who thirst for a tax fix that is both simple and politically palatable, yet able to collect enormous sums without grinding down the poor or hopelessly distorting incentives to work, save and invest.
For Mr.
Brown's tax bears at least a fleeting resemblance to their Holy Grail -- what specialists call a "direct consumption" tax.


Bridge
When a major knockout team event is played at a national championship, The Daily Bulletin invariably carries predictions by "The Hog." This famous pundit was confounded at the Vanderbilt Knockout in Pasadena, Calif., last week by a string of surprising results that eliminated six of the top eight seeded teams before the semifinal stage.
Four of the upsets, en route to Vanderbilt victory, were achieved by Andy Goodman of San Francisco, John Mohan of Santa Monica, Calif., Roger Bates of Mesa, Ariz., John Schermer of Seattle, and Neil Chambers of Schenectady, N.Y.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Poll; Clinton Dogged By Voter Doubt, Poll of U.S. Says
With only one Democratic opponent remaining on the field, Gov.
Bill Clinton has gained the support of a bare majority of Democrats nationwide and his campaign continues to confront a cloud of doubts and reservations, according to the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll.
In a month of fierce campaigning that knocked three of his opponents out of the race for the nomination, Mr.
Clinton's support jumped to 51 percent from 28 percent among Democratic primary voters, the national poll found.
But half said they worried that "allegations about Bill Clinton's character" could cost him the election this November.


Review/Art; Eakins Artifacts Give Context To Works in Philadelphia Show
When the American painter Thomas Eakins resigned from his teaching position at the Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts on Feb. 9, 1886, he did so under duress.
His students accused him of moral impropriety.
The crisis was precipitated when he removed the loincloth from a male model in a class of female students, but the scandal was only the climax of longstanding disapproval of Eakins's insistence on rendering the nude human form from life.
Although Eakins (1844-1916) never returned to the Pennsylvania Academy, where he had been a student, he is there again now, in some ways more fully revealed as an artist and as a man than he ever was during his life.
For the first time, the academy is displaying a portion of a trove of over 2,000 pieces of Eakins's documentary material that was not available for study until recently.
It is the largest known collection of Eakins memorabilia.


Mexico's Human Rights Agency Urges Arrest of 13 Police Agents
In a case that international human rights groups have singled out as a test of Mexico's commitment to end the impunity of abusive police officers, the Government human rights agency has called on the Attorney General to arrest 13 federal agents for murder.
The National Human Rights Commission, in a report made public on Monday night, sharply criticized the Attorney General's investigation of the case, in which three brothers were slain by members of a police anti-drug squad.


Seville Puts Acts For Expo At 55,000
More than 55,000 performances and events, including a new opera by Laurie Anderson and appearances by the Metropolitan Opera, the Berlin Philharmonic, the Martha Graham Dance Company, Dizzy Gillespie and Ryuichi Sakamoto, a Japanese pop composer, will be presented at Expo '92, the Seville World's Fair.
Officially called the 1992 Seville Universal Exposition, it opens on April 20 and runs through Oct. 12.
The arts programming component of the World's Fair was announced yesterday by Emilio Cassinello, the commissioner general of Expo '92, at a news conference at the Spanish Institute on Park Avenue.
Mr.
Cassinello said that the Expo programs would be presented in 21 theaters and at outdoor sites in and near Seville, including the second-century Italica Roman Amphitheater in Santiponce.
Performing ensembles from 111 countries are to participate, he said.


Virco Manufacturing reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Elsinore Corp. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Figuring Out the Russian Consumer
Though Russia resembles a consumer society about as much as Moscow resembles Muskogee, Western marketers are focusing on demographics, seeking to penetrate the psyche of a country that Winston Churchill called a riddle wrapped in a mystery inside an enigma.
D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles has published "The Russian Consumer: A New Perspective and a Marketing Approach." The agency, which has offices in Moscow and St.
Petersburg, serves Western clients in Russia including Mars Inc., the Procter &amp; Gamble Company and Finnair.


International Talks on Steel Trade Break Down
Negotiations broke down today at talks on a 36-nation agreement to limit government subsidies to steel companies, but the Bush Administration said it would allow 10-year-old United States restrictions on steel imports to expire tonight anyway.
The talks in Geneva foundered on the issue of whether some subsidies, including those for environmental purposes and assistance to workers losing their jobs, should be exempt from a general ban on aid to steel producers, American and European officials said.


International Testing Services reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Reliance Group Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Same Old Dinner, Same Old Lunch: Most People Like It That Way
ROBIN SIMONS figures that there are nearly 100 restaurants within walking distance of her office in downtown Seattle.
But every weekday, she goes to the same restaurant and orders an oat bran muffin and a cup of coffee for breakfast.
On weekends, she feels bereft without her regular muffin.
"If I have an excuse to be out and about," she said, "I'll go to that restaurant and get one."
Only her marriage to a man who enjoys cooking has prompted her to enlarge her diet beyond the chocolate-chip cookies, pizza or Thai food that used to satisfy her on nearly any occasion.
Habits, she said, make life efficient in a world with so many choices.
They also eliminate risk and guarantee gratification.
"When I know what I like," she said, "I want it."


Earth Technology reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Lifetime Products reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Core Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Rite Aid Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Informality Reigns, And Good Manners Get a Bad Name
THE pleasure of your company is requested in a new age of informality.
Do not bother to R.S.V.P.
Do not get done up in black tie.
The mood just now is one of casualness in dress, in manners, on all fronts.
This is the time of the artfully unmade bed (rise, take up your downy duvet and toss it); the carry-out dinner; the telephone solicitor who calls at all hours and addresses you by your first name.


Episcopal Bishop Criticizes Catholic Church
The Episcopal Bishop of Newark yesterday attacked the policies of the Roman Catholic Church with regard to women and homosexuals, calling the church repressive, patriarchical, prejudiced, hypocritical and "in danger of losing its soul."
The bishop, John S. Spong, made his comments in an article in The Virginia Quarterly Review, which describes itself as "a national journal of literature and discussion" associated with the University of Virginia.
Bishop Spong concludes his article by calling for an end to the official dialogue between the Episcopal Church and Roman Catholicism.


Most Pieces of Russia Agree to Coalesce, for Now
President Boris N. Yeltsin traversed an important stage toward political stability in the vast Russian Federation today when 18 of its 20 main subdivisions signed a federal treaty that forms the basis of a new post-Soviet state.
It was a considerable political victory for the Russian President.
He wanted this treaty in place before the opening Monday of the Congress of People's Deputies, where he will be the target of criticism for his radical economic reforms.


House Rejects a Proposal to Shift Military Money to Social Programs
The House today decisively rejected a Democratic budget plan that would have shifted more than $6 billion in military savings to social programs next year by breaking the 1990 budget agreement between Congress and the White House.
The defeat had been expected by the Democratic leadership, which had delayed floor action on the bill for three weeks in a futile attempt to attract support from conservative and moderate Democrats.


Resolution on Libya Embargo: Barring Takeoff and Landing 'to Any Aircraft'
Following is the text of the Security Council resolution adopted today imposing air and arms embargoes against Libya and reducing the size of Libyan missions abroad.
The vote was 10 in favor, none opposed and five abstentions from China, Cape Verde, India, Morocco and Zimbabwe.


Corning Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 22


Aero Systems Engineering reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Topics of The Times; Silent Night, Oscar Night
On Oscar night the phones are stilled, the streets are quiet and the sound of America is the sound of Billy Crystal against the sounds of popcorn disappearing, refrigerator doors opening and of incessant commentary.
"Check that dress!" and "Check that hairdo!" and "Check that chest!" And, yes, the occasional snore.
How sweet it is, to see the stars arriving in full light of day in full evening fig.
How swell the ladies in their straplesses and sunglasses!
How great the gents in their vibrant vests!
How glorious to see so much wealth and ego so gloriously packaged!


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Trail; Cuomo's Freudian Slips: Desire, or Just Fatigue?
Mario Cuomo's Freudian slip has been showing again.
New York's militantly unpresidential Governor addressed a group of Puerto Rican and Hispanic leaders in Albany this week.
He began with a few words about his life in politics.


Delay in S.&amp; L. Hearing
The former chief executive of the Columbia Savings and Loan Association, Thomas Spiegel, sat in Federal court today as savings and loan regulators began efforts to recover about $40 million they say he squandered while head of the institution.
Mr.
Spiegel, a comrade of Michael R., Milken, the former junk-bond financier, is accused of some of the most colorful excesses of the nation's savings and loan debacle: survival-chamber bathrooms with bulletproof glass, European vacations, guns, luxury condos and limousines.


Banks Refuse to Extend an Olympia Loan
Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd., the debt-laden Canadian developer, failed yesterday in its attempt to get a syndicate of banks to agree to extend by one year a $450 million loan that is to come due today.
Olympia &amp; York also indicated yesterday that it had enough cash on hand to retire the portion of a $300 million commercial-paper program that matures today.
The $300 million program was used to finance the Exchange Tower in Toronto.


Public &amp; Private; Just Say Yes
Here's a suggested response for elected officials of a certain age when asked whether they smoked marijuana:
"Of course."
When political handlers are putting together position papers in the years to come, they should include an appendix they might as well call the Rolling Papers.
Exhibit A might be the way in which Gov.
Bill Clinton handled the dope issue when it came up this year.
He backed, he filled, he clung to the letter of the question ("I have never broken the laws of my country"), and finally he said that, like so many other people of his generation, he did smoke marijuana when young, at Oxford when he was a Rhodes scholar.
He then went on to explain.


Iran-Contra Prosecutors Question General Powell
Iran-contra prosecutors have interviewed senior Pentagon officials from the Reagan Administration in recent weeks, examining for the first time the role of the military in the affair, Government officials with knowledge of the meetings said today.
The prosecutors have met informally with Gen.
Colin L. Powell, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, who was a military assistant to Caspar W. Weinberger, President Ronald Reagan's Defense Secretary from 1981 to 1987.
They also interviewed Richard L. Armitage, who was Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs in the Reagan era and is now coordinator of American aid to the former Soviet Union, the officials said.


Judge Rejects Parents' Plan to Take Over School
A New York State Supreme Court judge today rejected a proposal by a group of parents, alumni and teachers who sought to take over control of an exclusive century-old parochial school that the Episcopal Diocese of Long Island closed last year.
Spokesmen for the diocese hailed the decision as one that would insure the school's future by allowing them to sell or lease part of the school to pay for its operations.


Israeli Settlement and the Geneva Convention
To the Editor:
I apologize for an error in "Agreements Don't Bar West Bank Settlements" (letter, March 18), on the legality of Israeli settlements in the West Bank, which states that "international lawyers differ on whether the 1949 Geneva Convention applies to the Israeli occupation of the West Bank, because Israel is not a signatory." Both Israel and Jordan
did
sign and ratify the convention, Israel with a reservation.
The error does not affect my argument, however.
Article 2 of the convention provides that the agreement applies "to all cases of partial or total occupation of the territory of a high contracting party." Thus the convention cannot apply because the West Bank, East Jerusalem and the Gaza Strip have never been generally recognized as territories of Jordan.
Jordan administered them as a belligerent occupant between 1948 and 1967, after a war of aggression against Israel in 1948.
Jordan's attempt to annex these areas in 1950 was recognized only by Britain (except for Jerusalem) and perhaps by Pakistan.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.50
6.50
9.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
6.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.00
4.00
6.46
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.03
4.08
5.76
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.15
4.19
5.77
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.19
7.19
7.89
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.95
7.93
8.21
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.85
8.90
9.29
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.76
6.77
7.32
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Astrocom Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Prosecution Starts Closing Arguments in 7-Month-Old Noriega Trial
Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega was "nothing more than a corrupt, crooked and rotten cop" who eagerly "sold his uniform, his army and his protection to a murderous criminal gang called the Medellin cocaine cartel," a Federal prosecutor said today as closing arguments began in the seven-month trial of the deposed Panamanian leader.
Speaking to a jury that will soon be asked to evaluate more than 15,000 pages of testimony from 79 witnesses in the case, the Assistant United States Attorney, Myles Malman, described General Noriega as "a man of great, great power," a "classic military dictator" who used his position of privilege to enrich himself and to allow "tons and tons of a deadly white powder" to pollute the streets of the United States.


Trout Anglers Ready For Their First Pitch
Today in New York State, legions of anglers will be driving to their favorite streams in the pre-dawn darkness, hopeful participants in decades-old ritual, the opening of the trout season.
Nearly 60 years ago in preparation for my first opening day, I was so excited that I lay awake until 3 A.M., then rose and walked down the fog-draped road to meet the chum with whom I was to go fishing.


Helian Health Group reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Yanks Close In on Day of Decision
The entire picture is still muddy, and still distressing to several players, but Manager Buck Showalter of the Yankees will apparently change that Thursday by finally answering the many questions that have gone unanswered this spring.
Players will be fighting for good seats and reporters may have their ears pressed to the clubhouse door when the rookie manager addresses the team and renders decisions in the skirmishes for third base, fifth outfielder, fifth starter, backup catcher and one or two other roster positions.


500 Years After Expulsion, Spain Reaches Out to Jews
In a poignant ceremony marking the 500th anniversary of the expulsion of the Jews from Spain, President Chaim Herzog of Israel and Spain's King, Juan Carlos, prayed together in the synagogue of Madrid today.
Their gesture symbolized reconciliation between their people.
For Mr.
Herzog, it was an occasion that "closes one more of the many painful cycles in the history of our people." And he added: "We cannot change the past. But we can learn its lessons and thus assure a better future for ourselves and humanity."


Cellular Communications International reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


COMPANY BRIEFS
*
Greiner Engineering, Irving, Tex., agreed to form a partnership with an affiliate of the Perot Group, Dallas, to plan, finance, build and operate transportation projects. *
Kansas Power and Light Co., Topeka, Kan., and Kansas Gas and Electric Co., Wichita, Kan., completed their merger.
Kansas Gas is now a wholly owned subsidiary of Kansas Power.


Thoratec Laboratories reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 28


Gemco National Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Arden Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 28


Theater in Review
Little Me  The York Theater Company 2 East 90th Street Manhattan Through April 26 Book by Neil Simon; music by Cy Coleman; lyrics by Carolyn Leigh; based on the novel by Patrick Dennis; directed by Jeffrey B. Moss; sets by James E. Morgan; costumes, Michael Bottari and Ronald Case; lighting, Stuart Duke; technical director, John Miller; production stage manager, Alan Fox; musical director, Leo P. Carusone; choreographer, Barbara Siman.
Presented by the York Theater Company, Janet Hayes Walker, producing director; Molly Pickering Grose, managing director, in association with One World Arts Foundation.
WITH: Jo Ann Cunningham, Stephen Joseph, Denise Le Donne, Amelia Prentice, Jonathan Beck Reed, Russ Thacker and Ray Wills.
When a musical has dialogue as funny as Neil Simon's laugh-a-minute book for the 1962 show "Little Me" and songs as catchy as the Cy Coleman-Carolyn Leigh score for that musical, some fun is virtually guaranteed, no matter how unfocused the production.
And in the York Theater's miniaturized revival, Mr.
Simon's raucous jokes and such good-natured Coleman-Leigh tunes as "I've Got Your Number" and "Real Live Girl" put over a production that is as spirited as it is raw and every which way.


I.M.F. ENDORSES RUSSIAN PLAN FOR ECONOMY, CLEARING WAY FOR AID AND FOR MEMBERSHIP
The International Monetary Fund said today that it had endorsed Russia's economic reform plan, paving the way for Moscow to receive up to $4 billion in I.M.F. aid over the next year.
I.M.F. officials say Russia could begin receiving loans from the fund as early as May, a move that will place the Russian economy to some extent under the stewardship of the I.M.F.
It will still require Moscow to meet certain conditions to qualify for the aid, including stringent targets to control the inflation rate and budget deficit.


What Can You Get on the Sidewalks of New York?


Cigna Grades Its Holdings
The Cigna Corporation says its holdings of potentially troublesome bonds and mortgage loans more than doubled last year.
The insurance company on Monday identified $1.35 billion in potential problem investments in 1991, up from the $640 million reported a year earlier.


Insurance Futures Backed
Federal regulators today approved plans for trading futures contracts tied to health-care and homeowner insurance risks.
The Chicago Board of Trade, the nation's largest futures exchange, said it expected to begin trading the unusual futures contracts in September.


Socanav Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Ambiguity Remains After Decision
In its ruling yesterday on a major school desegregation case, the Supreme Court could have set broad new guidelines or sharply curtailed existing remedies.
Instead, the Court left many of those crucial judgments up to lower courts, and left legal experts guessing about what the impact of its latest ruling will be.
Some civil rights advocates saw yesterday's decision -- in the case of Freeman v.
Pitts in De Kalb County, Ga., outside Atlanta -- as a blow to school desegregation efforts, arguing that more conservative judges appointed by Presidents Reagan and Bush would be more likely to let school districts off the hook, allowing shifts toward resegregation.
Others believed the Court made no major departure from previous principles.
But all the school desegregation experts interviewed said they would have to wait and see how lower courts ruled in the hundreds of school desegregation cases pending across the country.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Urban Problems; Democratic Foes Harmonize On Need to Give Aid to Cities
Facing mayors for a dialogue on urban problems, and then each other in a debate on the same topic in the Bronx, the Democratic Presidential contenders expressed broad agreement yesterday that cities needed more help from Washington, which, each said, he would deliver as President.
But each candidate cast the issue in the image of his own campaign, Bill Clinton insisting that urban problems were really American problems and Edmund G. Brown Jr. arguing that cities were just another casualty of politics as usual.
Differing on Welfare
Summoned to a 75-minute exchange at Gracie Mansion, led by Mayor David N. Dinkins and Mayor Raymond L. Flynn of Boston, the candidates were peppered with questions on topics like housing and crime by a dozen other mayors from Cincinnati to Puerto Rico.
They responded with answers so generally similar that Mayor Dave Karp of San Leandro, Calif., described them afterwards as "the Bobbsey twins."


CHRONICLE
The benefit on April 9 for the East Harlem Tutorial Program is formally billed as "an evening of readings and song," but CALVIN TRILLIN prefers to think of it as the "First Real Poets' Read-Off."
"We are all poets for whom rhyme is terribly important," Mr.
Trillin, the humorist and essayist, said yesterday of the participants.
"Rhyme only. Free verse is considered sissy."


Ameron Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Stocks Rise, Then Fall As the Dow Closes Flat
Stocks closed yesterday pretty much as they ended the first quarter of this year, weakening at the end after a very promising start.
The Dow Jones industrial average closed at 3,235.47, up 0.23 point on the day, and 66.64 points, or 2.1 percent, for the quarter.
Hugh A. Johnson, chief investment strategist for the First Albany Corporation, said that until the end of the day, the market reacted favorably to the economic news reported in the morning, most importantly to the March consumer confidence index issued by the Conference Board.
"It clearly brightened investors' expectations and showed that investor focus has shifted from interest rates to the economy," Mr.
Johnson said.


At the Y, Molding Little Lives With Lumps of Clay
THE Mayor is forever saying we should write about the good things in New York City, as if the telling of the bad things is the problem.
This is about one of the good things, a program by the West Side Y.M.C.A. to teach homeless children how to make pottery.
It brings warmth, creativity and a sense of accomplishment to little lives that so lack these qualities.


Chancellor Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Justices Ease Court Controls In School Desegregation Case
Ruling in a major school desegregation case, the Supreme Court today gave hundreds of formerly segregated school districts a potential new legal tool for returning to local control after decades of operating under Federal court supervision.
The 8-to-0 ruling, in a case from De Kalb County, Ga., in Atlanta's suburbs, allows school districts to win release from court control bit by bit as they achieve racial equality in various facets of their operations.
It overturned a Federal appeals court ruling that required school districts to achieve equality in seven aspects of their operations before they could win release from judicial supervision of any.
Important Qualifications
But if the decision provided a road map for the return to local control, it left significant obstacles in the school districts' path.
As a result, the practical impact of the ruling is less clear than its significance as legal doctrine.  [ Excerpts from the opinions, page B8. ]


Cintas Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Turks Got Tanks, and German Minister Must Quit
The German Defense Minister and his top aide resigned today after a scandal over arms shipments to Turkey.
The minister, Gerhard Stoltenberg, is a longtime friend and ally of Chancellor Helmut Kohl.
At a news conference today, Mr.
Kohl said he respected Mr.
Stoltenberg's decision to resign, but had not forced it.


New Sign of Recovery
The latest statistics indicate that the economic recovery in the United States is taking hold.
The Government's chief forecasting gauge rose eight-tenths of 1 percent in February, its second straight rise.
But in Japan, worries about sluggish growth prompted the nation's central bank to lower an important lending rate and the Government to announce a package of measures to revitalize the economy.
Business Day, page D1.


Pinelands Stock Falls 10.1% on Disney Deal
Stock in Pinelands Inc. fell 10.1 percent yesterday, as investors reacted unfavorably to the deal the company, which owns WWOR-TV Channel 9 in the New York area, made with the Walt Disney Company on Monday.
Pinelands said it would buy KCAL-TV in Los Angeles from Disney, which, in turn, would get 45 percent of Pinelands.
Pinelands's stock fell $1.50 a share, to close at $13.375, in trading yesterday on the New York Stock Exchange.


Literally Entranced by Television, Children Metabolize More Slowly
WHY are children who watch a lot of television fatter on average than those whose viewing habits are more limited?
Is it because television watching substitutes for exercise, or because television advertisements entice children to eat high-calorie foods, or because children snack more when in front of the set?
Or is it simply that children who are fat would rather watch television than, say, play rough-and-tumble games with their friends?
While all these factors no doubt play a contributing role, a Memphis researcher has found yet another explanation that should be appreciated readily by parents who have tried to get youngsters' attention while they are watching the tube.
When children watch television, Dr.
Robert Klesges found, they lapse into a deeply relaxed almost semiconscious state that is metabolically between resting and sleeping.


Honors
*
New York Women in Communications will present awards to seven women at the 22d annual Matrix Awards ceremony in New York next Wednesday.
Among them are Helayne Spivak, executive vice president and executive creative director of Young &amp; Rubicam New York; Elizabeth P. Valk, publisher of Time magazine, and Lou Rena Hammond, president of Lou Hammond &amp; Associates.


60-Minute Gourmet
THE annual migration of shad to rivers in the East is reaching its peak, which means that one of spring's delicacies, shad roe, is abundant.
These inexhaustible fish migrate at this time of year into virtually every major river system from Florida to the Gulf of St.
Lawrence.
Shad has a rich yet delicately flavored flesh that is best with a sauce that has some acid: vinegar, lemon or dry white wine.
In France, I remember cooks braising shad in an acidic sorrel sauce.
The flesh is very bony, and the acid helped break down the bones.


Home Unity Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


BTR Realty Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Bay Meadows Operating Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Crownamerica Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


D.O.C. Optics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Extra! Extra! British Editors Infuse Views Into the News!
When the Labor Party recently announced its economic game plan for Britain, should it win the general election on April 9, the entire front page of The Daily Mirror, a London tabloid, was given over to the story.
"Labor yesterday unveiled a People's Budget to rid Britain of the blight left by 13 years of Tory rule," the newspaper's political editor cheered in the main news story.
The rest of the page displayed pictures of the homeless, the unemployed and the unhappy under the headline: "Goodbye to All This."


New Campaigns
*
O.
J.
Simpson, longtime spokesman for Hertz, has returned in new advertising by Wells Rich Greene BDDP,New York, for Hertz's frequent-renter program, the No. 1 Gold Club.
To demonstrate its advantages, he strolls, rather than rushes, through an airport, urging renters to "beat the rush hour." Mr.
Simpson, who has been under contract to Hertz since 1975, last appeared in the company's ads in 1989.


Penny-Pinching Submarine Warfare to Death; Recipe for Victory
To the Editor:
Your March 24 lead editorial summarily dismisses the importance of the Electric Boat division of General Dynamics and of submarines to our nation's defense.
Rather than your simplistic suggestion to create a supermarket for ships in one, all-purpose production facility, the better approach is to maintain the country's pre-eminent submarine builder and concentrate surface ship work at other shipyards, including Newport News.


Settlements Alarming Auditors and Lawyers
Reeling from a string of multimillion-dollar settlements that may cause their partners to dig deeply into their own pockets, many of the nation's accounting and law firms are growing alarmed that the safety net that protects them from disaster is in danger of unraveling.
Malpractice insurance, once plentiful, has grown scarce as investors and Government agencies have stepped up their assault on accountants and lawyers, accusing them of being partly responsible for the failure of financial institutions.
Witness the $117 million alone that three professional firms agreed to pay in recent weeks to bondholders who purchased securities marketed by their now discredited client, Charles H. Keating Jr.


CHRONICLE
KITTY CARLISLE HART was appearing in her first Broadway show, "Champagne Sec," when the orchestra's pianist announced to her, "Someday I will write the best musical on Broadway."
" 'Sure,' I thought, 'you and who else,' " Mrs.
Hart recalled yesterday.
"I thought he was a charming but insignificant piano player."


Grant Tensor Geophysical reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Mr. Gasket reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Blood Taken From One Met
Lieut.
Dwight Hart of the Port St.
Lucie Police Department said tonight that a blood sample had been obtained on Monday evening from one of the three Mets accused of rape by a New York woman.
The officer also said that the woman, who says she was raped here in March 1991, had been interviewed for more than five hours today in an effort "to clarify certain facts that had been discovered by detectives during the course of the investigation."
Stating that a search warrant had been signed by Judge Dan Vaughn last Friday, Hart said the blood sample was taken from one player at an undisclosed site Monday evening.
He refused to identify the player and offered no official explanation for why a warrant for physical evidence had been served on only one of the three players and why there were no plans to obtain blood samples from the other two.


Appeals Court Rejects Request That Tyson Be Freed on Bail
The Indiana Court of Appeals rejected Mike Tyson's application for bail yesterday, making it all but certain that the former heavyweight champion will remain in prison for at least six months while his rape conviction is being appealed.
Within hours after the brief, two-sentence ruling was handed down by a three-judge panel in Indianapolis late yesterday afternoon, Alan Dershowitz, the Harvard law professor who is handling the appeal and had argued the case for bail before the appeals court, denounced both the ruling and the absence of a formal opinion explaining the court's rationale.


Freeing the Innocent From Behind Bars Is Centurions' Mission
James McCloskey gets hundreds of letters from prisoners who insist they are innocent, so he tries to get an early sense from each one of its possible merit.
The letter from Clarence Chance, who wrote from California that he had been in jail at the time of the murder for which he was given a life sentence, got Mr.
McCloskey's attention.
"It would take a lot of guts," he said, "for Clarence to lie about something as easy to check as that because either he was in jail or he wasn't."


Cellular Communications of Puerto Rico Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Nuggets Lose Mutombo
Rookie DIKEMBE MUTOMBO will miss the Nuggets' 10 remaining games because of a left thumb injury, the Denver Nuggets said yesterday.
Mutombo, who has a torn ligament in his left thumb that he incurred against Phoenix last Saturday, was placed on the injured list.
The Nuggets activated STEVE SCHEFFLER to take the center's place. (AP)


Books of The Times; The Problem That Won't Go Away
Race  How Blacks and Whites Think and Feel About the American Obsession  By Studs Terkel  403 pages.
The New Press. $24.95.
By tackling the toughest issue in the United States and the hardest subject of his career, Studs Terkel has written his most challenging book.
"Race" is the kind of book that happens along once in a long while -- "The Other America," by Michael Harrington, quickly comes to mind -- and demands: Here's the real testimony, now what are you going to do about it?
The question is directed at Presidents and Presidential hopefuls and public servants all down the line; to people in early-education classrooms, in health clinics, in hiring halls and on the job; to neighbors and non-neighbors in the cities and countryside who seldom cross the racial divide in their daily lives.


Williams-Sonoma reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 2


A Family's Odyssey Brings a Taste of Cambodia to Boston
COMBINE "Miss Saigon" with "The Killing Fields" and you have a sense of the lives led by Longteine De Monteiro, her husband, Kenthao, their daughter Nadsa and her husband, Bob Perry.
It took Nadsa and Bob seven years to find each other, and her parents 15 to make it from Cambodia to America and open a restaurant.
Sampling the bright clean flavors of the food Mrs.
De Monteiro cooks here in Elephant Walk, a darkened, quiet little dining room below street level, it's difficult to imagine the years leading up to it.
The restaurant's site in this blue-collar suburb of Boston was all the family could afford.
It was not always that way.


Ulster Catholic Hopes Vote Advances Peace
John Hume, viewed as the most effective Roman Catholic political leader in Northern Ireland, wants the British election campaign to be a referendum on the violence that has killed some 3,000 people in Ulster since 1969.
For the time being, the violence has subsided while politicians compete for the 17 seats Northern Ireland has in the British Parliament.
Of these, 13 are held by Protestants who want this country of 900,000 Protestants and 600,000 Catholics to remain part of Britain; 3 by moderate Catholics, headed by Mr.
Hume, who favor a negotiated end to the violence, and one by Sinn Fein, the political wing of the Irish Republican Army.


Brown Courts New York Labor Leaders


Bank Fund, C.D. Yields Still Mixed
Yields on bank money market accounts and short-term certificates of deposit continued to show a mixed pattern for the week ended today, according to The Bank Rate Monitor.
"Doubt is forming as to whether we have seen the end of a three-year downslide in interest rates," Robert K. Heady, publisher of The Monitor, said yesterday.
"On the one hand, there have been upticks in the leading economic indicators as well as in consumer confidence. On the other, economists are urging the Federal Reserve to ease rates further.


Chiles Offshore Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Topics of The Times; Coeducation, Then and Now
In the wake of Women's History Month, the feminist movement has a bicentennial to celebrate.
Two hundred years ago, in 1792, "Vindication of the Rights of Woman" was published.
It was written by Mary Wollstonecraft, a British product of the free-thinking 18th century that culminated in the American and French Revolutions.
Mary Wollstonecraft would sympathize with the American Association of University Women report that "gender bias in our schools is shortchanging girls." Mary, who lived for a time in Paris during the Revolution, advocated women's rights and equality in education.
"Marriage," she wrote, "will never be held sacred till women, by being brought up with men, are prepared to be their companions rather than their mistresses."


Metropolitan Diary
Place: Grand Army Plaza, Central Park South and Fifth Avenue.
Dramatis personae: Well-dressed matron and equally well-dressed girl about 5 or 6 years old.
Kenneth Kowald overhears their conversation as they stroll past the recently-spraying-but-now-dry fountain opposite the Plaza hotel.


Virginia 'Disturbed' By Record Vs. Irish
Pity poor Virginia.
The upscale school from Charlottesville has this unpleasant history of defeating Notre Dame: four straight times in their only five meetings.
Why, the last time they met, in January, the Cavaliers trounced the Fighting Irish by 27 points.


Clinton Criticizes President Over Relations With Israel
Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas yesterday accused the Bush Administration of "ever so subtly" eroding "the taboo against overt anti-Semitism."
Meeting with New York Jewish leaders, Mr.
Clinton cited as evidence the Administration's criticism of Israel and its refusal to grant loan guarantees readily for housing immigrants.


Accounts
*
Old Stone Corp., Providence, R.I., to Pagano Schenck &amp; Kay, Providence, as the first agency of record for a strategic communications program.
Billings were not disclosed. *
Adria Laboratories, Dublin, Ohio, a division of Erbamont Inc., to S. J. Weinstein, New York, for its new diagnostic test for colo-rectal cancer imaging, Raid, expected to be approved by the Food and Drug Administration early next year.
Billings are estimated at $2 million.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The index of leading indicators rose eight-tenths of 1 percent in February, a second straight rise that left little doubt that the economy was in recovery.  [ Page D1. ]


French Paradox
To The Living Section:
The article "In France, Wine and Pate Days Seem Numbered" questioned the "French paradox" but overlooked the interrelationships among diet, life style, alcohol consumption and the reduced risk of coronary heart disease.


A Basic-Black Evening at the Oscars
EXCEPT for Geena Davis's long white dragon dress (a creamy pouf with a ruffled appliqued train), Hollywood took few fashion risks at this year's Academy Awards.
It was America in its basic-black, recessionary, real-me mode.
The no-star, nonglamour look, but sophisticated.
There was a good bit of decolletage, but quite demure, very little leg and nothing truly appalling, unless you count a modern-dance rendition of "J.F.K."


Fairfield Communications reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Serb and Croat Asking to Confer With Bush
President Slobodan Milosevic of Serbia and President Franjo Tudjman of Croatia, the principal antagonists in the Yugoslav civil war, are separately seeking meetings with President Bush, Administration officials said today.
But the officials said the Administration, which holds both leaders responsible for creating the conflict that led to the fighting last year, is unlikely to welcome either any time soon.


After 16 Years as President of Tufts, Scientist Counts His Achievements
When Jean Mayer became president of Tufts University in 1976 it had never had a capital fund-raising campaign, and university administrators counseled him to limit a drive he was planning to $14 million.
"Nonsense," Dr.
Mayer said.
"Let's make it $140 million."
In the end Dr.
Mayer, a French-born scientist and expert on nutrition, raised $145 million.
The drive was only one of several important steps Dr.
Mayer has taken to help transform Tufts from a small, once-overlooked liberal arts college into a research university with a growing international reputation and a much-improved faculty and student body.


Sequa Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Candidate's Record; Despite Improvements, the Schools In Arkansas Are Still Among Worst
As he campaigns for President, Gov.
Bill Clinton talks a great deal about the importance of education, boasting that "the most important thing" he has accomplished in Arkansas has been improving the schools.
If elected, Mr.
Clinton says, he will do the same for the nation.
Under Mr.
Clinton's leadership, Arkansas has done much to improve its schools -- increasing expenditures, requiring competency testing for teachers, broadening curriculums, setting new academic standards, slowing the dropout rate and encouraging greater college attendance.
The effort resulted in part from a court order that instructed the state to improve its education system.


Security Council Votes to Prohibit Arms Exports and Flights to Libya
The Security Council voted today to impose a ban on air travel and arms sales against Libya in two weeks and other sanctions unless it surrenders agents implicated in the bombings of a Pan Am flight over Scotland in 1988 and a French airliner over West Africa the next year.
The vote in the 15-nation Council was 10 in favor with five abstentions.
Abstaining were China, which as a permanent member of the Council could have vetoed today's decision; Morocco, the Council's only Arab member, and three other third-world countries: India, Cape Verde and Zimbabwe.
The five said they favored delaying an ultimatum to Libya to allow more time for a negotiated settlement.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Assessment; Clinton Hopes Debates Return Initiative to Him
In calling for six debates over the next week, Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas tacitly acknowledged on Monday that he had lost control over the campaign's dynamic in the crucial days leading up to the New York primary.
With the debates, Clinton aides say, he hopes to retake the initiative by accomplishing two complementary goals.
The first is to speak more directly to New York voters, minimizing the press's role in the April 7 primary.
On Monday, Mr.
Clinton complained about the coverage of his campaign by the rambunctious New York press corps, saying that all that voters had heard about him was "bad stuff dumped on them about me."


Nationwide Cellular Service Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Review/Television; A Very Different Oscars Broadcast
"Young, beautiful and talented -- a winning combination in any league: Daryl Hannah!" exclaimed the off-camera announcer at Monday night's 64th annual Academy Awards presentation.
"Everybody's definition of class: Academy Award winner Audrey Hepburn!" "Three of Hollywood's most respected citizens: Steven Spielberg, George Lucas and Geena Davis!" Apparently nobody had notified the announcer, who provided virtually the only touches of old-style Hollywood hokum, that the game would be played a little differently this time.
Jack Palance: that's the short answer to what made Monday's uncharacteristically lively ABC telecast (produced by Gilbert Cates) a welcome departure and a winner in its own right.
Of course there was nothing unusual about a best-supporting-actor award to a 72-year-old Hollywood veteran appearing in "City Slickers," the year's most lucrative sentimental comedy.
However, Oscar audiences ordinarily have to wait all night for the kind of loose-cannon appearance Mr.
Palance put in at the beginning of the show.
And Mr.
Palance's cheerfully unprintable acceptance speech, not to mention his impromptu calisthenics display, provided Billy Crystal, the program's sensationally quick-witted host, with a whole evening's worth of running gags.


Wall St. Underwriting Fees Hit Record in First Quarter
Wall Street earned a record amount of fees in the first quarter, as American corporations rushed to the securities markets, seeking to cash in on the ever-growing public appetite for stocks and bonds.
Underwriting fees totaled $1.78 billion, nearly three times the $633 million that brokerage houses earned in the first quarter of 1991 and surpassing the previous record of $1.59 billion set in 1991's fourth quarter, according to IDD Information Services.


Food Franchises Train Inner-City Youngsters
To the Editor:
"A Tax Boon, or Boondoggle?" (News of the Week in Review, March 1) discusses the extension until next July of the real property tax exemptions in New York City's Industrial and Commercial Incentive Program.
You criticize the award of exemptions for $9 million in new construction from 1984 to 1988 for fast-food restaurants such as McDonald's and White Castle.
Such exemptions are, you state, "for those adept at tapping public subsidy programs."


If Budget Won't Bend, Perhaps Calendar Will
For months, lawmakers looked toward April 1 with Cinderella-like dread, fearing that if they missed the state budget deadline at midnight tonight, their careers would turn into the political equivalent of pumpkins.
In fact, they did miss the midnight deadline, which marked the end of the 1991 fiscal year.
That led some legislators to do some brisk semantic backpedaling


Eating Well
Scene: Students and instructor around a table in a classroom.
Instructor: What is the recommended level for cholesterol consumption per day?


Action Seen By Manville
The Manville Corporation is likely to announce a public offering of shares in the Riverwood International Corporation, its packaging subsidiary, within the next few weeks.
Signs pointing to an imminent action included the shift in this week's scheduled board meeting from Denver, where Manville has its headquarters, to New York, and the unavailability of senior executives to answer inquiries.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
Axel Johnson Inc., New York, an industrial products and electronics company, named Joseph F. Smorada senior vice president and chief financial officer. *
Comdata Holdings Corp., Brentwood, Tenn., a transaction services company, appointed Dennis R. Hanson chief financial officer.


Harriet Mandelbaum, Children's Lobbyist, 79
Harriet Mandelbaum, who spent decades of her life working in behalf of autistic and other mentally impaired children, died on Thursday at Caledonian Hospital in Brooklyn.
She was 79 years old and lived in Brooklyn.
Her family said a cerebral hemorrhage caused her death.


Rodime reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


The New Letdown: Making Partner
For decades, becoming a partner in a law or accounting firm was almost better than getting tenure at a university.
The promotion guaranteed job security, prestige and a large, steady income.
But these days, with the bankruptcy of many firms and increasing Government litigation against law and accounting firms and their partners, some people are finding that making partner is no longer the magic moment it once was.
Offered a partnership, some people are thinking twice -- and some are even saying no thanks, deciding that the prospect of a higher salary and the improved status do not offset the greater exposure to lawsuits and the firm's financial problems.


In Fight Over Privileges, Spotlight's Now on Bush
Jockeying for advantage over a volatile issue that threatens both parties, the White House and Congressional Democrats battled today over the perquisites and privileges of the capital's political elite, especially subsidized travel.
A week after President Bush excoriated Congress in a White House speech as unaccountable and beholden to special interests, a House subcommittee criticized the White House for refusing to divulge what it costs Mr.
Bush and his aides to travel around the world aboard Air Force One and other Federal aircraft.


Theater in Review
Lypsinka!
A Day in the Life  Perry Street Theater 31 Perry Street Manhattan Through April 19 Created and performed by John Epperson, with the Enrico Kuklafraninalli Puppets; directed and choreographed by Michael Leeds; set by James Schuette; costumes, Anthony Wong; lighting, Mark L. McCullough; sound, Mark Bennett and Jim Van Bergen; puppet maker, Randy Carfagno; production stage manager, Kate Broderick; production manager, George Xenos.
The Fourth Annual OSolo Mio Festival presented by the New York Theater Workshop, James C. Nicola, artistic director; Nancy Kassak Diekmann, managing director.
John Epperson is the master, or rather the mistress, of the marginal theatrical device of lip-synching.
In other words, he can move his lips exactly in time with previously recorded songs and dialogue.
This could be the beginning and the end of his new solo show, "Lypsinka! A Day in the Life," were it not for the underlying commentary on roles imposed by men on women.


Werner Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Record Prices at Christie's For Japanese Swords
Buyers -- most of them Japanese -- paid record prices yesterday at Christie's in New York for swords and fittings collected by an Indiana physician and businessman.
The first day's sale of the Japanese sword collection of Dr.
Walter Ames Compton, described by the auction house as the most important ever held in the West, totaled $8 million, a record figure for a sale of Japanese works and within the auction house's expectations of $7 million to $10 million.
"It's the best private collection in the world," the president of the Japanese Sword Company of Tokyo, Tomihiko Inami, said before the sale.
"The quality and the quantity is extraordinary. A Japanese cannot keep such a collection."


Charivari Ads Long for 80's
Advertising these days is replete with images of people who have abandoned the carefree materialism associated with the 1980's and have ostensibly adopted practical, "back-to-basics" values.
But one retail advertiser is longing for an 80's revival.
Charivari, which has seven fashion boutiques in New York and Japan, has introduced a print and outdoor-poster campaign, created by Kirshenbaum &amp; Bond in New York, that carries the theme "Wake us when it's over."


Market Place; Seeking a Cure For Ailing Shares
REGENERON PHARMACEUTICALS began its life as a public company on a very sour note.
Almost alone among biotechnology stocks, its share price collapsed soon after the initial public offering last April.
Now, a year later, the company has produced evidence it hopes will persuade investors that "we're not just a science company," but a commercial one as well, as Dr.
Leonard S. Schleifer, the company's president and chief executive, said yesterday.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Borg Struggles Before Defeating Svensson  Bjorn Borg, resuming a comeback he started a year ago, struggled before beating a fellow Swede, Peter Svensson, 6-2, 6-7 (3-7), 6-3, yesterday in a first-round match of the River Oaks International tournament in Houston.
"I was satisfied with the match," said the 35-year-old Borg, who won 11 Grand Slam events, including five consecutive Wimbledon titles, before retiring in 1981.
"Maybe he doesn't hit as hard as he used to but I think he'll improve as he plays more," Svensson said.
Borg reached the finals of the River Oaks tournament in 1974 as a 17-year-old, losing in the title match to Rod Laver. (AP) Fernandez Is Upset: After torrential rains washed out most of the first-day matches, the sun broke through at the Family Circle Cup in Hilton Head Island, S.C., yesterday and seven of the nine seeded players advanced.
But Gigi Fernandez, seeded ninth, was upset by unseeded Silke Frankl of Germany, ranked 115th in the world.
Fernandez saved two set points in the first set.
But she won only three games the rest of the way in losing by 6-7 (7-9), 6-2, 6-1.
Conchita Martinez of Spain, seeded fifth, defeated Mary Lou Daniels, 6-0, 6-2.
Gabriela Sabatini, seeded first, and Martina Navratilova, seeded second, in the $550,000 tournament, begin play today. (AP) Lendl Advances: Top-seeded Ivan Lendl advanced yesterday to the second round of the Estoril Open in Lisbon, when Mark Koevermans of the Netherlands retired in the second set.
The rain-interrupted match was about to start again after Lendl won the first set, 7-5.
But Koevermans stopped playing after hearing the news of his grandmother's death. (AP) BOXING  Ioka Defeats Tunacao and Retains Title  Hiroki Ioka of Japan outpointed the Filipino challenger, Noel Tunacao, in a unanimous decision yesterday to retain his World Boxing Association junior flyweight title.
There were no knockdowns in the 12-round bout at Kitakyushu Municipal Sogo Gym in Japan.
Ioka improved his record to 20-2-1 with nine knockouts.
Tunacao is 18-1-1 with eight knockouts. (AP) N.H.L.
Jennings Leads Penguins Past Flyers  Grant Jennings matched his season output by scoring two goals last night as the Pittsburgh Penguins, playing at home, facing a possible strike that could keep them from defending their Stanley Cup title, defeated the Philadelphia Flyers, 6-5.
Jennings's second goal with 5:39 remaining broke a 5-5 tie and gave the Penguins 85 points, pulling the Penguins into a third-place tie with the Devils.
Mario Lemieux added a goal and assisted on three others, raising his league-leading point total to 132.
He scored unassisted on a power play at 7:33 of the third period to break a 4-4 tie, extending his point-scoring streak to 13 games. (AP) Red Wings 3, Blackhawks 3: Shawn Burr's goal with 2:35 remaining in regulation time capped a 93-second scoring spree and gave Detroit a tie with the visiting Blackhawks.
Burr tipped Sergei Fedorov's slap shot over Ed Belfour's shoulder for his 19th goal and the third in a 1:33 span.
Fedorov had given the Wings a 2-1 lead midway through the third, but Chicago went ahead on goals one minute apart by Mike Peluso and Steve Larmer. (AP) Bruins 5, Nordiques 4: Adam Oates scored two goals and assisted on the winner by Brent Hughes with 36 seconds left in overtime as Boston beat visiting Quebec.
The goal was the first of the season for Hughes, obtained by Boston from the Washington Capitals on Feb. 24.
Defenseman Curtis Leschyshyn had two goals for the Nordiques. (AP) North Stars 5, Sabres 3: Minnesota's Ulf Dahlen and Mike Craig each squeezed two goals into a game filled with fights as Minnesota and Buffalo combined for 360 penalty minutes at Bloomington, Minn.
Craig broke a 3-3 tie at 16:42 of the third period, then added an insurance goal in the final minute as the Stars recovered after losing a 3-1 lead to end a five-game losing streak. (AP)
Flames 5, Oilers 2: Gary Roberts reached the 50-goal mark for the first time in his career by scoring twice as Calgary, playing at home, kept its playoff hopes alive.
The victory moved the Flames within 4 points of the idle Winnipeg Jets in the battle for the final Smythe Division playoff spot.
Both teams have three games remaining, if there's no strike. (AP)


Telemundo Group Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


PEC Israel Economic Corp.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


HMG/Courtland Properties reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Lilly Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


International Innopac reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Sears Plans To Cut 2,000 More Jobs
Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company said yesterday that it would eliminate 2,000 more jobs by early next year.
The retailer said the move would save $30 million this year and $80 million annually thereafter.
In issuing its annual report and a proxy statement yesterday, Sears also said that Edward A. Brennan, its chairman, president and chief executive, had declined to be considerated for an annual performance bonus "to reflect the spirit of the salary freeze that was in effect for salaried employees" in Sears's merchandising group and at corporate headquarters.


Audit of House Post Office Finds Inadequate Controls Over Money
An audit of the post office at the House of Representatives found that controls over cash were still inadequate last week, nearly a year after an employee absconded to Puerto Rico with several thousand dollars of post office money, Congressional aides said today.
The Speaker of the House, Thomas S. Foley, appointed a new postmaster this afternoon to replace Robert V. Rota, who resigned earlier this month amid allegations of sloppy management at the post office.


Supreme Court Upholds Method Used in Apportionment of House
In a decision that dashed Montana's hope of retaining two seats in the House of Representatives, the Supreme Court today upheld the constitutionality of the method Congress has used for 50 years to apportion seats among the states.
The unanimous ruling overturned a decision issued last fall by a special three-judge Federal District Court in Montana.
That court, ruling in a lawsuit brought by the state, had ordered the use of a different method under which Montana would have kept the two House seats it has had since 1910 and the State of Washington would have lost one of its nine.


Fisher &amp; Porter reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Jones Intercable Investors reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


General Nutrition Inc. reports earnings for Year to Feb 1


Theater in Review
Hour of the Lynx  Harold Clurman Theater 412 West 42d Street Manhattan Through April 12 By Per Olov Enquist; translated by Kjersti Board; directed by Oeyvind Froeyland; set by Campbell Baird; lighting, Paul Bartlett; costumes, Deborah Rooney; composer, Genji Ito; dramaturge, John Bergstrom; production stage manager, Lillian Ann Slugocki; managing director, James Boglino.
Presented by Northern Lights Theater.
WITH: Rob Campbell, Heather Ehlers, Helen Harrelson and Jason Jacobs.
The search for God often leads the mind through dark and mystical territory.
In "Hour of the Lynx," a new play by the Swedish writer Per Olov Enquist, a mentally unbalanced young man who murdered the couple who bought his deceased grandfather's farmhouse deifies a cat he was given to care for as an experiment in the asylum in which he is incarcerated.


Excerpts From Court Ruling to Lift Curbs on Formerly Segregated Schools
Following are excerpts from the Supreme Court's decision today in Freeman v.
Pitts, providing standards for the termination of Federal Court control of formerly segregated school districts.
The vote was 8 to 0.
Justice Anthony M. Kennedy wrote the majority opinion, which was joined by Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist and by Justices Byron R. White, Antonin Scalia and David H. Souter.
Justices Scalia and Souter also wrote concurring opinions.
Justice Harry A. Blackmun wrote an opinion concurring in the judgment, which Justices Sandra Day O'Connor and John Paul Stevens joined.
Justices Clarence Thomas did not vote in the case, which was argued before he joined the Court.
JUSTICE KENNEDY  For the Court.
DeKalb County, Ga., is a major suburban area of Atlanta.
This case involves a court-ordered desegregation decree for the DeKalb County School System (D.C.S.S.).
D.C.S.S. now serves some 73,000 students in kindergarten through high school and is the 32d-largest elementary and secondary school system in the Nation.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo; Clinton's Roots Trip Him in New York
History is riddled with the stories of Southerners who fled their native region and found glory in New York City.
They were writers and actors, musicians and journalists, people from every walk of life -- except, perhaps, Presidential contenders.
For them, the rite of passage has been hard in recent years.
Call it Bill Clinton's Southern problem.
It can pop up as an explicit appeal to regional bias, as with the handful of protesters who greeted the Arkansas Governor in Boro Park on Sunday night with signs that said, "Bubba Stinks." It emerges in interviews conducted by the Clinton campaign, in which his aides say some New Yorkers free-associate Mr.
Clinton with Jimmy Carter and television evangelists.


Penny-Pinching Submarine Warfare to Death
To the Editor:
"Mr. Clinton's Tough Choice" (editorial, March 24) is right to point out that tough decisions will have to be made by any President on the size and shape of the United States defense industry.
But you're way wide of the mark in concluding that the United States can afford to dispose of the submarine design, engineering and construction capability at the General Dynamics Electric Boat Division in Groton, Conn.
The Bush Administration terminated the Seawolf program in January as part of its fiscal 1993 defense budget.
Once envisioned as a 29-ship program, the Seawolf was canceled after one ship (designated the SSN-21), now under construction at Electric Boat.
Two ships previously authorized and appropriated by Congress were also included in the termination.


Koo Koo Roo Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Gotti Judge in Control From Start
Even before the trial of John Gotti began, the rulings of Judge I. Leo Glasser have had a significant impact on the case.
He disqualified Mr.
Gotti's longtime lawyer, Bruce Cutler, last July, because the lawyer participated in taped conversations that were part of the prosecution's evidence.
During the trial, Judge Glasser exercised tight control over the lawyers, holding one of them, Anthony M. Cardinale, in contempt of court for arguing vociferously about the judge's decision to exclude a defense witness.


Brown Trounces Clinton in Caucuses in Vermont
Former Gov.
Edmund G. Brown Jr. of California finished an easy first today in Vermont's Democratic Presidential caucuses, his anti-establishment message drowning out the more conventional voice of Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas.
With nearly 95 percent of the state's 246 caucuses reporting, Mr.
Brown captured 46 percent of the support, to 17 percent for Mr.
Clinton, a decisive edge that gave him a lift going into the New York primary next week.
In Third: 'Uncommitted'


Leaders in Albany Settle Disputes In Rush to Meet Budget Deadline
Using a time-honored method for closing a budget deal, state leaders on Tuesday produced more money for schools and for New York City with an array of last-minute fiscal maneuvers that all but guaranteed the swift conclusion of marathon budget negotiations.
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and the state's legislative leaders hoped to cap their achievement with the symbolic act of passing budget bills before midnight, when the new fiscal year began.
But by the time March gave way to April, the budget bills were still being printed and the lawmakers were not expected to cast their final votes until the wee hours of Wednesday morning.


Port Authority Forecasts a Loss of 200,000 Jobs
In their annual economic forecast released yesterday, officials at the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey said they expected the region to lose another 200,000 jobs in 1992 before a mild recovery settled in in 1993.
That bleak forecast comes on top of the 495,000 jobs that have already been lost in the region over the last two years.
"No major turnaround is expected in the next few months," said Stanley Brezenoff, the Port Authority's executive director.
Of those additional job losses, about half, or 110,000, are expected to come from New York City, said Rosemary Scanlon, the Port Authority's chief economist, with the rest from northern New Jersey, Long Island and the suburbs north of the city.


Bobbie Brooks Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Tom Kahn, Leader In Labor and Rights Movements, Was 53
Tom Kahn, former international affairs director of the A.F.L.-C.I.O. and a longtime civil rights advocate, died on Saturday at his home in Silver Spring, Md.
He was 53 years old.
Mr.
Kahn died of complications resulting from AIDS, said a statement issued by the American Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial Organizations.


Pacesetter Homes reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Pleas Amid a Vote by N.H.L. Players As New Strike Deadline Approaches
With hockey players voting on a collective bargaining agreement, and a strike scheduled for 3 P.M. today, the leaders of both union and management appealed to the fans and the work force yesterday afternoon in an emotional display of public passion and persuasion.
Sounding like candidates for public office, the president of the league and the executive director of the Players Association held separate news conferences in Toronto that were televised nationally in Canada.


Bias Attack Is Reported in Crown Heights
A Hasidic man was attacked last night by a group of black youths on a street in Crown Heights, Brooklyn, and the police have classified the attack as bias related.
Detective Kim Royster, a police spokeswoman, said the Hasidic man, whom the police declined to identify, did not appear to have been injured in the 9:30 P.M. attack.
She said the police who were investigating the attack did not have any suspects in the case.


Gotti Case Goes to the Jury Today


Amstar Corp. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Blue Cross Sending Checks in Settlement
In a settlement of a class-action suit brought by a patient complaining about insufficient payments on doctor bills, Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield said yesterday that it was sending checks totaling $8 million to 54,000 subscribers.
Empire Blue Cross denied all charges of wrongdoing, saying it agreed to settle the case to avoid burdensome litigation.


Japanese Stock Slide Continues
The deep pessimism here over the course of the economy and the stock market worsened on Wednesday as stock prices plummeted despite announcments of a steep cut in the official interest rate and an emergency Government stimulus program.
The market continued to be very volatile today, closing lower after it struggled to recover from a sharp selloff in the afternoon.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
CHICAGO WHITE SOX -- Placed Carlton Fisk, catcher, on the 15-day disabled list.
CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Placed Joel Skinner, catcher; Jim Thome, third baseman; and Reggie Jefferson, first baseman, on the 15-day disabled list.
Signed Ted Power, pitcher, to a one-year contract.
KANSAS CITY ROYALS -- Sent Kevin Koslofski, outfielder; Rico Rossy and Luis Media, infielders; and Tim Spehr, catcher, to their minor league camp for reassignment.
SEATTLE MARINERS -- Returned Donnie Elliott, pitcher, to the Philadelphia Phillies by sending him outright to Scranton-Wilkes-Barre of the International League.
TEXAS RANGERS -- Placed John Barfield and Hector Fajardo, pitchers, and Bill Haselman, catcher, on the 15-day disabled list, retroactive to March 28.
National League
ATLANTA BRAVES -- Optioned Mark Wohlers, pitcher, and Keith Mitchell, outfielder, to Richmond of the International League.
Sent Randy St.
Claire, pitcher, to their minor league camp for reassignment.
Waived Mike Heath, catcher, for the purpose of giving him his unconditional release.
CHICAGO CUBS -- Placed Jerome Walton, outfielder, on the 15-day disabled list, retroactive to March 28.
Traded Ty Griffin, infielder, to the Cincinnati Reds for Scott Bryant, outfielder.
Assigned Bryant; Lance Dickson, pitcher; and Derrick May, outfielder, to Iowa of the American Association.
Sent Jeff Robinson, pitcher, to their minor league camp for reassignment.
CINCINNATI REDS -- Assigned Ty Griffin, infielder, to Chattanooga of the Southern League.
MONTREAL EXPOS -- Optioned Brian Barnes, pitcher, to Indianapolis of the American Association.
ST. LOUIS CARDINALS -- Placed Scott Terry, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list.


Great American Communications Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Plains Resources reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


U.S. Intec Inc.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Werner Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


CV REIT Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Canterbury Educational reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Financial Data Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


13 Companies Admit Guilt in False Coal Dust Tests
A three-year investigation of coal companies' tampering with equipment and falsifying tests to understate the amount of disease-causing coal dust in mine air has led to guilty pleas by 13 coal companies.
The companies admitted Tuesday in Federal District Court in Abingdon, Va., that they conspired to submit bogus air samples to the Federal agency monitoring mine safety, said Phillip B. Scott, an assistant United States Attorney in Charleston, W.Va.
Fifteen individuals also pleaded guilty in the case, Mr.
Scott's office said.


A Cafe for Bendel's. But of Course.
THE French stylist,interior designer and purveyor of chic Marie-Paul Pelle is at it again.
Her latest creation can be found at Henri Bendel, where she has designed Le Petit Cafe, which opens on Monday.
The inspiration for this cappuccino and espresso bar was La Cafetiere (The Coffeepot), a bistro in the Saint-Germain-des-Pres area of Paris.
"This is an homage to that place," the designer said.
"But of course, it's completely different."


Daily Telegraph Stock Offering
Hollinger Inc., owned by the Canadian financier Conrad Black, said today that it planned a public offering of shares in its Daily Telegraph unit, a major British newspaper.
Hollinger said the listing would take place in London, where 20 million or more Daily Telegraph shares would be offered in June.


Conservation Makes a Case
"What we found is that the cheapest source of new power is conservation." Those words from a senior New York State energy official explain Gov.
Mario Cuomo's laudable decision to cancel a $12 billion contract to buy power from a mammoth hydroelectric complex planned for Quebec.
The project, known as Great Whale, was bitterly contentious.
It would have provided New Yorkers with clean power beginning in 1995.
It would also have turned a huge, unspoiled area of Quebec into a managed system of waterways and reservoirs, threatening the hunting grounds and livelihood of native Indians.


Speaking of 'Hello'
To The Home Section:
Re: Your delightful ratiocinative piece on the etiology of "hello"  [ "Great 'Hello' Mystery Is Solved," March 5 ] , a churlish friend routinely solves the problem of what to say when someone calls.
He answers simply, "Telephone."
Often, I answer my telephonic summonses with the single word "Speaking."
And as for the specific makeup of the hello form: I suggest it might be a compressed form of "How well are you?" In more gracious times, more attention was paid to the well-being of the individual.
MARION D. S. DREYFUS New York


Camera Platforms International Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Prices of Treasury Securities Rise
Prices of Treasury notes and bonds rose and interest rates fell yesterday despite a fresh sign of economic revival and a sharp rise in foreign interest rates.
The seeds for what could have been a selloff were initially sown in overseas financial markets.


HMO of America reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


DYNA Group International reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


CHRONICLE
The eighth Earl Spencer, father of PRINCESS DIANA, was buried yesterday beside 19 generations of his family in the parish church near his home, Althorp (pronounced ALL-trop), in Northamptonshire, England.
Princess Diana and PRINCE CHARLES were among the mourners at the service, along with Princess Diana's two sisters, Lady SARAH McCORQUODALE and Lady JANE FELLOWES and their brother, CHARLES, formerly Viscount Althorp, now the ninth Earl Spencer, according to The Associated Press.
Lord Spencer, who was 68 years old, died of a heart attack on Sunday.
The bells of the small church, St.
Mary the Virgin, rang for more than an hour before the noontime service, which was attended by 200 people, half of them employees on the Spencer estate.
RAINE, COUNTESS SPENCER, Lord Spencer's second wife and Princess Diana's stepmother, waved to journalists and onlookers lining the road to the church.
A card attached to a bouquet of lilies, freesias and sweet peas bore a message from the 30-year-old princess.
"I miss you dreadfully darling Daddy but will love you forever." It was signed "Diana."


Buttrey Food &amp; Drug Stores Co.  reports earnings for 13wks to Feb 1


Port Agency Says Hoboken Owes Refund
A day after Hoboken voters, for the second time in two years, defeated a plan to redevelop the city's crumbling waterfront with the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey as a partner, the bistate agency says it wants a refund of at least part of the $30 million it has spent on the project over the last decade.
Sounding clearly frustrated, the chairman of the Port Authority, Richard C. Leone, said yesterday: "As far as I'm concerned, there is no project. The people have decided the issue locally. We've invested about $30 million various ways, and I think Hoboken has a financial obligation."


Acton Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Cellular Communications of Puerto Rico Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Twin Crowns for 30-Acre Fungus: World's Biggest, Oldest Organism
Scientists have discovered what could be the largest and oldest living organism on earth, an individual mightier than the blue whale, the giant sequoia tree or such past pretenders to size supremacy as the dinosaur.
The organism is a giant fungus, an interwoven filagree of mushrooms and rootlike tentacles spawned by a single fertilized spore 1,500 to 10,000 years ago and now extending for more than 30 acres in the soil of a forest near Crystal Falls, Mich., along the Wisconsin border.


Celina Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Iraq-Kuwait Border Still Under Discussion
To the Editor:
Though the demarcation of the Iraq-Kuwait boundary has been under discussion by the United Nations Iraq-Kuwait Boundary Demarcation Commission, whose chairman is Mochtar Kusuma-Atmadja of Indonesia, no final recommendations have been made.
The ground survey and aerial photography work in the border area has been completed.
Data gathered in the field are being analyzed for the purposes of producing a set of large-scale orthophoto maps, which will cover the entire length of the boundary, and a series of cross-sectional profiles of the Qadi Al-Batin.


Liberty Homes Inc.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


House Blocks Spending on Savings Rescue
As a revolt by Republican lawmakers withstood heavy Administration lobbying, the House of Representatives this evening defeated a bill that would have allowed the Federal Government to continue spending money to rescue ailing savings and loan institutions.
The vote was 298 to 115, with 180 Democrats and one independent joining 117 Republicans against the measure, which would have allowed the continued spending of $17 billion left from money authorized last December.
As more and more Republicans voted no and it became apparent that the bill would not pass, dozens of wavering Democrats decided toward the end of the vote not to bother supporting the highly unpopular measure.


Record World's Chief Finds 2 Buyers for the Company
When David E. Bloom joined Record World Enterprises Inc. as its chief executive last year, his mission was clear: help revamp and expand the 90-store chain.
But for the last eight months, he has tried to put himself out of work by finding a buyer for the company, based in Roslyn, L.I.
He succeeded Tuesday night, when a bankruptcy court approved the purchase of 65 Record World stores for $38 million by two companies.
The decision ended a bidding war between the buyers and the Musicland Group for Record World, which had sales in 1991 of $72 million.


Reserve Industries Corp. reports earnings for Year to Nov 30


Home Video
The April schedule of Quantum, Time Warner's giant cable television service in Queens, lists "Boyz N the Hood," "Dead Again" and "The Doctor" among the hit films to be shown during the month on its 55 pay-per-view channels.
The movies, now in the top three spots on Variety's best-renter list, have been available on tape for less than a month, and it might seem startling to find them already on television just when they are hitting their stride in video stores.
In fact, the Quantum schedule does not violate the window of time the studios allow the stores to rent the movies before they are made available to pay-per-view television, which is growing fast across the country but still amounts to only about 2 percent of the video rental market.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: New York; Clinton Has Turned the Corner With Voters, His Aides Say
Gov.
Bill Clinton had the complete New York primary experience yesterday, expounding on his views on the post-cold-war era at the Foreign Policy Association and defending himself against accusations of marital infidelity on "Donahue."
Former Gov.
Edmund G. Brown Jr. led a labor march through lower Manhattan, asserting that his anti-establishment appeal would carry the day.


Workers Strike at Bus Company
Bus drivers and mechanics struck the Red and Tan Lines before dawn today, snarling the morning rush hour for about 8,000 commuters in Bergen and Rockland Counties.
The walkout started about 4 A.M. after a night of bargaining between the privately owned bus company and Local 1558 of the United Transportation Union failed to break a stalemate on wages and health-care benefits.


Where the English Country Look Is Still Man's Best Friend
WHILE many decorators have abandoned the English country-house look that once engulfed Fifth Avenue libraries, East Side studio apartments, Connecticut bedrooms -- even pool houses in the Hamptons -- in favor of a virtuous new minimalism, Josef V. Pricci has stuck to his idea of what the proper gentleman's home should look like.
In the last 22 years, Mr.
Pricci, a Manhattan interior decorator, has moved and redecorated nine times, done hundreds of rooms for clients, participated in about a dozen show houses -- including three put on by the Kips Bay Boys and Girls' Club in Manhattan -- resolutely striking the same traditional note throughout.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo; BROWN IS HELPED BY CLINTON FOES
Hoping to bring about a brokered convention -- an event that would probably increase their own influence -- a number of prominent New York labor and political leaders are supporting Edmund G. Brown Jr. simply to block Bill Clinton from winning the Democratic Presidential nomination.
The cast of political leaders supporting Mr.
Brown, the former Governor of California, includes unlikely people like Mayor Thomas Whalen 3d of Albany, one of the few cities in the state that still has something resembling a Democratic machine.


Luria (L.) &amp; Son (A) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 1


Rexhall Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Pregnancy-Discrimination Award Upheld
A state appellate court has reversed itself and upheld a decision of the state Division of Human Rights awarding $450,000 to an employee of the New York City Transit Authority who accused the agency of discriminating against her during two pregnancies.
The woman contended that she suffered a miscarriage when the Transit Authority ordered her to continue driving a bus during her first pregnancy, even though she requested a different assignment.
During a second pregnancy, she said, the authority forced her to take an unpaid maternity leave.


Abatix Environmental reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Laser Corp. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


College Basketball; Virginia Wins Title, N.I.T. Title, That Is
All week Coach Jeff Jones had told his Virginia players: Don't feel sorry for yourselves because you're in the National Invitation Tournament and not the N.C.A.A.
Playing like anything but also-rans, the Cavaliers won the N.I.T. last night over Notre Dame, whose followers made Madison Square Garden seem like the Irish's arena back home in Indiana.


U.P.S. Buys Europe Carrier
United Parcel Service of America Inc. said today that it had bought the Austrian package carrier Star Air Parcel Service, its gateway agent for most shipments to Eastern Europe.
No terms were disclosed.
U.P.S., the world's largest package distributor, said the deal marked its 15th European acquisition and gave the company an intra-country delivery service in Austria along with the air-express services it first offered there in 1986.


Nets Top Bucks and Nip At the Heels of the Heat
The Nets are focusing sharply on securing a playoff berth.
After falling behind by 23 points in the first half tonight against the Bucks, the Nets could not afford the luxury of scoreboard watching.
New Jersey concentrated on a comeback and rallied to defeat Milwaukee, 121-117.
The victory moved New Jersey into a virtual tie with the Miami Heat for the eighth and last playoff spot in the Eastern Conference.
The Nets (33-39) trail the Heat (34-40) by one percentage point.


Jean-Francois Daigre, Designer, Is Dead at 56
Jean-Francois Daigre, the surviving partner in the Valerian Rybar &amp; Daigre Design Corporation of New York and Paris, once one of the world's most expensive decorating and architectural design firms, died on Saturday in a hospital in Paris.
He was 56 years old and lived in Paris.
Mr.
Daigre, a former Manhattan resident, died after a long AIDS-related illness, a director of the firm, Jorge A. Ferrari, said in Paris.


Giant Food Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


St. James Aiming For Indianapolis 500
LYN ST.
JAMES officially announced yesterday that she would try to qualify for the Indianapolis 500, scheduled for May 24, in a car entered by DICK and DIANNE SIMON, longtime Indy-car team owners.
If the 45-year-old St.
James succeeds, she would become the second woman to drive in the nation's most-famous race.
JANET GUTHRIE drove at Indy from 1977-79, with a ninth place her best finish.
St.
James said she had approached about 150 companies as potential sponsors before striking a deal with J. C. Penney, which will back her at Indy.
"You bet there were times when I thought it wasn't going to happen," St.
James replied when asked if she ever got frustrated during the search.


Comdata Holdings Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


2 Fatally Stabbed at Home
A 69-year-old woman and her teen-age foster son were bound and fatally stabbed in their South Bronx apartment yesterday morning in what the police say was a push-in robbery.
A third stabbing victim, the woman's daughter, managed to call the police after freeing herself.
She was in critical but stable condition last night at Lincoln Hospital.
The attack took place in the Moore Houses, a city housing project at 674 East 149th Street.
The police identified the victims as Rosa Rodriguez, Danny Cheveres, 19, and Cynthia Rivera, 22.


KMS Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


There's Art In the Wind
WEATHER vanes are classic, unpretentious examples of American folk art -- in other words, sitting ducks just waiting for a group of pointy-headed architects to reinterpret them.
But wait.
The weather vanes designed by Stanley Tigerman, Michael Graves, Smart Design and the Japanese architect Takenobu Igarashi for the Markuse Corporation of Woburn, Mass., are full of the romance and wind-tossed wit that has long characterized the form.


Gotti Jury Begins Deliberations by Hearing Replay of Secret Tapes
Jurors in the trial of John Gotti completed their first day of deliberations yesterday after listening to four tapes of Mr.
Gotti discussing the operation of the Gambino crime family.
In a note shortly after beginning the deliberations in the morning, the jurors asked to hear the tapes of two conversations that the prosecution had played as part of its evidence that Mr.
Gotti and his co-defendant, Frank Locascio, were leaders of the Gambino organization.


Is Our Space Program Pursuing Fool's Gold?; Thrill of Exploration
To the Editor:
While I believe there is some merit in Timothy Ferris's argument in "Ground NASA and Start Again" (Op-Ed, March 16), that the National Aeronautics and Space Administration suffers under an excessive bureaucratic overlay, his allegation that this results from an overemphasis on human space flight seems simplistic.
Mr.
Ferris indicates his true sympathies by his statement that NASA had its "glory days, when men flew into orbit and on to the moon." Such a statement suggests that even he can perceive the inspirational power of human space flight.
I think the difference between human missions in the Apollo era and those we have now is the difference between true exploration and the running of a freight delivery operation.
Even the name "shuttle" is hardly inspirational.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in some editions yesterday about a vote in the Senate, to allow Federal financing of tissue transplants using cells from aborted fetuses, misstated the tally.
It was 77 to 23, not 72 to 23.


International Mobile Machines reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Furniture That Gets Around
HOLD on to your antimacassars.
Jean-Paul Gaultier, the fashion designer who made skirts for men and ballistic brassieres for Madonna, has turned his attention to furniture.
Mr.
Gaultier, who takes great pleasure in mixing the historical with the avant-garde in his fashions (like Victorian frills with bondage accouterments), is up to similar tricks with his styles for the home:


Calendar: Works of Art And Old New York
Artists' Other Works
New York School of Interior Design, 155 East 56th Street; (212) 753-5365.
An exhibition of furnishings, decorative objects and textiles by artists -- including a curtain designed by Matisse, a chair by Diego Giacometti, fabric by Raoul Dufy and an urn by Picasso -- runs through May 20.
Hours: noon to 6 P.M.
Monday through Thursday; noon to 5 P.M.
Friday.
Free.
About Ceramics
McGraw-Hill Auditorium, 1221 Avenue of the Americas (49th Street); (212) 309-6886.
American Ceramics Magazine and the Everson Museum of Art of Syracuse are sponsoring a symposium on ceramics from 9 A.M. to 5 P.M. on April 10.
Participants will include Hilton Kramer, the art critic; David McFadden, a curator at the Cooper-Hewitt Museum and Ronald Kuchta, the director of the Everson Museum.
Registration fee, $125.
Urban New York, 1900
Fashion Institute of Technology, Katie Murphy Amphitheater, 227 West 27th Street; (212) 969-0673.
New York City at the turn of the century will be the subject of lectures from 7 to 9 P.M. on Tuesday and Wednesday.
The talks on Tuesday will be about mansions and monuments.
Tenements and fashion will be the topics on Wednesday.
Reservations are suggested.
Fee, both evenings, $50; one evening, $25.
Dining In
The Staten Island Institute of Arts and Sciences, 75 Stuyvesant Place (off Richmond Terrace), St.
George, S.I.; (718) 727-1135.
An exhibition of china and silver, from 18th-century Baroque to Art Deco, runs through July 19.
Hours: 9 A.M. through 5 P.M.
Monday through Saturday; 1 to 5 P.M.
Sunday.
Suggested donation: $2.50; $1.50 for students and those 65 or older.
Table settings by 22 designers, including Mario Buatta, Gail Salvatore and George Way, will be on display at a reception tomorrow night from 7 to 9, and at a tea on Saturday from 3 to 5 P.M.
Proceeds will benefit the institute.
Tickets, reception, $35; tea, $20.
Reservations required.


Dash Industries Inc. reports earnings for Year to Nov 30


Aid to Russia; Thankful Russia Still Wary Of Daunting Tasks Ahead
For months, the reigning young economists of Russia have been campaigning for Western economic aid, both to stabilize an economy lurching through one of the greatest transitions of this century and to provide political support for President Boris N. Yeltsin.
In a coordinated fashion today, perhaps timed to help Mr.
Yeltsin mute sharp criticism of his economic reforms when the full Russian Parliament convenes on Monday, President Bush and the German Government announced plans for considerable Western aid to Russia and other former Soviet states.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
FOR the secure mounting of heavy items like shelves, cabinets, mirrors and large pictures to walls made of plaster or wallboard, you must attach fasteners to the solid lumber framing beneath the surface.
But finding that framing is not easy.
First you have to know how these walls are constructed.
Most consist of evenly spaced vertical boards called studs that are fastened to horizontal boards at the floor and ceiling.
Studs are almost always two-by-fours, which of course means that they actually measure only one and a half inches thick by three and a half inches wide.


Enscor reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


BUSH AND KOHL UNVEIL PLAN FOR 7 NATIONS TO CONTRIBUTE $24 BILLION IN AID FOR RUSSIA
The leaders of seven major industrial nations announced a $24 billion, one-year program today to help propel Russia toward democracy, including a contribution from the United States of nearly $4.5 billion.
In announcements in Washington and Bonn, President Bush and Chancellor Helmut Kohl presented the program as a way for the United States and its allies to prevent economic collapse in Russia and stop a new authoritarianism from rising from the rubble of the former Soviet Union.


Loral Unit's Deal
Space Systems/Loral, a unit of the Loral Corporation, said it had received approval from the United States Government to buy Russian electric satellite propulsion systems.
The company said the deal was the first involving an exchange of space technology between an American company and a former Soviet republic.
Donald Atwood, Deputy Defense Secretary, authorized Space Systems/Loral to import equipment used to place satellites in assigned orbital positions.
The company said the West did not have similar technology.
Space Systems said it felt the equipment could make spacecraft more efficient by reducing satellite weight, fuel consumption and launching costs.


Virco Manufacturing reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Southwestern Public Service reports earnings for 12mos Feb 29


Biopool International reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


People
*
J.
Len van Zyl, 56 years old, president and chief executive at FCB/ Lewis, Gilman &amp; Kynett, Philadelphia, will resign, effective on June 30, to become chief executive of the South African Foreign Trade Organization.
He will be succeeded by Brian J. Gail, 45, senior vice president and group management director. *
Jeffrey T. Seregny, senior vice president and group management supervisor of Lintas Campbell-Ewald, Warren, Mich., was promoted to executive vice president and director of client services.
He succeeds R. H. (Ham) Schirmer, who joined Masco Corp., Taylor, Mich., as marketing vice president.


New Nissan Car Is Named Altima
The Nissan Motor Corporation said it would name its midsize sedan Altima when it is introduced this fall.
The model will replace the Nissan Stanza, which was first introduced in 1981.


Hockey; Defense Expected to Dominate in N.C.A.A. Semifinal Tourney
Woe to the goaltender who gives up the easy score tonight.
Few goals are expected when the National Collegiate Athletic Association's Division I semifinals open tonight at the Knickerbocker Arena in Albany.
There are four candidates, three from the state of Michigan, and each team not only has a solid defensive core, but also a skilled performer in the nets.


Russia Takes Over Command of Army in Moldova
President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia took command of the former Soviet army stationed in Moldova today, just as 10 people were killed in a skirmish between the Moldovan police and separatists in a region inhabited mainly by ethnic Russians.
Mr.
Yeltsin's decree moving the 14th Guards Army from the jurisdiction of the Commonwealth of Independent States to that of Russia also came as representatives from Moldova, Romania, Ukraine and Russia sought to negotiate a solution to a conflict that has become one of the fiercest ethnic battles in the former Soviet Union.


Clinton's Record in Arkansas Is Uneven on Health Issues
When Gov.
Bill Clinton says he has faced many uphill struggles to improve life for his constituents here, none has been more daunting than trying to improve health care.
Arkansas, one of the nation's poorest states, has some of the country's most serious health problems: above-average rates of disease and death, shortages of doctors and hospitals and inadequate insurance coverage.


Hanger Orthopedic Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Hockey; Devils Display Strong Solidarity
The Devils went through their traditional morning skate on the day of the game and they were ready to play the Washington Capitals tonight.
All that was left in the game-day ritual was a warm-up skate on home ice and the drop of the puck.
But instead of players showing up around 5 o'clock at Byrne Meadowlands Arena to prepare for the game, Lou Lamoriello, the president of the Devils, held a press conference and told everyone how displeased he was that no game would take place.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Candidate's Record; Policies Under Clinton Are a Boon to Industry
Under Gov.
Bill Clinton, Arkansas has grown to be a business-friendly state.
The Governor entices corporations with tax breaks, low wages and a warm, cooperative attitude.
All this has helped add jobs, increase income tax revenue and provide much of the money spent on efforts to improve public schools.
But in some cases industry has used state government concessions while eliminating jobs.


4 Palestinians Die in Major Gaza Clash
At least four Palestinians were killed and dozens wounded in the southernmost part of the Gaza Strip today in one of the most serious clashes between Israeli troops and Palestinians since the killings at Al Aksa mosque in Jerusalem 18 months ago.
Five of those hurt were said to be in very serious condition, including some with head wounds, raising the possibility that the death toll might increase.


Nutrition Management Services Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Long Lake Energy reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Review/Film; A Tale of 3 Brothers Shows a Dismal Russia
The unremittingly bleak Russian film "Hey, You Wild Geese" takes its title from a folk song with a chorus about destiny.
"Tell me my fate in the world," the lyrics ask, and the film provides grim answers for each of its principal characters.
These are Mitka, Petka and Sanka, seen as three young brothers in the film's 1950's prologue and then as weary, disappointed men in 1980, when the film's action unfolds in a rural village.
The abjectness of these brothers' lives is painfully contrasted with the false merriment of the Moscow Olympics, as symbolized by that grinning Soviet mascot, Misha the Bear.


Tax-Exempt Yields Gain; Taxable Funds Hold Steady
Yields on the money market funds monitored by IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report were mixed in the last week.
Tax-exempt money fund yields moved up smartly in the week ended Monday because of a combination of factors, including the increase of supply and the absence of an increase in demand.
To attract investors, issuers sometimes push up yields.


London Futures Market Names New Chairman
The London Futures and Options Exchange has named Michael Jenkins chairman.
He will take up the post in a non-executive capacity until June 1, when the current chairman, Andrew Large, 49, assumes the chairmanship of the Securities and Investments Board, which regulates Britain's securities industry.
Mr.
Jenkins, 59, has worked in financial markets for more than 20 years, the last 11 as chief executive of the London International Finance Futures and Options Exchange, which he helped create in 1981.
He is also a director of Liffe (Holdings) P.L.C., the London Clearing House and the Swiss Commodities Futures and Options Association.


ON THE ROAD WITH: Jacques Barzaghi; What's That Glimmering Behind Jerry Brown?
DON QUIXOTE had Sancho Panza and Richard Nixon had Bebe Rebozo.
Jerry Brown, who on any given day of his campaign can seem idealistic or just plain tricky, has Jacques Barzaghi.
People joke that Edmund G. Brown Jr. is Governor Moonbeam, but it is Mr.
Barzaghi who, behind the scenes, puts the frost on the California Flake.
Anywhere Mr.
Brown goes in his quest for the Democratic nomination for President, his longtime adviser and confidant is sure to be found -- and noticed.
He does not travel incognito.


Big BT Contract Awarded to M.I.T.
BT, the British telecommunications company, said it had awarded a $2.5 million five-year contract to the Massachusetts Institute of Technology's Media Laboratory to develop new computerized tools to "see" and "understand" visual images.


Valenti Calls 'J.F.K.' 'Hoax' and 'Smear'
In a highly unusual and angry statement, Jack Valenti, the president and chief executive of the Motion Picture Association of America and a former top aide to President Lyndon B. Johnson, denounced the film "J. F. K." today as a "hoax," a "smear" and "pure fiction" that rivaled the Nazi propaganda films of Leni Reifenstahl.
Mr.
Valenti, a film industry spokesman and lobbyist in Washington, has kept silent until now about the Oliver Stone film, which opened in December.
He emphasized that he was making a personal statement that "has no connection to my responsibilities in the movie industry."


Prine's New Lease on Performing Life
Like any great songwriter, John Prine frames the world in a way that gives things a slightly different luster, a new sheen.
His most recent album, "The Missing Years," released on his own Oh Boy label, includes 14 easygoing folk, rock and country songs on subjects like love, family, growing up and adjusting to the odd turns life takes.
But in Mr.
Prine's hands, the most familiar topics get a treatment no one else could give them.
"Sally used to play with her Hula Hoops," he sings in "The Sins of Memphisto." "Now she tells her problems to therapy groups."


FSI International Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Tecnol Medical Products Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


U.S. and Europe Agree on Limits To Subsidies for Aircraft Makers
Settling one of the most bitter trade disputes between the United States and Europe, American officials announced a tentative agreement today limiting government support for the commercial aircraft industry.
For several years, the Boeing Company and the McDonnell Douglas Corporation have accused Europe's fast-growing Airbus Industrie consortium of stealing business through unfair direct state subsidies.
Airbus has countered that American makers are indirectly subsidized by orders from the Pentagon and the space program and are engaged in a thinly veiled attempt to thwart a European upstart in an industry they long dominated.


Asked to Cut Back, Fernandez Seeks $517 Million More
Brushing aside Mayor David N. Dinkins's request to trim $100 million from next year's New York City schools budget, Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez yesterday called for a $517 million increase in spending for items ranging from school repairs and security to a longer school day for some students.
The Chancellor's budget request, calling for a 7.8 percent increase, marks the beginning of the annual tug of war over how much will be spent to educate the public schools system's 973,000 students.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Personal Finances; BUCHANAN INCOME IS PUT AT $809,975
Patrick J. Buchanan, the Republican candidate who often speaks of leading a "middle-American revolution," has income and assets that place him far above the average American, according to a financial disclosure form made public today.
Through most of last year, Mr.
Buchanan earned $809,975 from his nationally syndicated column, from his regular appearances on the "McLaughlin Group," "Crossfire" and "The Capital Gang" as well as from speaking fees.
In addition, Mr.
Buchanan has more than $1 million in an account with a major Wall Street brokerage firm and owns five rental properties worth at least $800,000.
He also owns at least $24,000 worth of stock and lives in a house in McLean, Va., valued at more than $1 million.


The Police Padlock Two Gambling Dens In Chinatown Raids
In simultaneous raids yesterday afternoon, the New York City police padlocked two Chinatown gambling dens that they said were hangouts for youth gangs involved in extortion, murder and the smuggling of illegal aliens, the police said.
The two basement dens, at 125 East Broadway and 1 Catherine Street, had become "magnets for violence" in the last two years involving two rival gangs, Tong Ons and Fuk Qing, that provided protection for the gambling parlors and may have profited from their operations, the police said.


Review/Television; From Britain, the Appalling but Dear 'Mr. Bean'
Not all British comedy imports click.
There was, for instance, the fizzle a few months back of campy "Dame Edna" in an American network special.
But then there are the seemingly instant classics, a very special category that includes the Monty Python gang and the "Fawlty Towers" series.
Now demanding serious consideration for membership in those upper reaches of blessed lunacy is Rowan Atkinson, who conveys the distinct impression that he was born to play each and every animal in "The Wind in the Willows."
Beginning tonight at 7:30 on Home Box Office and continuing for the next five Thursdays, Mr.
Atkinson can be seen in "Mr. Bean," a limited series of half-hours he created in 1989 for Thames Television.
Dressed in one-size-too-small boyish clothes, always with shirt and string tie, Mr.
Bean is a rather odd, fearfully determined fellow who on each show wanders in and out of two or three ordinary situations, transforming them slyly into extraordinary comic turns.


The Wonderful Wizards of the Ozarks
The team is tucked away in a corner of the state, so far from the big-city lights that it sometimes seemed as if no one noticed.
Most of the time, no one did.
It has taken time.
Even if the good people of Springfield, Mo., knew about the Southwest Missouri State women's basketball team, everyone else has had to catch up.
But in the months that have led to this -- the Final Four at the Los Angeles Sports Arena this weekend -- people have learned that the Bears (31-2) are more than just another good team.


Increase Water Taxes
To the Editor:
New York City has been using scarce tax dollars to pay for full-page ads, such as that of March 12 in The New York Times, exhorting New Yorkers voluntarily to use less water.
This is weak policy.
Stiffer water taxes are guaranteed to be effective, and would allow the city to lower other aversive taxes on modest-income New Yorkers, and the city would save the expense of taking out ineffectual ads asking citizens to cut back.
THOMAS O'BRIEN Director for Research Horizon Institute for Policy Solutions Charlottesville, Va., March 15, 1992


Welfare and Medicaid Bills Likely to Keep Soaring
Although the new state budget will wring unprecedented savings from New York's Medicaid and welfare programs, even the budget's architects do not believe it will arrest the explosive growth in spending on social services in the near future.
And unless the economy makes a remarkable rebound in New York, the continued growth in spending on social services for the poor and elderly may open large deficits in the budget this year and in subsequent years.


Crown Resources reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Drew Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


West Haven Bailout Plan Calls for Hartford to Take the Rudder
The state began pulling a second Connecticut municipality, West Haven, back from the edge of financial insolvency today.
But the $35 million package of loan guarantees approved by the House of Representatives differs sharply from the bailout of Bridgeport, the state's largest city, which filed for Federal bankruptcy protection last year.
State officials said that the far stiffer terms being dealt to West Haven, a mostly blue-collar community of 55,000 on Long Island Sound, are intended specifically to head off another Bridgeport fiasco, where the former Mayor battled the state for control, then took the city into bankruptcy court over vehement state objections.


Foster Wheeler Job
The Foster Wheeler Corporation said today that it had received a $143 million contract to design and build an asparatame artificial sweetener plant for Euro-Asparatame, a joint venture of the Ajinomoto Company of Japan and the Monsanto Company's Nutrasweet Company.
The plant will be in Gravelines, France.


The Telephone as Antique
To The Home Section:
Your article dealing with decorative elements used in the film "Howards End" mentions everything from lace antimacassars to vintage trains but fails to mention the antique telephone that is prominently displayed in the photograph  [ "Finding Realities to Fit a Film's Illusions," March 12 ] .
I was pleased to contribute such a phone to Jacqueline Kennedy when she was redecorating the White House.
She requested a phone that represented an earlier era in American history.
We had evidence that the phone, made in Sweden, was used by a phone company in Buffalo at the turn of the century.


Colt's Abuses Connecticut
Colt's Industries, a Connecticut firearms manufacturer that survives on financial support from the state, raised eyebrows two years ago when it resumed production of a military assault rifle for civilian use.
Now Colt's compounds the outrage by joining a lawsuit that seeks to overturn a ban on assault weapons in Columbus, Ohio.
A financing package that saved Colt's two years ago depended on a hefty contribution from state employee pension funds.
Last month, after the company filed for bankruptcy, the Connecticut Development Authority chipped in $2 million more in loans.


Douglas Roby, 94, A Former President Of Olympic Group
Doug Roby of Ypsilanti, Mich., a high-ranking American amateur sports official for 50 years and a member of the International Olympic Committee for 32 years, died Tuesday in a nursing home in Ann Arbor, Mich.
He was 94 years old. He died of heart failure, his family said.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Almanac; Ad Spending in New York City


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.50
6.50
9.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
6.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.12
4.00
6.46
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.00
4.08
5.76
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.08
4.19
5.77
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.12
7.19
7.89
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.89
7.93
8.21
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.85
8.85
9.29
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.76
6.76
7.32
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Yes, Help Russia, But Stop Magnifying Threats
President Bush deserves bipartisan support for his new programs of aid to Russia and the other former Soviet republics.
He has, laudably if tardily, seized the chance to invest in democratic and capitalist reform in what was recently a menacing Communist superpower.
Yet he forfeited an opportunity to redefine U.S. foreign policy using Russian aid as an example.
Mr.
Bush promotes aid as a bulwark against a renewed Soviet threat.
But he could instead be describing America's larger purposes in a transformed world -- transcending military responses to advance democracy and markets through cooperation.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Wet Match to Novacek  Third-seeded Karel Novacek won his opening-round match in the rain-troubled Estoril Open last night in Lisbon, beating Nuno Marques of Portugal, 6-2, 6-2.
The match was resumed on a lighted court after afternoon showers stopped play at 2-0 in the first set.
Andres Gomez of Ecuador, a former French Open champion, eliminated Emanuel Couto of Portugal, 6-3, 7-6 (9-7), in a match carried over from Tuesday.(AP) YACHT RACING  Wind Causes Failures  Brisk winds approaching 20 knots off San Diego yesterday created numerous gear failures in the America's Cup trials, including a broken rudder on the Japanese yacht, Nippon.
Chris Dickson and his Nippon crew were ahead of the French team by 58 seconds at the previous mark.
The mishap forced Nippon to drop out of the race and forfeit the day's victory to France.
In the other challengers' match, New Zealand defeated Italy by 18 seconds.


Albany Ready to Declare Victory and Adopt Budget
Despite having to miss the legal deadline by more than a day and rely on a last-minute accounting trick to settle a caustic battle over school aid, the New York State Legislature was set to declare victory this morning and give final approval to a $56.5 billion state budget.
But in a fitting conclusion to five months of exhaustive haggling here over the state's finances, the passage was held up by mechanical problems in getting the 2,200 pages of the budget bills printed and by 11th-hour objections from some lawmakers to the new taxes in the budget accord on banks, hospitals and insurance companies.


Addington Resources reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Philadelphia Suspect: A Troubled Life
Next to his picture in a 1960 high school yearbook is the prediction that Edward I. Savitz, its editor, would someday be Chief Justice of the United States.
"The Flame staff believes that its editor in chief will make it," they wrote 32 years ago in the yearbook of West Philadelphia High School.


Panel Criticizes Weight-Loss Programs
When it comes to losing weight, nearly all of the people who try commercial programs are being fooled nearly all of the time, a national panel of experts concluded here today.
After two days of testimony from leading obesity specialists, the panel said it had found no good evidence that any currently popular methods of "voluntary" weight loss had much chance for long-term success.
In fact, what evidence the panel could find suggested that 90 to 95 percent of dieters regain all or most of their hard-lost pounds within five years.


BRIEFS
*
Advanced Interventional Systems Inc., Irvine, Calif., signed a letter to acquire Polymicro Technologies Inc., which supplies fiber-optic products. *
American Telephone and Telegraph Co., New York, bought 51 percent of Informatica y Telecomunicaciones S.A., Mexico's telecommunications distributor.
No terms were disclosed.


Baseball; Kamieniecki Leaves The Yankees Guessing
The uncertainty over the Yankee pitching staff continued today as Scott Kamieniecki did little to hurt, or truly help, his struggle with Greg Cadaret for the final berth in the starting rotation.
Kamieniecki's adequate outing in a 5-3 loss to the Dodgers at Holman Stadium was not quite enough to push him past Cadaret in the race for the fifth starting position.
By allowing two earned runs and four hits in five innings, the 27-year-old right-hander may have muddled the equation even further.


Penobscot Shoe co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Dynasty Classics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Football; N.F.L. Will Give Rebate to Networks
The National Football League owners found a compromise here today for their television brethren who say they are struggling to sell advertising in a soft marketplace: Each team will give back $1 million of the $41 million it will receive from the networks in 1993, and the 1992 N.F.L. regular season will be played over 17 weeks instead of the 18 weeks previously scheduled.
In other action, the owners approved Victor Kiam's sale of his 51 percent interest of the New England Patriots to the St.
Louis businessman James B. Orthwein.
Kiam said closing on the deal should come by April 15.
Orthwein remains part of a group seeking an expansion team for St.
Louis.
His approval from the owners today hinged on the Patriots' remaining in New England.
Television payments for each team this season -- $34.5 million -- remain unchanged.


Iwo Jima Journal; Sulfur, Sharks and Always the Ghastly Surprises
The battle for this island ended 47 years ago.
But three weeks ago, in one of those grisly discoveries that seem commonplace here, a dwindling corps of 22 survivors and the descendants of Iwo Jima's dead returned here and dug through the thick brush and excavated the entrances of old tunnels to find the remains of 197 more Japanese soldiers.
According to the neat charts kept up at the old airfield, the prize that the two sides were struggling to control in one of the most gruesome battles of World War II, that leaves just 12,291 Japanese soldiers unaccounted for. (Japan's dead amounted to 20,000; America's 6,800.)


50-Off Stores Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Federated Department Stores reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 1


New Hope Is Seen for Trade Pact
After several years of tortuous negotiations, the leading trade negotiators of the European Community and the United States are saying, for the first time, that a global agreement on liberalizing trade may be possible soon.
The negotiations began five years ago under the auspices of the 108-nation General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, the world body that oversees trade, and they have assumed importance in recent months as a barometer of relations between Europe and the United States, now that the strategic threat that was long the cement of the trans-Atlantic alliance has been withdrawn.


Benton Oil &amp; Gas Co.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Is Our Space Program Pursuing Fool's Gold?
To the Editor:
"Fresh Air for the Space Agency," your optimistic March 13 editorial about the nomination of Daniel Goldin to lead the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, is premature.
His opinions and political abilities are largely unknown, as has been the case in other Bush nominations where commitment to a narrow point of view turned out to be the reason for the nomination.
Mr.
Goldin's technical experience with "Star Wars" is also not particularly apt background for NASA's problems.
Our civilian space agency carries out work in human space flight, earth remote sensing and space science.
Earth remote sensing is of unquestioned importance because of weather, ozone and climate change questions.
Mr.
Goldin's experience may be useful in deciding the mix of missions, small and large, in this area.


Fat Substitute From Oat Bran
The Quaker Oats Company and Rhone-Poulenc Inc. said yesterday that they planned to jointly market a fat substitute made from oat flour and oat bran for use in bakery products, processed meats, salad dressings, snack foods, frozen desserts and candy.
The companies said the fat replacer, called Oatrim, contained a substance known as beta-glucan, which some researchers say may be responsible for the cholesterol-lowering property of oats and oat bran.


Tracking the Elusive Student in Crown Heights; A Truant Officer for the 90's Uses Persistence and Persuasion, and Attendance Rises
With jazz tunes wafting softly from his radio, the man in the blue van cruised the streets of Crown Heights, his dreadlocked head turning slowly as he scanned the sidewalks and empty lots in search of loitering youths.
His eyes locked on four teen-agers shuffling toward a corner market.
The van slowed.
"You guys going to school?" he called out an open window.
They ducked their heads.
"Don't hide like that," he cajoled.
"Go on now."


All American Semiconductor reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: California; Who Is Jerry Brown? Voices From Past Show Why the Man Is an Enigma
As New Yorkers and the nation ponder the surprisingly strong Presidential bid of Edmund G. Brown Jr., they ask who is this unconventional politician?
In the California Democratic political soil from which he sprang, there are many answers.
Those who have known him well describe the ascetic former Governor variously as brilliant, self-absorbed, friendless, idealistic, erratic, opportunistic, cold, hypocritical.
Even many admirers say they cannot imagine him as President, administering a vast government apparatus.


Woodward's Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 25


New Campaigns
*
To reinforce Dollar Rent A Car's identity as lower-priced alternative for rentals, FKQ Advertising, Clearwater, Fla., has created a sequel to a campaign introduced last year featuring the actor Leslie Nielsen.
In one of the television commercials, Mr.
Nielsen, behaving as he did in the comedies "Airplane" and "The Naked Gun," steals a courtesy car and turns somersaults to take advantage of Dollar's low rates.


A Plan to Burn PCB's Frightens Neighbors
Twelve years after heavy concentrations of PCB's were discovered in the oily waters of a Metro-North Commuter Railroad yard lagoon here, environmental officials have announced a $9.1 million plan to burn the chemicals in a mobile incinerator and bury the residue in the yard.
But residents fear the proposal could be more dangerous than the lagoon itself, and they have vowed to fight it.


Osborn Communications reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Interpharm Laboratories reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Concert Series Planned for Bryant Park
Bryant Park, which reopens to the public on April 21 after extensive restoration, is planning a new concert series featuring performers from New York City's music schools.
The Bryant Park Young Concert Artists Series, a 20-week program of 60 free chamber-music concerts, will begin in mid-May with student instrumentalists from the Juilliard School, the Mannes College of Music, the Manhattan School of Music, Fiorello H. La Guardia High School of Music and the Arts and the City University Graduate Center.
Established concert artists will occasionally join the student performers.
The Bryant Park Restoration Corporation has appointed Deborah Drattell as artistic director for the park.
Ms.
Drattell, formerly a composer in residence with the Denver Symphony, said the concert series would "give audiences a chance to change their impressions of the park by offering them the opportunity to hear really fine music of the highest artistic quality."


International Murex Technologies Corp. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Texaco Ends a Sponsorship
The Texaco Company has decided to end its corporate underwriting of the public television series "Great Performances" at the end of this season, a spokeswoman for the oil company said yesterday.
"After a careful review of the program's current and future direction, we decided that it was heading into areas that are not within our niche, which has been in the area of traditional classical programming," the spokeswoman, Anita Larsen, said.
Texaco has long sponsored programs of classical music, including the radio broadcasts of the Metropolitan Opera's Saturday matinees.


Rehearsal Week For Nicklaus
A trimmer, muscular Jack Nicklaus will compete in the Tradition this weekend.
His devotion to a new fitness regimen, however, has little to do with his quest for a third straight tournament title.


Aid to Russia; Russia Is Said to Plan for a Smaller Armed Force
Russia has told the United States that it intends to maintain a smaller military force than Washington expected, a senior Bush Administration official said today.
Under Moscow's plan, Russia would keep 1.2 million to 1.3 million troops in its armed forces, less than half the number that are now controlled jointly with other republics of the former Soviet Union, the Administration official said.
Russia also indicated it would assign its forces to more defensive positions and thin concentrations of heavy battle tanks and attack aircraft now in western Russia, the official said.


Essay; Bush-Clinton Debate
President Bush and his likely Democratic challenger went back-to-back on CNN yesterday, and Gov.
Bill Clinton came out standing a little taller.
Twenty minutes before a long-scheduled foreign policy address by Governor Clinton, the President rushed on the air to pre-empt his rival's call for aid to the republics of the former Soviet Union.


A Chair Is Still A Chair, or a Tree
IF you can wax poetic over a tree stump, chances are that you, like Daniel Mack, have rustic furniture in your blood.
"It's an elusive quality," he writes in his new book, "Making Rustic Furniture" (Sterling/Lark Books, $24.95), "that allows a chair to look and work like a chair while still retaining the grace and variety of the tree itself."
In the book, Mr.
Mack, a New York-based rustic furniture maker, contends that "if you can peel an apple, you can make a rustic chair." Half historical overview, half how-to, the book draws on Mr.
Mack's own expertise as well as that of leading craftspeople and dealers.
For those who have trouble peeling apples, the book also contains a source list of furniture makers, including specialists in bent wood, driftwood and hickory.


Las Vegas Discount Golf &amp; Tennis reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Labatt Breweries Plans Consolidation
Labatt Breweries of Canada announced yesterday that it intended to consolidate the agency roster handling its beer brands in Canada.
The subsidiary of John Labatt Ltd. in Toronto said the decision followed a six-month study involving all of its agencies, which concluded that "we need to streamline the process and reduce the lines of communication." A decision is expected in the fall, a spokeswoman said.


Data General Cuts
The Data General Corporation, which had been rebounding from past troubles, said it would lay off 1,000 workers and charge $46 million against earnings to pay for the cuts.
The computer maker, which employs about 8,100 people, said the layoffs would be worldwide, with a significant number of administrative positions being eliminated.
In 1991, Data General reported its first profitable year since 1985.
The company continued turning profits into the first quarter of its fiscal year, earning $4 million.
The $46 million charge will be counted against its second quarter, which ended on March 28.


No More No. 1 for Borg
BJORN BORG has an answer for those who say he can't become the No. 1 tennis player in the world again.
"They're right, I couldn't be No. 1 again," the 35-year-old Borg said.
"I'm just trying to play at the best level that I can play. I have no goals. I just want to have some fun and in six months we'll see."
Borg, resuming a comeback he started a year ago, had fun on Tuesday night, although he had to battle before beating a 17-year-old fellow Swede PETER SVENSSON, 6-2, 6-7, 6-3, in the first round of the River Oaks International tournament in Houston.


Concord Fabrics reports earnings for Qtr to March 1


Slaying Suspect Adrift in World of Violence
At a storefront church in Rochester, a few miles from a drug house where three people were found shot dead the morning before, Etheridge Pierce Jr. sought sanctuary on Monday.
His life had changed, he said.
He had nowhere to go.
And for most of the day, the 18-year-old from New York City sat quietly in a pew, praying and reading from a Bible.
"He said he didn't have no place to stay," said Bishop Johnnie L. Jackson, who tends to many troubled young men at the Last Days Deliverance Apostolic Faith Church, a small haven on a street of boarded up, graffiti-covered houses.
"He said he wanted to be saved. That's the word he used."


Slowdown on Bank Closings Is Seen
Bank regulators have sharply slowed the pace at which they close failing banks, the Senate Banking Committee was told today, a potentially costly development that Democrats said appeared to reflect political calculations by the Bush Administration.
Delays this year would both keep the Federal budget deficit from growing and protect local communities from the burden of replacing a lost source of credit.
But the delays could also increase the costs of closing ailing institutions later.


Rag Shops Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Marshall Steel reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Passage of Time In Busing Case Blurs the Lines
Like many critics of busing, Brenda Jackson was elated Tuesday when she heard that the United States Supreme Court had ruled in favor of the DeKalb County School District in a major decision that limited the desegregation requirements faced by local schools.
"I'm a firm believer that you support the school that's within your community," said Mrs.
Jackson, who has two children who have graduated from the DeKalb schools and one who is still in school there.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Brown; Campaign Rally Urges Jackson To Join Ticket
The crowd chanted, "V.P.! V.P.! V.P.!" at an impromptu rally in downtown Manhattan yesterday as Edmund G. Brown Jr. tapped the shoulder of the Rev.
Jesse Jackson, the man he wants for his running mate.
"You're looking at a winning coalition," the former California Governor declared.
But it wasn't as it seemed to be outside the Board of Elections at 200 Varick Street.


Hockey; Puck Stops Everywhere as Players Go on Strike
National Hockey League players went on strike yesterday, staging the first general walkout in the 75-year history of the league.
The strike began at 3 P.M. after the players, voting by secret ballot, rejected by a vote of 560 to 4 the owners' last proposal for a new collective bargaining agreement.


Dinkins Names New Chief of Hospitals
Mayor David N. Dinkins yesterday nominated Dr.
Billy E. Jones, the city's Mental Health Commissioner, to be president of New York City's Health and Hospitals Corporation.
The announcement came a week after a mayoral search committee said that it could not find a suitable candidate for the post, mainly because applicants said that the current salary of $129,000 was too low.
Mr.
Dinkins said he had recommended that the hospital corporation pay Dr.
Jones $150,000; he makes $110,000 as Mental Health Commissioner.


Reliance Insurance Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Industrial Expansion Continues
The nation's manufacturing economy, pushed by a surge in new orders, continued to expand in March, according to a report by the nation's purchasing managers.
Economists said that the figures presented the freshest evidence available that the nation's economy had moved out of recession.
The purchasing managers' report, a closely watched gauge of the nation's manufacturing industries, said that its index of economic activity rose to 54.1 percent in March from 52.4 percent in February.
It was the index's highest level in six months.
What Readings Show
A reading below 50 percent indicates that the manufacturing economy is declining; a reading above 50 percent indicates an expansion.


The S.&amp; L. Victims' Avenging Angel
When one of the nation's largest law firms and one of the largest accounting firms said this week that they would pay $87 million to settle charges that they had helped Charles H. Keating Jr. dupe investors, it was another big victory for Joseph W. Cotchett.
Mr.
Cotchett, a San Francisco lawyer, has become the scourge of the accounting and legal firms in recent years by suing those who were unlucky or unwise enough to have done work for companies or individuals who turned out to be crooked.
To many of his fellow professionals, Mr.
Cotchett is nothing more than a glorified ambulance chaser who relies on bombast and the age-old strategy of suing the deepest pockets with any link to the case.


METRO DIGEST
LAGGING BEHIND ON RECOVERY
Economists are growing increasingly convinced that a national recovery is finally under way, but they caution that residents of the New York region will have to be more patient.
A recovery in the region is likely to lag behind that of the rest of the nation by six months or more, many said, with economic growth resuming only in 1993.
B7.
NEW YORK CITY  DINKINS PICKS HOSPITALS CHIEF
Mayor Dinkins nominated Dr.
Billy E. Jones, the city's Mental Health Commissioner, to be president of the Health and Hospitals Corporation.
The announcement came a week after a mayoral search committee said that it could not find a suitable candidate for the post, mainly because applicants said that the current salary of $129,000 was too low.
B3.
COLOMBO MOB LEADERS ARRESTED
As jurors considered testimony in the murder and racketeering trial of John Gotti, the reputed boss of the Gambino crime family, Federal officials announced that they had arrested two leaders of another crime family, the Colombos.
B3.
BATTLE OVER THE SCHOOL BUDGET


Old Pianos Can Still Play Sweetly
RESTORING an old piano can be a complicated business.
There are its furniture part and instrument part, and specialized skills are needed to return each to optimum condition.
"The wood may need refinishing or French polishing," said Kalman Detrich, who has been a piano restorer in Manhattan for 32 years.
"Veneer may be missing. Or a part may be gone, like the music desk."


House Identifies Top 22 Bank Abusers
The House ethics committee tonight finally identified 22 current and former lawmakers who it said had repeatedly and substantially abused their privileges at the House bank.
The report sent new political shock waves across Capitol Hill.
The committee identified the 22 after rejecting appeals from most of the lawmakers.
In general, those found to have abused their banking privileges by overdrawing their accounts said they had done nothing wrong, and they contended that bank records were inaccurate.


Jean Philippe Fragrances reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Review/Television; That Mysterious Something Called Creativity
Creativity being a notoriously slippery concept, credit is due the producers of "The Creative Spirit" for a brave try at tracking and capturing the creature with the help of animation, dramatization, speculation, inspiration and quotation.
It makes for a lively outing, but when a hunter goes forth with butterfly net, rod and shotgun, you may suspect he is not altogether sure of the nature of his prey.
Much of "Inside Creativity," the first hour of the four-part series, at 10 tonight on Channel 13, consists of people, presumably all of a creative cast, trying to explain what gives their work that extra something.
Chuck Jones, the man behind Wile E. Coyote, calls attention to the cartoon star's persistence as he keeps running into stonewall adversity; the sight of Wile being smashed around gets the point across.
Benny Golson, a jazz musician, plays his own music and likens his feeling when composing to venturing into the darkness.
James Collins, a rock climber and lecturer in business at Stanford University, links the risk-taking aspects of the two endeavors, and the pictures of him hanging onto an unwelcoming rock face support at least half of his argument.


Living With Fear in the Shadow of Prisons
After an unsuccessful battle to prevent the state from building a prison in their midst, residents of this western Connecticut town are resigned to the fact that the Garner Correctional Institution will soon open.
But their anger and anxieties are re-emerging in the wake of three recent jailbreaks elsewhere in Connecticut.
"We're stuck with it and we have to work around it," said Carol Howard, who lives near the prison.
"But it's scary for me and for my kids to be home alone. And they have nothing in place to notify people if there's an escape."


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Journal; New York Campaigns Generate a Lot of Heat but Little Light
Thanks to a full week of intensive press coverage, even the most casual New York television viewers and newspaper readers have learned that there is a Presidential primary involving one candidate who always seems to be angry and another one who always seems to be in trouble.
That may be all they have learned.
So far New Yorkers have endured what is, on the whole, probably the least informative political coverage of 1992: stupefying debates, meaningless sound bites, obsessions with the trivial.
The closest thing to a substantive, illuminating discussion was not on a local broadcast but on yesterday's "MacNeil/Lehrer Newshour" and the "Donahue" show.


Steve's Homemade Ice Cream reports earnings for Year to Dec 28


Market Place; Cash Is Trash? Not This Time
"Cash," went the Wall Street refrain as 1991 ended, "is trash." So low were the prevailing interest rates on savings accounts, money market funds and Treasury bills that investors would have to turn to the stock and bond markets to find decent returns, the conventional wisdom held.
So what happened in the first quarter of 1992?
"Cash," as the financial community calls short-term investments, did better than stocks or bonds: Investors who kept their money in cash had positive returns, albeit small ones, while investors in stocks and bonds lost money.


Helmstar Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Financial Benefit Group reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Interferon Sciences Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Williams-Sonoma reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 2


Events: The Golden Age Of American Gardens
Gardens Over 50 Years
Metropolitan Museum of Art, Fifth Avenue at 82d Street; (212) 879-5500.
Mac Griswold, a garden writer, will speak on "The Golden Age of American Gardens: 1890 - 1940," Sunday at 3 P.M.
Suggested museum admission: $6; $3 for students and those 65 and older.
Green Thumbs
New York Botanical Garden, 200th Street and Southern Boulevard, Bedford Park, the Bronx; (212) 220-8747.
The education department will hold an open house from 3:30 to 7 P.M. on Wednesday, where visitors may meet instructors and register for classes in gardening, commercial horticulture, botany, landscape design and interior landscaping, among other subjects.
Catalogues are available by calling the garden.
Free.
Safe Gardening
Cornell Cooperative Extension, Davis Building, 1425 Old Country Road (east of Minetta Hill Road), Plainview, L.I.; (516) 454-0900.
A symposium on environmentally safe gardening, including lawn care, pest management and irrigation, will be held from 9:30 A.M. to 3 P.M. on April 11.
Fee, including lunch, $10.
Advance registration is required.
Scents and Soils
Reeves-Reed Arboretum, 165 Hobart Avenue, off Route 24, Summit, N.J.; (908) 273-8787.
A class on making a dried lavender arrangement will be held from 9:30 A.M. to noon on Saturday.
Fee, $48 ($44, members).
A workshop on enriching soils for gardens and potted plants will be held on April 11; fee, $15 ($12, members).
Advance registration required.
Problem Places
Bartlett Arboretum, 151 Brookdale Road, off High Ridge Road, Stamford, Conn.; (203) 322-6971.
Judy Glattstein, a gardening author, will give a two-part class on plants suitable for damp or wet areas (Monday, 7 P.M.) and for sandy or dry soils (April 13, 7 P.M.).
Fee, one session: $22 ($17, members); both sessions, $40 ($30, members).
Advance registration required.


Bush Signs a $14.2 Billion Foreign Aid Bill
President Bush tonight signed a bill that extends foreign aid for six months.
Earlier theSenate, resisting popular sentiment against such aid, approved the $14.2 billion measure but pared an Administration request for money for United Nations peacekeeping.
The bill passed 84 to 16 after Senate leaders reached a compromise on loan guarantees to Israel.
The White House had threatened a veto if the guarantees were included because Israel refused to halt new settlements in the occupied territories.


Dawn Capital Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Bassett Furniture Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


INSIDE
French Premier Resigns
Edith Cresson, the first woman to serve as Prime Minister, quit following the electoral setbacks of her Socialist Party.
Page A9.
Dim View of Congress
A poll shows half the public mistakenly believes that taxpayers made good for House bank overdrafts.
A list of the 22 worst offenders, meanwhile, was made public.
Page D21. 8 Dead, and a Youth Accused
Etheridge Pierce Jr., 18, sought sanctuary in a church on Monday.
Now, he faces charges of killing eight people in Rochester and New York.
Page B1.
Dieting Programs Faulted
A Federal health panel says there is no good evidence that popular commercial programs to lose weight do any long-term good.
Page D22.
Hockey Games Put on Ice
The first players' strike in National Hockey League history started with the playoffs a week away.
Page B11.


E-Z Serve Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Growing
THE bagworms must have started eating the cedar trees the summer my father was sick -- too sick to notice or care.
Or maybe he cared, but he could not muster the energy to do anything about it.
They ate their way through the summer, suspended in strange little silk bags covered with twigs and leaves.
Then, in September, they laid millions of eggs.


Itel Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Southland Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Buying Time for Yeltsin
The $24 billion in aid that President Bush and other leaders have promised Russia is not going to turn it into a prosperous nation overnight.
But it does give President Boris N. Yeltsin something Mikhail S. Gorbachev never received: a major vote of confidence on his economic reforms.
For Russia, the aid package may make the crucial difference between unbearable misery and hard, but tolerable times, and this, economists say, could give President Yeltsin the margin of maneuver to push ahead with his tough free-market program.


Codenoll Technology reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


St. John's Defendant Says He May Appeal


Olivetti Executive To Xerox
The Xerox Corporation said yesterday that it had hired a computer industry veteran from Olivetti, Vittorio Cassoni, as an executive vice president to spearhead the company's effort to blend computer technologies and office copiers.
Mr.
Cassoni, who will join Xerox's five-member management team, was president of A.T.&amp; T.'s Data Systems Group from 1986 to 1988.
There, he orchestrated A.T.&amp; T.'s investment in Sun Microsystems and was credited with getting the phone company's stumbling personal computer business off the ground.


Daxor Corp. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a sports article in some copies yesterday misstated the day of the opening of trout season in New York.
The season began yesterday.


Ghost Houses Reflect Fading of Farm Life
It sits, fragile as a bird's nest, down a country road with no name.
The old clapboard house has been abandoned for nearly 30 years, but some of the Svarc family spirit remains.
Patches of red honeysuckle wallpaper cling to the walls, and the entrance to the old root cellar where the family stored milk and eggs in the days before refrigeration still stands in the backyard.
Though the family moved to town in 1961, Emma Svarc (pronounced schwartz), of Czechoslovak descent and now 87 years old, never sold the old place, which she and her husband, Joseph, bought along with a pickup truck in the 1950's.
"I suppose I figured somebody might live in there yet," she recalled one March afternoon at The Wilber Nursing Home.


A Rising Tide of Rhetoric Over Warnings on Alcohol
AS Senate hearings get under way this morning on a bill that would require health warnings in advertising for alcoholic beverages, people on both sides of the issue are intensifying their already fierce efforts to sway public opinion.
The Surgeon General, Dr.
Antonia C. Novello, who last week reiterated her demands that the alcoholic beverage industry drop advertising meant to appeal to young people, has declared April as "Alcohol Awareness Month." She also urged health care officials to keep the industry accountable and let executives know "when their ads and promotions are misleading."


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Trail; Aides Seek Right Song For Clinton
Having dealt with sex and drugs, the Clinton campaign must now overcome the most impossible hurdle of all: rock and roll.
"We just can't find a theme song," said Gary Ginsberg, who is in charge of the Arkansas Governor's advance team.
"We have tried everything from R.E.M. to John Philip Sousa. You could not imagine how much energy, imagination and debate has been devoted to this issue."


Stolt Tankers &amp; Terminals reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Convest Energy Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Football; Run and Shoot to Beat Plan B Deadline
The National Football League Plan B free-agency period ended at midnight last night with a few major players moving to new teams and most returning to their old teams.
Around the league, the Atlanta Falcons, who use a run-and-shoot offense, raided the Houston Oilers' wonderful collection of run-and-shoot receivers for the second straight day.


Midland Resources reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Pele the Spokesman
PELE, perhaps the most famous player in soccer history, has signed on for MasterCard International as its spokesman for the 1994 World Cup and this summer's European Championship.
The former captain of Brazil's national team and star for the Cosmos, said he turned down opportunities to be a spokesman for beer, alcohol and tobacco companies.
MasterCard paid approximately $18 million to have two signboards around the field at the World Cup and European Championship games. (AP)


More Concerns Lift Dividends
The number of companies raising dividends turned up sharply in the first quarter of the year, providing another signal that the economy may be recovering, figures released yesterday by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation showed.
The report said 351 companies announced higher payouts in the quarter, an increase of 47 from the corresponding period of 1991.
It was the second consecutive quarter that saw a year-over-year increase, and was the largest such gain since the fourth quarter of 1988, when an increase of 50 was recorded.


Bridge
For the last two years, Sandra Landy and Michele Handley have been the most successful women's partnership in Britain, winning virtually every women's title available to them.
On Sunday in Pasadena, Calif., they became the first players from outside North America ever to capture a major women's title on this continent, coming from behind at the finish to capture the women's Swiss teams event.
On the diagramed deal, en route to victory, Handley, as South, demonstrated the right way to handle a suit combination that would deceive many.
As the partnership favors four-card major openings, she was able to open one heart.
The two-spade cue-bid as a passed hand showed heart support and a hand just short of opening requirements, so South bid the game.


Nachman Quits as New York Post Editor
Jerry Nachman, editor of The New York Post, announced his resignation yesterday after nearly three years in which the paper scored some journalistic coups while also setting the standard for big-city tabloid sensationalism.
Peter S. Kalikow, publisher and owner of The Post, said that Lou Colasuonno, the paper's executive editor and Mr.
Nachman's chief deputy, would become editor when Mr.
Nachman leaves in about two weeks.


Times Bags to Be Recycled
Starting on Sunday, New York Times subscribers will be able to recycle the blue plastic bags in which their papers are delivered at all Grand Union supermarkets in the New York metropolitan area.
Home-delivery customers can drop the bags, which are used to protect newspapers from water and dirt, in special bins at all Grand Union stores in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut.
The bags will be combined with other plastics recycled at the stores, then sent to Webster Industries, a manufacturer of lawn and leaf bags.


Wendell Mayes, 72, Film and TV Writer
Wendell Mayes, who wrote the screenplays for "Anatomy of a Murder" and "Advise and Consent," died on Saturday at St.
John's Hospital and Health Center in Santa Monica, Calif.
He was 72 years old and lived in Bel Air, Calif.


Sweden 9th in Suicides
To the Editor:
Jeff Manevich (letter, March 19) perpetuates an aging canard: Sweden has the highest suicide rate in the world.
Not so.
Statistics compiled for 1987 or later indicate that the suicide rates for the major countries of the world are, in descending order, Hungary, Finland, Austria, Denmark, Switzerland, France, Czechoslovakia, Belgium and then Sweden, in ninth place. (The United States is 15th.) Mr.
Manevich's implication that the suicide rate is tied to the form of government has yet to be proved by empirical study.
JESSE MITTLEMAN Laurel Hollow, L.I., March 23, 1992


Knicks Look Ahead and Leave Loss to Bulls Behind
The faster the Knicks forget about Tuesday's loss to Chicago, the better off they will be.
The Bulls' 96-90 victory reinforced Chicago's status as the best team in the National Basketball Association.
And the Knicks (46-26), who have just 10 games left in the regular season, have more urgent things to worry about than measuring up to Chicago.


James H. Bell, 48, Political Chief For Auto Workers Local, Is Dead
James H. Bell, a vice president of District 65 of the United Auto Workers who was active in New York City's union affairs and political campaigns, died yesterday at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in Manhattan.
He was 48 years old and lived in Mt.
Vernon, N.Y.
He died of lung cancer, union officials said.


Baseball; Mets Rape Case Transferred To the Florida State Attorney
The rape allegations against three players for the Mets is now in the hands of the Florida state attorney's office, which will decide whether to bring formal charges.
The case file was forwarded today by the Port St.
Lucie police to David C. Morgan, the assistant state attorney for the 19th Judicial Circuit of Florida, who now assumes control of the case involving pitcher Dwight Gooden and outfielders Daryl Boston and Vince Coleman.
The 31-year-old woman who filed the complaint a month ago said she was raped last March 31 at a home rented by Gooden.


Forum Retirement Partners L.P.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Vivra Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


College Basketball; Massimino Is Bound For Vegas
Rollie Massimino, the revered Villanova basketball coach who once turned down a $2 million contract to coach the New Jersey Nets, ended his 19-year career at Villanova last night by taking on the most daunting challenge in college basketball.
The 57-year-old Massimino accepted an offer from the University of Nevada-Las Vegas to replace Jerry Tarkanian as head coach of one of the most successful and visibly tarnished basketball programs in the country.


Last Bit of Eden Teeters on Brink of Development
YOU need a permit from the owners to set foot on this 445-acre island in the Great Peconic Bay.
It is either that or risk a harsh encounter with Robert M. Tuthill, the caretaker, who doesn't take kindly to uninvited visitors.
For the few allowed to take the short boat trip from the North Fork of Long Island to the storm-damaged pier on Robins Island, another problem arises.
A few hours in this place of rough beauty between the East End forks of Long Island, and the thought of leaving is painful.


Doughtie's Foods reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 28


Moody's Alters Debt Ratings After Kansas Utility Merger
With the $1.1 billion acquisition of the Kansas Gas and Electric Company by the Kansas Power and Light Company, Moody's Investors Service adjusted the debt rating of both utilities yesterday, affecting about $2.1 billion of debt and preferred stock.
Moody's lowered the senior debt rating of Kansas Power and Light to A-3, from Aa-3, saying the rating adjustment reflected the financial strain associated with the $450 million of bank debt in the transaction.


Wal-Mart Head in Hospital; Role Was Already Limited
It has been four years since Sam Walton, the founder and chairman of Wal-Mart Stores Inc., installed a management team to succeed him and gradually withdrew from the day-to-day leadership of what is now the nation's leading retailer.
But Mr.
Walton never completely backed away.
He dominated the company's annual meetings and dropped in frequently at the company's weekly management meetings.
He also barnstormed the country, piloting his plane to visit the company's stores.


Man Accused as Colombo Chief Is Held in Slaying of Ex-Member
As jurors considered testimony in the murder and racketeering trial of John Gotti, the reputed boss of the Gambino crime family, Federal officials announced yesterday that they had arrested two leaders of the Colombo crime family.
Victor J. Orena, described as the acting boss of the Colombo family, and Pasquale Amato, a high-ranking family member, were arrested and charged with the murder of a former Colombo soldier, Thomas C. Ocera, said Andrew J. Maloney, the Federal prosecutor in Brooklyn.


At Home Abroad; A Captive Press
The Sunday Times of London topped the front page some weeks ago with a banner headline: "Soviet files reveal Labor's private dialogue with Kremlin." Below it was a large picture of the Labor Party leader, Neil Kinnock, his head shown against a red background.
The eager reader of this great scoop found that Soviet diplomats over the years had sent home reports of meeting Labor Party figures at embassy cocktail parties, the House of Commons and so on.
They had conversations about current events.
In other words, humdrum stuff.


Books of The Times; 2 Voices as Far Apart as the Novel and the Essay
Jazz  By Toni Morrison  229 pages.
Alfred A. Knopf. $21.
Playing in the Dark  Whiteness and the Literary Imagination  By Toni Morrison  91 pages.
Harvard University Press. $14.95.
"I'm crazy about this City," writes the nameless, elusive, inquisitive narrator of Toni Morrison's lyrically brooding new novel, "Jazz," about a couple from the South now living in Harlem.
"I like the way the City makes people think they can do what they want and get away with it. . . . All you have to do is heed the design -- the way it's laid out for you, considerate, mindful of where you want to go and what you might need tomorrow."


Grammy Show to Move Back to Los Angeles
The Grammy Awards ceremonies will return to Los Angeles next year after two years in New York City, the National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences announced yesterday.
Michael Greene, the president of the academy, said at a news conference in Los Angeles that the awards show would be broadcast live from the Great Western Forum, an arena that seats 17,500.
Mr.
Greene said in February that when the program was in Radio City Music Hall, which seats nearly 6,000, as many as 4,000 people in the recording business alone had to be put on a waiting list for seats.


Han Schroeder Dies; Interior Designer, 73
Han Schroeder, an architect, interior designer and educator, died on March 20 in the Boerhaave Clinic in Amsterdam.
She was 73 years old and lived in Richmond.
She died after a short illness, said Janet De Cecilia, the coordinator of the interior design program at the New York Institute of Technology in Old Westbury, L.I., where Ms.
Schroeder had taught.


ALBANY PREPARING TO GIVE BLUE CROSS STEEP RISE IN RATES
New York State's Insurance Superintendent is poised to announce a steep increase in health insurance costs for more than 1.2 million New Yorkers, state officials said today.
The increase would affect individuals and small companies that subscribe to Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield, which covers the Albany, Hudson Valley and New York metropolitan areas.
Though most subscribers would probably have to start paying about 13 percent more than they do now, officials said, some people's premiums could go up by as much as 21 percent.


Blame the Cattle Industry, Not the Cattle
To the Editor:
Jeremy Rifkin's campaign to remove cattle from the environment is one of the most simplistic and misguided efforts he has ever yet undertaken ("Big, Bad Beef," Op-Ed, March 23).
Let me cite two examples of his many reductionist and erroneous assumptions.
Mr.
Rifkin's assumption that the problem of hunger can be addressed by removing cattle from the food chain is ludicrous.
Every high school economics student knows that hunger is not caused by lack of grain, but by poverty.
Even with current levels of grain consumption by cattle, the world has been deluged with surplus grain in recent years without any abatement in world hunger.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Kenny Drew Jr.
The Blue Note
Technology put its foot down during Kenny Drew Jr.'s show at the Blue Note on Monday night.
Small-group jazz relies on interaction to create its more lucid moments, but in its first set, Mr.
Drew's ensemble couldn't hear itself because of technical problems.
The result was fascinating in its own way, and it underscored esthetic differences among the musicians in his trio that might have been moderated under better circumstances.


Herbalife International reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Dinkins Authorizes Bond Issue To Improve Grand Central Area
Giving official approval to an effort by private businesses to enhance nearby public areas, Mayor David N. Dinkins yesterday authorized a bond issue of up to $35 million to finance improvements in the area surrounding Grand Central Terminal.
The authorization was given on behalf of the Grand Central Business Improvement District, the largest and wealthiest of the 24 associations of private businesses in New York City's Business Improvement District program.
The associations generate revenues through self-imposed fees that are earmarked for things like security, sanitation and capital improvements of public areas.
This the first time any of the associations have proposed to raise money through a bond issue.


What Will Be, Will Be: Capriati Is Beaten Early
These are tumultuous times for Jennifer Capriati.
Upset has become a temporary leitmotif for the teen-ager who was such a charming superstar at 13 but who is suddenly finding out everything that's not so sweet about turning 16.


Olympia Misses a Big Loan Payment
The cash-short Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd., continuing its efforts yesterday to raise cash to meet hundreds of millions of dollars in maturing debt, failed to repay a $378 million loan that was due yesterday on its 68-story Scotia Plaza Tower in downtown Toronto.
The syndicate of banks holding the loan, totaling $450 million in Canadian funds, did not agree to delay acting against the real estate giant, but an Olympia spokesman indicated that the loan could be called on demand by the banks.


ATNN Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Autoinfo Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Alexander Energy reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Public Believes Worst on Bank Scandal
Most Americans are so scornful of Congress that they have already concluded that representatives broke the law when they overdrew their accounts at the House bank.
And half the public says -- mistakenly -- that taxpayers' money was used to make those checks good.
Those two findings from the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll underscored the political menace in the bank scandal at a time when Congress's reputation is generally terrible, when 31 Representatives have already announced that they do not plan to run again and when the lawmakers' side of the story is not selling with the public.


Global Natural Resources Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


I.M.F. Loans for Argentina
The International Monetary Fund on Tuesday announced a $3.15 billion package of loans to Argentina, which the country hopes to use to stretch its huge commercial debt.
The funds are expected to help Argentina in talks with private banks aimed at rescheduling the country's $31 billion in commercial debt.
Argentina's total foreign debt is $62 billion.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Voters; Many in the Bronx Say Candidates Aren't in Touch
The Democratic Presidential candidates took their campaign roadshow to the Bronx this week, for a debate on the problems of urban America.
But for many who live in the heartland of urban America, it was as if the candidates had never been there at all.
Many of the people who live, work and study in the Bronx, the much-maligned symbol of urban blight, say they do not think the candidates understand what their concerns are.
And among some of them, there is a feeling that nobody really cares about what happens to their neighborhoods.


10.25% Notes Sold By Owens-Illinois
Owens-Illinois Inc. yesterday priced for offering $250 million in 10.25 percent senior subordinated notes due 1991 through underwriters led by Merrill Lynch.
Because of strong demand, the size of the offering was increased from $200 million.
The securities are offered at par, to yield 305 basis points more than Treasury securities with a similar maturity.
A basis point is one-hundredth of a percentage point.


Callon Consolidated Partners reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Shift in Batting Order Gets Johnson in Gear
Manager Jeff Torborg's first flip has been anything but a flop.
Torborg, who had argued long and hard that Howard Johnson should bat third for the Mets and Bobby Bonilla fourth, switched their positions in the order two weeks ago.
The position of the Mets on the scoreboard in the aftermath has remained almost unvaryingly the same: on top.


Marlton Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Three Peat Is Withdrawn From the Gotham Stakes
The rocky road to the Triple Crown tripped another candidate yesterday when the colt Three Peat was withdrawn from Saturday's Gotham Stakes at Aqueduct after developing a cough.
"He's on antibiotics," said John Sadler, who trains the horse for Gary Biszantz of California.
"He started coughing after Monday's workout. But he jogged today, and we'll keep giving him light exercises for a couple of days and see how he is. We're greatly disappointed to miss the Gotham. Depending on how he responds, we'll see if he can come back in the Wood."


United Stationers reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Logic Devices Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Pop and Jazz in Review
'S Wonderful, 'S Marvelous, 'S Gershwin  Rainbow and Stars 30 Rockefeller Plaza Through May 9
Near the end of " 'S Wonderful, 'S Marvelous, 'S Gershwin," the new revue of Gershwin songs that opened a six-week engagement at Rainbow and Stars on Tuesday evening, Jo Anne Worley performs a rendition of "Who Cares?" that distills much of what is wrong with the show.
Attempting to express the sort of dramatic irony that Barbra Streisand brought to her brokenhearted version of "Happy Days Are Here Again," Ms.
Worley shouts this frothy little ditty from "Of Thee I Sing" in a tone of undisguised anger.
The performance is an ear-grating embarrassment in a revue whose opening-night performance was sadly lacking in joie de vivre.


As the New York Vote Nears
Even as Gov.
Bill Clinton has found himself forced to go head to head against Edmund G. Brown Jr. in daily debates, New Yorkers and the nation are pondering Mr.
Brown's surprisingly strong Presidential bid and asking, who is this unconventional politician?
Leading political figures in California who have known the former Governor well over two decades describe him variously as brilliant, self-absorbed, friendless, idealistic, erratic, opportunistic, cold, hypocritical.


Questech reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Rev. James Harvey, 47, Founder Of Jobs Program for Ex-Convicts
The Rev.
James R. Harvey, who founded a program that has given thousands of ex-convicts training and jobs in florist shops and other businesses, died on Monday at New York Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 47 years old and lived in Queens.
He died of natural causes after a long illness, his family said.


Galvest Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Republic Health Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Corrections
A table in Business Day on March 25, and a corrected table on March 26, both headlined "Largest Cover Ratios" -- listing over-the-counter stocks that showed the largest ratios of numbers of shares borrowed and sold short compared with average daily volume -- carried incorrect figures provided by the National Association of Securities Dealers for the average daily volume of many stocks.
A corrected table appears today on page D12.


Busch Plans Theme Park in Spain
The Anheuser-Busch Companies said yesterday that it planned to open a theme park and resort near Barcelona in 1995.
The 400-acre theme park, the company's first such project outside North America, will be fashioned after Busch Gardens in Williamsburg, Va., using trappings from various countries to create five distinct villages.
The villages in the Spanish park will represent life in Polynesia, China and Mexico, as well as the American Old West and the Catalonia region of Spain.


Most Trout Choose to Ignore the Casting Call
Never have so many cast so much for so little.
As a fly fisherman, this has always been, and continues to be, my experience of the annual rite of mortification known as opening day, also well named April Fool's Day.
But this year I had high hopes, very high hopes.
Tuesday afternoon when Josh Feigenbaum and I pulled into this town, hard by the banks of fly fishing's shrine, the Beaverkill, the weather had turned unpredictably sunny and warm.
The water was an early-season green, clear and fast-flowing and not very high.
Altogether, the conditions looked quite promising.


Harrowston Corp.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Wallace Fund Quietly Grows Into Nation's Top Arts Donor
Rural Alaskans may not know it yet, but they will be getting a truckload of theater over the next five years.
Earlier this month the Perseverance Theater in Douglas was one of nine community theaters across the United States to receive grants totaling $3.4 million from the Lila Wallace-Reader's Digest Fund.
With its $600,000, the Perseverance Theater, like such fellow grant recipients as the Roadside Theater in Whitesburg, Ky., and the Mixed Blood Theater Company in Minneapolis, will bring plays and theater workshops to communities throughout the state, and accelerate its program for cultivating a more diverse audience.


Optelecom Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Potomac Electric Power Co.  reports earnings for 12mos Feb 29


Sports of The Times; The Year Without The Cup?
OUTSIDE the ice rink in the Rye Playland amusement park where the Rangers practice, the stillness was spooky.
The ferris wheel wasn't turning.
The roller coaster wasn't rumbling.
The arcades were shut.
Inside, the stillness was even spookier.
The ice was empty.
So was the future of the National Hockey League's best team.
Only a week before the Stanley Cup playoffs are scheduled to start, the first players' strike in N.H.L. history was about to begin.


Haugen and Mancini Envision Bigger Bouts
It's a mile around Virginia Lake, and the path encircling the water is teeming with walkers and joggers who stride around the abundant geese that congregate here year round.
It's here as well that the former world champions Ray Mancini and Greg Haugen keep bumping into each other on their early-morning training runs.
Invariably, Haugen reminds Mancini how many days there are before the two climb into the Reno-Sparks Convention Center ring Friday night for their pay-per-view match.


Cascade Corp.  reports earnings for Year to Jan 31


At C.I.A., Word and Deed -- Still Slanted
Slanting intelligence to satisfy superiors is as common at the C.I.A. as gambling is in the movie "Casablanca." So said critics during Robert Gates's confirmation hearings.
Now there's support for that view: More than half the 250 analysts who responded to a recent in-house survey believe that slanting occurs.
Mr.
Gates, now the agency's Director, told an audience of C.I.A. analysts that he found the results "disturbing." Slanting, he said, "occurs often enough to be of concern." He ordered remedial action.
But his own deeds in recent weeks suggest the same tendency to twist intelligence for political purposes.


Fletcher Leisure Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Grubb &amp; Ellis Realty Income Trust reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Therapist Told of Desire For Client, Court Is Told
A psychotherapist asserted today that Dr.
Margaret Bean-Bayog, a Harvard Medical School psychiatrist accused of seducing a patient who later killed himself, had spoken of her sexual attraction to the patient during a teaching session in her office in 1990.
The psychotherapist, Amy Stromsten, said the patient, Paul Lozano, a student at the medical school, later told her he had had a "sexual relationship with Dr. Bean-Bayog for a number of years." Ms.
Stromsten said Mr.
Lozano said he felt "ashamed, embarrassed, dirty" about the "kinky" relationship and had continued it only because "he wasn't paying her very much."


PARENT &amp; CHILD
THE 11-year-old boy needed to build a small wooden car as part of a father-and-son project.
His father was very enthusiastic, but the boy said he preferred to work on the model with his stepfather instead.
"The father had been convinced that if he stuck to the visiting arrangements every other weekend, paid his support payments and stayed in touch with his son's school, he'd have a close emotional relationship with his son," said Dr.
Neil M. Kalter, the director of the Center for the Child and the Family at the University of Michigan at Ann Arbor, who counseled the family.
"But it doesn't happen that way."


U.S. Said to Ignore Reports Israel Broke Law
The State Department inspector general issued a report today asserting that department officials have for years failed to act on numerous reports indicating that Israel was violating United States laws by making unauthorized sales of sensitive American military technologies to third countries.
The report by the inspector general, Sherman M. Funk, does not mention Israel by name, but refers to the "major recipient" of American military assistance.
Administration officials said that was a reference to Israel.


Justices Hear Case on Right Of U.S. to Kidnap Foreigners
The Bush Administration argued before the Supreme Court today for the right of the Federal Government to kidnap foreigners and prosecute them in the United States for crimes committed abroad.
The Administration is asking the Justices to overturn lower court rulings that barred the trial of a Mexican doctor, Humberto Alvarez Machain, for participating in the 1985 murder of an American drug agent, Enrique Camarena Salazar.
Dr.
Alvarez was kidnapped from his Guadalajara office and flown to Texas in 1990 by Mexican bounty hunters who were seeking a $50,000 reward that the Drug Enforcement Administration had offered.


5 Dead in Rising South African Strife
Alexandra, one of several satellite black townships around Johannesburg, teetered today on the brink of chaos as residents battled each other in politically tinged violence and angry mobs surged into the streets.
At least five people were reported killed today and 38 others wounded after a night of gun battles.
The death toll has reached 10 since Tuesday.


Intercontinental Life Corp. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Music Notes; Indisposition for Behrens Helps Another Elektra
When Hildegard Behrens arrived a few weeks ago to rehearse the Metropolitan Opera's new "Elektra" production and announced that she had the flu, the level of anxiety around the house was higher than usual.
Although the Met casts a cover, or understudy, for every role in every performance, "Elektra" is the kind of role for which a company is hesitant to turn to an understudy.
It puts a soprano in the spotlight for virtually the entire 100 minutes of the score, and it makes extreme demands on a singer's range, power and acting.
Miss Behrens's illness lingered, but although she skipped a few of the rehearsals, she decided to sing the role when the production opened last Thursday.
She received mixed reviews, with some critics noting that although she was dramatically strong, her voice was not at its best.


Review/Film Festival; Seeing Death as Part of Life
"Children of Nature," Fridrik Thor Fridriksson's new Icelandic film, considers death as the perfectly natural, inevitable end of the life cycle, not something to be ignored, feared or artificially staved off.
The film has a narrative of sorts, but its effect is that of a documentary about an ancient ritual rediscovered.
When first seen, the widowed old Geirri is preparing to leave his farm.
He sells his sheep, burns faded family photographs and takes his ancient sheep dog into a field, where he shoots and buries him.
After Geirri's plans to live in the city with his married daughter do not work out, he allows himself to be placed in a retirement home, to be patronized and disciplined by the ever-smiling personnel.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co., New York, the investment banking firm, named Joanne Hill vice president of equity derivatives. *
Home Depot, Atlanta, the home-improvement retail chain, appointed Dick Hammill senior vice president, marketing and advertising.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Henry Butler Trio
Condon's 117 East 15th Street Manhattan Through Sunday
Henry Butler's first set of his Condon's engagement was a warm-up: three standards (all of them love songs) and a blues.
He didn't sing, although a microphone was at hand, and each selection followed a typical theme-solos-theme sequence: Mr.
Butler's piano, Dwane Burno's bass, Ben Riley's drums.
But Mr.
Butler's piano playing carried the music a long way from its conventional set list.


New York Should Dump Harbor Mud Much Farther Offshore
To the Editor:
The ancient harbors of Homer's Troy and England's Old Rye have long since disappeared, as has Rome's Ostia, because of natural filling in by muds that were not dredged.
Continued harbor dredging is essential even today to keep modern harbors open and functioning.
But despite the contention by some that New York Harbor's dredged muds can be properly disposed of at the Corps of Engineers mud dump site six miles off the New Jersey shore and 10 miles south of Long Island beaches, where they have been discharged since 1914, the site is filling up.
The muds now contain mercury, PCB's, dioxins and lead that show up in fish and other local marine organisms.
Over the years, dumped harbor muds have caused significant degradation of coastal waters for which sewage sludge has been incorrectly blamed.


Saving the Face Of Old Barrio
THE Barrio Historico in Tucson, Ariz., is one of that city's oldest, most architecturally spirited neighborhoods.
Dating from the late 1800's, it is notable for its fearlessly painted pink, yellow and lilac houses, fanciful mosaics and ironwork and quiet gardens and courtyards.
This Sunday is the fifth-annual Barrio Historico Home Tour and Fiesta to benefit the Barrio Historico Neighborhood Association, devoted to preserving the once predominantly Hispanic, now ethnically mixed, neighborhood.


Sage Analytics International reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Devon Energy Corp.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
A $24 billion, one-year program to help propel Russia toward democracy, including a U.S. contribution of nearly $4.5 billion, was announced by the leaders of seven nations.  [ Page A1. ]


HomeFed Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Unicorp American Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


California Amplifier Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Lancer Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Exel Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


International Airline Support Group reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Duracell Promotes Official to President
Duracell International Inc., the world's largest producer of batteries for the consumer market, has appointed Charles R. Perrin to the newly created position of president and chief operating officer.
The appointment of Mr.
Perrin, who has been responsible for most of the company's operations in recent years, is intended to free C. Robert Kidder, the 47-year-old chairman, to spend more time on long-range planning and financial affairs.


American Shares Hospital reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Noriega Lawyer Derides U.S. Case in Closing
His voice dripping with sarcasm, the chief lawyer for Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega today derided the drug-trafficking, money-laundering and racketeering charges against the deposed Panamanian leader as a crude political vendetta built on the dubious testimony of "admitted liars and convicted felons."
"This indictment stinks," the main defense lawyer, Frank A. Rubino, told jurors during the second day of closing arguments in the trial that began last September.
"It stinks like a dead fish. It smells from here to Washington."


Financial Industries reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


5 School Districts Will Undergo Review for Progress on Failings
Five urban school districts in New Jersey will be reviewed this spring to determine whether they are making adequate progress toward correcting serious educational deficiencies and a sixth, Orange, will be considered for a more comprehensive review that could lead to a state takeover, according to education officials.
Education Commissioner John Ellis outlined the more stringent monitoring process at a State Board of Education meeting at which he and Assistant Education Commissioner Larry Leverett briefed the board on progress under the state's Quality Education Act and described a "carrot and stick" approach to upgrading schools.


Mallard Coach Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 1


Intel-Digital Software Pact
The Intel Corporation and the Digital Equipment Corporation, two of the biggest high-technology powerhouses, said they would collaborate on new software vital to the future of the world's fastest computers.
They said the effort would cover projects that include advanced supercomputer software for operating systems and networking.
Supercomputers, the world's most powerful, can complete billions of calculations a second, making them a vital tool for scientific and mathematical research in areas as diverse as aerospace, chemical analysis and meteorology.


Accuhealth Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Garden Q. &amp; A.
A Lichen Challenge
Q.
I would like to duplicate a rock wall I saw covered with lichens as well as ferns.
What growing conditions do I need for lichens and how do I arrange for them to move in?
A friend suggested looking for a "spore bank." Is this hopeless? -- Margaret Charpentier, Kew Gardens, Queens.
A.
I'd hate to call any garden effort hopeless, so let's just say that you are certainly pushing the limit of possibility.
Lichens are complicated organisms consisting of two separate symbiotic plants: green algae and colorless fungi.
Some prefer dry rocks, some moist rocks, and some trees in moist forests.
Hundred-year-old gray-green lichens endure in profusion on rocks surrounding the Mohonk Mountain House near New Paltz, N.Y.
Ruth H. Smiley, a botanist and a member of the family that owns the hotel, has observed them there for more than four decades.
She said these lichens arise naturally on the conglomerate rock when conditions suit them.
They are thought to flourish in direct proportion to the purity of the air.
There is no way to buy them, they cannot be transplanted and, while the fungus part does make spores when temperature and humidity are right, there is no "spore bank" that I have heard of.
Also, depending on conditions and type of lichen, Mrs.
Smiley said, "They can reach an inch in up to 10 years."
But if you are determined to pursue this, Mrs.
Smiley suggests consulting the "Lichen Handbook" by Mason E. Hale Jr. (Smithsonian Institution, 1961).
Pond Gallons
Q.
I see instructions for water gardens listed in terms of number of pond gallons.
How do I figure out how many gallons are in my oval-shaped fiberglass pond? -- Katherine Raphael, White Plains.
A.
Several simple math formulas will give you the number of gallons in various sized ponds.
For a square or rectangular pond, multiply length by width by depth, and that number by 7.5.
For an oval pond, multiply length by width by depth and that total by 6.7.
For a round pond, multiply the diameter by the diameter and then by the depth, and then multiply that number by 5.9.
The easiest way to compute gallons for a free-form pond is to use the formula for an oval, said William Uber, president of Van Ness Water Gardens in Upland, Calif.
Mr.
Uber added, "While it's important to know the number of gallons when adding chemicals, for planning the number of fish, the surface area is really more important."
He suggests the following for computing pond surface area in square yards.
For a square or rectangular pond, multiply length by width and divide by 9.
For an oval pond, multiply 3.14 by one-half the length and then by one-half the width, then divide by 9.
For a round pond, multiply one half the diameter by one half the diameter, then by 3.14 and then divide that by 9.


A Stroll Through the Park, Revisited
THE pastoral concept of the park -- beloved of sweethearts, roller bladers and children -- is now nearly a century old.
In an effort to explore parks of the future, the Walker Art Center in Minneapolis and the Minneapolis College of Art and Design invited nine Middle Western landscape architects to offer their own visions of urban and suburban parks.
The results will be on display at the college tomorrow through May 10.


BRIEFS
Common  *
Benchmark Electronics Inc., Clute, Tex., is offering 1.3 million common shares at $14 a share through Stephens Inc.
*
Kohl's Corp., Menomonee Falls, Wis., has filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for an initial public offering of 8.06 million common shares through underwriters led by Morgan Stanley &amp; Co.


Lintas Resigns Howard Johnson
Lintas New York announced yesterday that it had resigned the Howard Johnson Franchise Systems Inc. account, with estimated billings of $4.5 million, after the lodging chain and Lintas agreed that Howard Johnson's needs would "be better served by another agency."
In a telephone interview, Robert McGrail, executive vice president at Howard Johnson's parent company, Hospitality Franchise Systems in Parsippany, N.J., said the companies had first discussed parting a year ago.
Now, he said, "we felt it was the right time for a change."


Ketchum Leads Silver Anvil Awards
Ketchum Public Relations was the leading winner in the annual Silver Anvil Awards competition for excellence in public relations, sponsored by the Public Relations Society of America.
Ketchum's Washington office won three awards, while the Irving, Tex., office won one.
Edward Howard &amp; Company in Cleveland followed Ketchum, with two awards.


O'Neal to Decide Soon
Louisiana State Coach DALE BROWN said he expected to know by Sunday whether all-American center SHAQUILLE O'NEAL will return for his senior season or head for the National Basketball Association.
Brown said he met last Sunday with O'Neal and his family in San Antonio.


Spire Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


U.N. Billet Is a Symbol for Yugoslav Problem
The quarters chosen for the first United Nations troops to enter Croatia seems like a fitting symbol for the problems the troops will face as they set about enforcing the cease-fire in Yugoslavia's civil war.
In this quiet town on the west bank of the Danube, the 50 United Nations officers, including a contingent of 20 from Russia, have been using a makeshift barracks on the ground floor of the local school.
Down the corridor from the classrooms holding their bunk beds, a pair of doors bearing a heavy padlock lead into a sports hall.


DNX Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Reasons Assessed for Lag In Metropolitan Recovery
Economists are growing increasingly convinced that a national recovery is finally under way, but they caution that residents of the New York metropolitan region will have to be more patient.
A recovery in the region is likely to lag behind that of the rest of the nation by six months or more, many said, with economic growth resuming only in 1993.
The reasons are many.
The recession started in the metropolitan region about a year and a half earlier than elsewhere and has been much more severe, making it a steeper climb back to stability and ultimately to growth.


Children's Discovery Centers of America reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


A Correction: Short Sales
A table in Business Day on March 25, and a corrected table on March 26 -- both with the headline "Largest Cover Ratios" -- listing those over-the-counter stocks that showed, as of mid-March, the largest ratios of numbers of shares borrowed and sold short compared with average daily volume -- carried incorrect figures provided by the National Association of Securities Dealers for the average daily volume of many stocks.
The table below shows corrected cover ratios based on revised volume figures issued yesterday by N.A.S.D.
Cover ratio represents the number of days, at average volume level, that it would take to purchase the number of shares sold short.


Check Express Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Rangers Have a Title, But No One's Cheering
If the hockey season was over yesterday, suddenly, sadly, then Ranger General Manager Neil Smith was not proclaiming his team the champion of anything.
"This isn't the way we want to end things," Smith said at a press gathering in Madison Square Garden to discuss the National Hockey League strike.
"We want to win our last game of the season and win the Stanley Cup.


C.I.A. Chief Rejects Push for Change
Robert M. Gates, the Director of Central Intelligence, today rejected initiatives by both intelligence committees in Congress to legislate a wholesale reorganization of the United States spy system.
Unveiling the Bush Administration's modest plan to reorganize the Central Intelligence Agency and its sister intelligence agencies, Mr.
Gates told a joint hearing of the Senate and House intelligence committees, "Our changes should be evolutionary, conforming to the reality of an unstable, unpredictable, dangerously overarmed and still transforming world."


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Foreign Policy; Turning His Sights Overseas, Clinton Sees a Problem at 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue
Gov.
Bill Clinton accused President Bush yesterday of failing to articulate clear goals for American foreign policy after the cold war and outlined his own program for assisting Russia's transition to democracy.
In his second major foreign policy address of the campaign, Mr.
Clinton tried to attack Mr.
Bush on what has been regarded as his greatest strength: foreign policy.
Speaking at a Manhattan hotel five days before the New York primary, the Democratic candidate cited several specific areas where he disagreed with Mr.
Bush -- from what he called his failure to get a handle on relations with Japan, his slow response to events in Russia and his reluctance to use trade sanctions against China.


Check Writing at the House Bank Is Only Part of Congress's Trouble
It is being called the House bank scandal, but it is actually a web of administrative problems in the House of Representatives -- some of which have nothing to do with the House bank.
Four separate investigations are under way by Congress and the Justice Department:


CHRONICLE
CLARA HALE turned 87 years old yesterday, and to celebrate the occasion DONALD TRUMP turned up at Hale House, the Harlem home for infants born addicted to drugs or alcohol or with H.I.V, the virus that causes AIDS.
He brought her a surprise -- a check for $30,000.
"He told me he had been waiting a lifetime to see me and I feel so good," said Mrs.
Hale, who is known as Mother Hale, after blowing out the candles on a cake decorated with a replica of the check in white chocolate icing.


Lawrence Olson, 73, An Expert on Japan
Lawrence Olson, a retired history professor and expert on Japan, died on March 17 at his home in Washington.
He was 73 years old.
He died of cancer, his family said.


Musa McKim Guston, A Poet and Painter, 83
Musa McKim Guston, a poet and painter who was the widow of the Abstract Expressionist artist Philip Guston, died on Monday at Kingston Hospital in Kingston, N.Y.
She was 83 years old and lived in Woodstock, N.Y.
She died of congestive heart failure, said her daughter, Musa Mayer of New York City.


Columbia Real Estate Invts reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13
The leaders of the seven leading industrialized nations announced a $24 billion, one-year program to propel Russia toward democracy, including a contribution from the United States of nearly $4.5 billion.
A1  A VOTE OF CONFIDENCE
The aid that Western leaders have promised Russia is not going to turn it into a prosperous nation overnight, but it does give President Yeltsin something Mikhail Gorbachev never received: the West's vote of confidence on his economic reforms.A1
A $6 billion fund to stabilize the ruble will be particularly welcome.  A10
Russia apparently plans to keep a smaller army than expected.  A10
Russia took command of troops in Moldova amid clashes there.  A12  FRENCH PREMIER QUITS
Edith Cresson, named less than a year ago as the first woman to serve as Prime Minister of France, resigned.
A shakeup had been expected following the recent election setbacks for the Socialist Party.
A9  4 PALESTINIANS DIE IN GAZA
At least four Palestinians were killed and dozens were wounded in clashes in the Gaza Strip.
It was the worst violence between Israeli troops and Palestinians in 18 months.
A3  U.S.
LAXNESS ON ISRAELI ARMS
State Department officials have for years failed to act on reports indicating that Israel was making unauthorized sales of sensitive American military technology to third countries, the department's inspector general reports.
A7  CHAOS IN SOUTH AFRICA TOWNSHIP
Alexandra, one of several satellite black townships around Johannesburg, teetered on the brink of chaos as residents battled each other in politically tinged violence and angry mobs surged into the streets.
A3  GRIM MEMORIES IN CROATIA
An advance team of United Nations peacekeepers in Yugoslavia is bunking in a school building where at least 80 Croatian guardsmen and police are believed to have been gunned down last August.
A13  SPRING RITUAL AT IWO JIMA
Iwo Jima Journal: Japanese survivors of the battle for the island return each year "to console the souls of the dead." While no one in Tokyo says so publicly, the Government seems eager for such reminders to come quietly to a close.
A4  National A14-21, D21-22  LET THE RECORDS FALL
Scientists have discovered what could be the largest and oldest living organism on earth.
It is a giant fungus, spawned by a single fertilized spore 1,500 to 10,000 years ago and now extending for more than 30 acres in a forest near Crystal Falls, Mich.
A1  CALIFORNIANS ON BROWN
Just who is Jerry Brown?
From the California Democratic political soil springs many answers.
A19
Brown and Jackson met, each with his own motive.  A19
Hoping for a brokered convention, some are backing Brown.  A18  CLINTON'S VISION ABROAD
In a foreign policy address, Governor Clinton said President Bush had failed to articulate clear goals for the post-cold-war era and outlined his own plan for helping Russia's move to democracy.
A20
On "Donahue," Clinton faced the old question: marital fidelity.  A18
Clinton's Arkansas has become a business-friendly state.  A20
Campaign Trail: The Clinton camp's search for a theme song.  A21
News coverage of the New York race has been, well, shallow.  A18
In the Bronx, the candidates made little impact.  A19
Buchanan's income and assets are far above the average.
A19  THE PUBLIC ON THE BANK SCANDAL
A New York Times/CBS News Poll found most Americans so scornful of Congress that they have already concluded that lawmakers did something illegal when they overdrew their accounts at the House bank.
And half say -- mistakenly -- that taxpayers' money was used to make those checks good.
D21
A House panel released a list of egregious check abusers.  D21  DO DIETS MATTER?
A panel of experts found no good evidence that any of the currently popular methods of "voluntary" weight loss had much chance for long-term success.
D22  EVIDENCE ON PSYCHIATRIST
A psychotherapist charged that Dr.
Margaret Bean-Bayog, the Harvard psychiatrist accused of seducing a patient who later committed suicide, had spoken of her sexual attraction to the patient.
A14  MINING COMPANIES PLEAD GUILTY
Thirteen coal companies admitted conspiring to submit bogus air samples to the Federal agency that monitors mine safety.
A15  GATES REJECTS VAST OVERHAUL
The Director of Central Intelligence rejected initiatives by both intelligence committees of Congress to legislate a wholesale reorganization of the spy system.
He urged an evolutionary approach.
D22  Metropolitan Digest, B1 LOOMING INSURANCE INCREASE
New York State's Insurance Superintendent is poised to announce a sharp rise in health insurance costs for more than 1.2 million New York residents, state officials said.
A1  Business Digest, D1  The Home Section C1-14  GHOSTLY FARMHOUSES
The slow fading of the family farm can be read in the thousands of abandoned houses scattered across the Great Plains.
A1  Furniture that gets around C1  Where the English country look is still man's best friend C1  Sports B11-19  Hockey: N.H.L. players go on strike.
B11  Mets Case: Rape investigation goes to state attorney's office.
B11  Arts/Entertainment C15-24  Lila Wallace Fund becomes nation's leading private arts donor.
C15  Jack Valenti denounces the film 'J.
F.
K.' C15  TV study of creativity.
C15  Obituaries D23 James H. Bell, political chief for auto workers local  Rev.
J.
R.
Harvey, helped find jobs for ex-convicts  Editorials/Op-Ed A22-23  Editorials A22  Help Russia, but . . .
Conservation makes a case.
Colt's abuses Connecticut.
At C.I.A., slanted words.
Letters A22  William Safire: Bush-Clinton debate.A23  Anthony Lewis: A captive press.
A23  Richard Portes: Who can save Russia?
A23  George Feifer: Leave Okinawa in peace.
A23


Bomb Kills 2 in Colombia
A bomb exploded today at a gas station in Cali as policemen were filling their jeeps and motorcycles, killing two officers and wounding 13 others, the police said.
The local radio station RCN said an anonymous caller claiming to represent the Marxist Colombian Revolutionary Armed Forces guerrilla movement had taken responsibility.


Haben Industries reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Vernitron Corp.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Las Vegas Sells Tax-Exempt Debt
A $87.3 million sale of tax-exempt debt issued by the City of Las Vegas, Nev., was tentatively priced yesterday through Paine Webber Inc.
The general obligation sewer improvement and refunding bonds, backed by a limited tax and additionally secured by pledged revenues, are priced to yield from 3.6 percent in 1992 to 5.6 percent in 1997, 6.3 percent in 2001 and 6.75 percent for an issue due 2006.


Imaging ManagementAssociates reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Quotation of the Day
"They're skeletons. They symbolize a time when everything was used and nothing wasted. They were passed down through generations. There is a sense in them of the value of the earth and land as an inheritnce." -- DAVID MURPHY, Nebraska architect, about abandoned farmsteads.  [ A1:4. ]


The Campaign On Television
Where voters can find the candidates and programming about the Presidential campaign on television today:  "Inside Politics '92," on the Cable News Network at 4:30 P.M., will feature coverage of Edmund G. Brown Jr. campaigning in New York, as well as a profile of Hillary Clinton, the wife of Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas.


P&amp;F Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Honor for Staley
DAWN STALEY, Virginia's versatile point guard, was named the Women's Basketball Coaches Association's Division I player of the year for the second successive season.
Staley, a 5-foot-5-inch senior from Philadelphia, is the Cavaliers' career scoring leader.
She has led her team to three consecutive Final Four appearances. (AP)


Clarcor Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Firan Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Cellular Communications of Puerto Rico Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Minority Women Lagging in Law Faculties
Minority women seeking tenured teaching positions at the nation's law schools appear to be hindered by their sex, a new study says.
The study, which compares the credentials, work experience and course assignments of minority men and women teaching at 174 of the nation's 176 accredited law schools, found "startling differences" between the men and women in the rank of their starting positions, in what the authors called the prestige of their employers and in the kinds of courses taught.


Art in Review
Polly Apfelbaum Amy Lipton Gallery 67 Prince Street SoHo Through tomorrow
Polly Apfelbaum's new work has too much of the simple beauty of formalist styles past.
The artist has at least temporarily abandoned found materials like ribbons and paper flowers, which she used to present in colorful and suggestive arrangements.
Her latest efforts consist mostly of pieces of white velvet stained or splattered with luscious colors or black, and placed on the floor.


Medical Innovations reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Bishops Warn on Stopping Life Supports for Comatose
A committee of the nation's Roman Catholic bishops, addressing a question that has divided their ranks, issued a warning yesterday against the increasingly widespread practice of withdrawing food and liquid from irreversibly unconscious patients.
But calling the statement "our first word, not our last word," the panel acknowledged that Catholic teaching had not reached definite conclusions on all the moral questions surrounding withdrawal of treatment.
The 9,000-word statement was issued by the Committee for Pro-Life Activities of the National Conference of Catholic Bishops.
The 52-member Administrative Committee of the conference authorized its publication.


Family Dollar Stores reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


COMPANY BRIEFS
*
Eaton Corp., Cleveland, a maker of electrical components, agreed to acquire Heinemann Electric Co., Lawrenceville, N.J., a maker of circuit breakers, for undisclosed terms. *
Gitano Group, New York, a clothing maker, entered an agreement in principle with major lenders to modify and extend its credit facilities. *
Heller Financial Inc., Chicago, a unit of the Fuji Bank Ltd., acquired the First Capital unit of Financial Center Bancorp, San Francisco. *
Lockheed Corp., Calabasas, Calif., formed a Lockheed Information Technology unit to consolidate its information services. *
Reebok International Ltd., Stoughton, Mass., acquired Above the Rim, San Diego, which markets apparel and accessories for basketball players, for undisclosed terms. *
Zygo Corp., Middlefield, Conn., a maker of laser and optical equipment, dismissed 28 employees and said it would stop making its Image laser manufacturing gauge.


One Dead and 29 Hurt in Gaza In Protests Over Killings by Police
Violent protests swept the Gaza Strip today in the aftermath of a deadly clash in which the Israeli paramilitary border police killed four Palestinians and wounded dozens of others in the town of Rafa.
Hospitals reported 29 people wounded by army gunfire in today's unrest and one woman killed when she was struck by an Israeli military jeep at the Khan Yunis refugee camp.


Dalfen's Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


On Stage, and Off
Almost 6 Weeks' Previews for Pacino
Al Pacino is coming to Broadway, but his producers say they can't afford an opening.
Circle in the Square will present Mr.
Pacino in two plays, "Salome" by Oscar Wilde and "Chinese Coffee" by Ira Lewis, from May 21 through July 18.
The more than 600 Tony voters, whose presence qualifies an opening as official, will not be invited, says Circle's managing director, Robert Buckley, who estimates that the theater will save $140,000 in free tickets.


On My Mind; New York and Clinton
Suddenly, and with just a few days left to go, the central question of the New York Democratic primary has been turned right around.
The question is no longer whether Bill Clinton will prove himself smart enough for New York Democrats.
It is whether they will show themselves smart enough, mature and sophisticated enough to listen to the man.


Amerihost Properties reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Books of The Times; Hitler and Stalin: A Double Portrait of Tyrants
Hitler and Stalin  Parallel Lives  By Alan Bullock  Illustrated. 1,081 pages.
Alfred A. Knopf. $35.
First published in 1952, Alan Bullock's "Hitler: A Study in Tyranny" remains the standard biography of the dictator and a widely respected work on the Nazi movement in general.
Now, 40 years later, the eminent English historian has decided to try to put Hitler in perspective with that other monster of 20th-century history -- Stalin.
The result is a monumental and completely absorbing volume that creates vivid portraits of these two tyrants, while illuminating the history of the first half of this bloodstained century.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Candidate's Record; Race Relations in Arkansas Reflect Gains for Clinton, but Raise Questions
Two years ago England, Ark., a town with a recent history of racial tensions, was about to blow again.
A fight in the high school playground between a black student and a white student had escalated to a larger racial confrontation.
Black parents kept their children home from school.
Whites felt the incident was overblown.
The Knights of the Klu Klux Klan began distributing inflammatory leaflets in England, a town of nearly 4,000 people 22 miles southeast of Little Rock.


Sounds Around Town
Voodoo Rhythms
Marce et Tumpak, S.O.B.'s, 204 Varick Street, Manhattan, (212) 243-4940.
One of the best bands to come out of the French Antilles, Marce et Tumpak go heavy on the drums.
They integrated parade and voodoo rhythms and instruments with more electronic sounds early on, and the band figured out how to get the balance right.
Wood flutes mix with keyboards, and flocks of drums crowd the stage.
Shows Friday and Saturday night are at 10 and 1, and the cover is $16.  3-Part Harmony
The Shams, Knitting Factory, 47 East Houston Street, Manhattan, (212) 219-3055.
They traffic in a warped angelicism, slightly off key and self-conscious.
But the band, three female singers, work with the sort of everyday themes about living that sound good when done in three-part harmony.
Girl-group sounds give way to country sounds, and nothing seems quite right.
The show on Sunday night is at 11, and there is a $9 cover.


Arch Communications reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Review/Film; If Elvis Had Been A Rooster
"Rock-a-Doodle," the newest animated feature by Don Bluth, is so overzealous in its attempts at myth making that it often verges on muddle.
Stuffed with enough characters and plot to fill two movies, it veers in style from a simple rustic fairy tale to an Elvis Presley parody.
Right in the middle, it turns into a frenetic, nerve-jangling Saturday-morning cartoon before finally subsiding into a mood of pastoral whimsy.
The film tells the story of Edmond, a farm boy so entranced by his bedtime story about a rooster named Chanticleer that he enters the world of his storybook.
The pride of the barnyard, Chanticleer and his morning crows insure that the sun will rise.
One day, however, the evil Grand Duke of Owl picks a fight with him and he neglects his duties.
When the sun rises anyway, the rooster is so humiliated that he quits the farm for the big city, where he becomes a rockabilly star known as the King and his red comb becomes a blob of black hair that he tosses wildly while performing.


Aztec Manufacturing Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Corrections
The headline on a table in Business Day on Wednesday with an article about the declining desirability of partnerships in law and accounting firms incorrectly described the firms listed.
They were partnerships that have ceased operating for a number of reasons, not all failures.


Clinton Takes His Campaign to Wall Street


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; New Tactics On Celebrity Endorsement
WHEN celebrity endorsers are embroiled in scrapes, flaps and fracases, it poses problems for those who use stars to sell products.
And after a recent spate of embarrassing incidents, advertisers and agencies are scrambling to devise strategies to minimize such problems.
These incidents, and the damage-control efforts they require, have always plagued marketers.
Remember Pepsi-Cola's embarrassment when it was revealed that Michael Jackson never touches Pepsi?
Or the Beef Industry Council's dismay when James Garner underwent heart surgery?


Review/Film: Tuna, Borscht and Angst in the Catskills
To the Editor:
As a regular and admiring reader of Janet Maslin's film reviews, I can imagine the way she would review a film version of her March 6 account of a family weekend at a Catskills Mountains resort for a 60's oldies celebration:
An upscale professional woman, wife and mother of two small sons, plans a family vacation to a resort she has not visited since going there with her family 30 years before.
Their maid, of Irish descent, accompanies them to care for the children and has been told by her friends that the menu may include "beet soup" for breakfast.


Summagraphics Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Crack Goes Knight's Wit but Not Everyone's Laughing
Less than a week from the time when another generation of Indiana University students hopes to leap into Showalter Fountain to celebrate a national basketball championship, the latest group of Hoosier fans discovered one more errand to run.
They stood in line at a store across Indiana Avenue from Bryan Hall, where the office of the university president, Thomas Ehrlich, is located, as they waited for the arrival of T-shirts that represent the most recent controversy in Bob Knight's 21st season as coach.
The T-shirts show a cartoon of Knight, complete with a happy game face, wielding a bullwhip at a terrified Duke Blue Devil, who is bent over and reaching for a basketball.
Brandishing a Bullwhip
Unlike the four previous appearances that Knight's Indiana teams have made in the Final Four, this trip to Minneapolis has begun with the recent accomplishments of the Hoosiers sharing the focus with controversy.


With Spring, Feeding Frenzy Begins
THE first stirrings come before the sap moves, before the skunk cabbage emerges, before Little League starts, before the hardwares display fertilizer, even before the male mallards begin chasing their spouses around the pond.
Forget the calendar, the solstice, the weather.
It's spring all right.
Look out!
Here come the rummage sales.


TANKER THAT TOOK OIL TO HAITI SEIZED
United States Customs officials seized a tanker in Puerto Rico on Tuesday after it delivered 250,000 gallons of diesel fuel to Haiti in violation of a United States embargo, an Administration official said today.
The tanker, which is registered in Belize, had picked up its cargo in New York.
The officials said criminal and civil penalties could be imposed on the owners of the ship, who have not been identified.
Luigi R. Einaudi, American Ambassador to the Organization of American States, told the group on Wednesday, "We have reason to believe citizens of the United States are involved."


Complete Pain Relief Isn't Always Possible
To the Editor:
"U.S. Urges Doctors to Fight Surgical Pain (and Myths)" (front page, March 6) reports new guidelines for pain management introduced by the newly created Agency for Health Care Policy and Research.
While you address the importance of pain management, you appropriately note that the guidelines are not to be taken as absolute policies.
I am nonetheless concerned that patients and their loved ones may come away with overoptimistic expectations.
Although aggressive pain management may have short-term and long-term benefits, potent analgesics such as morphine must be administered judiciously.
Their administration is often associated with nausea and vomiting; not uncommonly, patients elect to accept some pain, rather than incur increased nausea.
Furthermore, narcotics may cause dangerous respiratory depression.


Money Fund Assets Off
The assets of the nation's 591 money market mutual funds decreased by $12.95 billion, to $486.86 billion, in the week ended Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
The assets of the 215 institutional funds decreased by $9.74 million, to $162.44 billion.
The assets of the 285 general-purpose funds fell $1.22 billion, to $178.66 billion.
The 91 broker-dealer funds decreased by $1.99 billion, to $145.77 billion.


Review/Music; Finding Solace and Solitude in the World of Electronic Sound
After Columbia University's $50,000 William Schuman Award was presented to Milton Babbitt during a concert of electronic music at the Kathryn Bache Miller Theater on Wednesday night, the composer paid tribute to the "splendid solace of the electronic studio," the "solitude" in which composers could construct their scores and sounds.
Mr.
Babbitt, who received the award for lifetime achievement as a composer, was a founder of the Columbia-Princeton Electronic Music Center; beginning in the 1950's, the center was (shall we say?) instrumental in demonstrating the musical possibilities in controlled and manufactured sound.
The concert itself, presented by the League of Composers/ISCM, aside from serving as an occasion for honoring Mr.
Babbitt, was partly a survey of that electronic world and its relationship to solace and solitude.
It was billed, in fact, as a tribute to Bulent Arel, a Turkish composer who was director of the Electronic Music Studio at the State University at Stony Brook, L.I., until his death in 1990.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
Aicorp Inc., Waltham, Mass., a maker of software products, appointed John Gannon vice president of finance and administration and chief financial officer. *
Blount Inc., Montgomery, Ala., an international manufacturing and construction company, appointed John M. Panettiere president and chief operating officer. *
Ford Motor de Venezuela S.A., a unit of the Ford Motor Co., named Henry Wallace president. *
International Paper Co., Purchase, N.Y., named Paul T. Stecko vice president and general manager for pulp and coated papers. *
The New York Times Co., New York, said Stephen Golden, vice president and director of forest products, had been named to the additional position of environmental officer. *
Philip Morris U.S.A., New York, a unit of Philip Morris Cos., named John R. Nelson Jr., senior vice president, corporate affairs. *
Salomon Brothers Inc., New York, the investment banking firm and unit of Salomon Inc., named Robert G. Gray a director in the corporate finance department.
He will head the European energy group, based in London. *
Texaco Inc., White Plains, appointed Clarence P. Cazalot Jr. vice president of the company.
He was also named president of the Texaco Latin America/West Africa division, based in Coral Gables, Fla. *
Xerox Corp., Stamford, Conn., named Paul A. Ricci president of the advanced office document services division, based in Palo Alto, Calif.


Restaurants
When Le Cygne, the renowned and elegant French restaurant, was forced to close its doors last year, it was seen as further evidence that luxury dining was on the ropes.
Yet the new tenants of the gracious town house on East 54th Street audaciously dismissed doomsayers and opened a sumptuous seafood restaurant called Oceana.
The quality effort by the new team is obvious; the wisdom of its upscale strategy remains to be seen.
Oceana is owned by John and Nickolas Livanos, a father and son from White Plains who have a successful establishment there called Livanos, in addition to six other restaurants in the region.
The third partner at Oceana is James Galileo, the former chef of Livanos who now oversees the kitchen in Manhattan.


Despite Opposition, Agency Plans to Sell Brooklyn Piers to Private Developer
The long-running dispute over what to do with almost 80 acres of prime Brooklyn waterfront kicked into high gear this week as the Port Authority said it would sell the property, complete with its five piers and a panoramic view of lower Manhattan, for private development.
Local officials and residents, who have fought to preserve the narrow strip of land for public use, said yesterday that the move was a ploy to force a resolution to the eight-year stalemate and that they would ask Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo to stop the sale.


Officials Question if Newly Passed State Spending Plan Will Remain Balanced
The New York State Legislature completed work on the new state budget just before 4 A.M. today, giving the state its earliest spending plan in eight years but raising questions among some fiscal monitors about whether the $30.8 billion budget will remain balanced through the year.
The monitors, including State Comptroller Edward V. Regan, expressed doubts about some revenue estimates and noted that lawmakers failed to give legal approval to the sale of property at the Aqueduct Race track in Queens despite a provision in the budget for $50 million in proceeds from the transaction.


Audit Reported to Detail Baker Use of Military Jets
Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d used military aircraft for 11 personal trips over 26 months at a cost to taxpayers of $371,599, according to a Government audit reported today in The Milwaukee Journal.
Mr.
Baker quickly said that he had repaid the Government for the use of the planes under its standard formula, the commercial airline rate plus $1, which was a fraction of the cost to taxpayers for the flight.


Missimer &amp; Associates reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Legislature In New Jersey Cuts Sales Tax
The Senate gave final legislative approval today to a one-cent rollback in the state sales tax, but Gov.
Jim Florio said he wanted to see how the Republicans who control the Legislature would make up the $608 million in lost revenues before he approved or rejected the measure.
If he decides to veto it, he faces an almost certain override.
"I'd love to sign a sales tax rollback," said the Governor, a Democrat, "but I need to know whether it is a good deal for New Jersey's citizens."


The Art Market
National's Victory
While Christie's may have lost a prized picture, England has secured a national treasure.


American Financial Enterprises Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Allcity Insurance Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


On Not Executing an Innocent Prisoner; Judicial Mumbo Jumbo  To the Editor:   Jordan Steiker's "Can They Execute the Innocent? Probably" (Op-Ed, March 11) leaves me in a state of shock. I am neither lawyer nor judge. Maybe it takes being just an ordinary American citizen to know that something is drastically wrong when one of our higher courts states that "claims of actual innocence are constitutionally irrelevant." Innocence irrelevant? Shame on us for letting judicial mumbo jumbo move us in this direction. MARIE LEE  White Plains, March 13, 1992


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Brown; Candidate Is Tripped Up Over Alliance With Jackson
Jerry Brown wanted to talk about apocalypse, but the group of Jewish voters was more interested in talking about Jesse Jackson.
After happily riding a wave of New York chaos, as Gov.
Bill Clinton stumbled through the New York primary campaign, Edmund G. Brown Jr. was pulled up short yesterday in a prickly session at the Jewish Community Relations Council of New York.


Continental Mortgage &amp; Equity Trust reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Shuttle Lands in Florida After 9-Day Mission
The space shuttle Atlantis glided safely back to earth today after a nine-day mission that the space agency said was nearly flawless.
The Atlantis, with its crew of seven, rolled to a stop under clear skies on a runway at the Kennedy Space Center about 6:25 A.M.
It circled the globe 142 times while the crew conducted a series of observations on the chemistry and physics of the earth's upper atmosphere.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Trail; Moribund Tsongas Campaign Seems to Stir
He's baaaaccck?
Former Senator Paul E. Tsongas of Massachusetts, who "suspended" his Presidential campaign two weeks ago, traveled to New York yesterday to speak to a gathering of Suffolk County Democrats.
It was his second trip to the state in five days.
Perhaps it is just coincidence -- but perhaps it is not -- that Mr.
Tsongas's trip came just one day before the Draft Tsongas Committee was scheduled to begin running television and radio advertisements in the state.
The commercials urge New Yorkers to vote for the former Senator in next Tuesday's primary.


Canseco Decides To Seek Counseling
Two months after the police in Miami say he rammed his estranged wife's car with his own, JOSE CANSECO has decided to seek counseling.
The decision, to be sure, was not entirely voluntary.
The Oakland Athletics outfielder was told that if he underwent 26 one-hour counseling sessions, authorities would drop the charge of aggravated assault stemming from the February run-in. (AP)


Sports of The Times; A New Day At Las Vegas, Wisconsin
JERRY Tarkanian's chances of coming back as coach at the University of Nevada-Las Vegas have diminished greatly, what with the school's appointing Rollie Massimino as the new head coach.
They don't have sit-in protests the way they used to, and it's hard to imagine Tarkanian occupying the basketball office and refusing to leave.


Clinton Fills Many Arkansas Judgeships With His Allies
In his 12 years as Governor, Bill Clinton has named several dozen lawyers to the state bench, and while he has used that authority to sharply increase the number of blacks and women in the courts, he has also used the appointments to reward his political allies.
Through all of this, lawyers here say that Mr.
Clinton, a lawyer himself, has shown little interest in the role of courts in society and has left no discernible philosophical stamp on the state's judiciary.


Harken Energy reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Ailing West Haven Struggles to Understand Its Troubles
The near-fiscal collapse of this waterfront city took few residents by surprise, but it has left many of them angry and cynical about government.
Even the General Assembly's decision on Wednesday to bail out West Haven with up to $35 million in loan guarantees is little consolation to residents who know their taxes will go up and municipal services will be cut.
"I can't believe we got in such a hole," said Carl Guarneri, an insurance agent and a West Haven native, "but it's common sense that if expenses go up, taxes should go up, but the former mayor cut taxes. We're upset and mad that we were lied to."


Acclaim Entertainment Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.50
6.50
9.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
6.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.00
4.98
6.20
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.00
4.00
5.76
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.10
4.08
5.78
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.13
7.12
7.86
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.89
7.89
8.18
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.85
8.85
9.27
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.75
6.76
7.30
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


KMC Enterprises Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Grocer Killed in Robbery
A Queens store owner was shot to death last night when he tried to prevent a robbery of his grocery in Long Island City, the police said.
The store owner, Seryang Kim, 45 years old, was shot once in the chest as he struggled with a man who had entered his store at 29-24 36th Avenue brandishing a handgun, said Detective Kim Royster, a police spokeswoman.
Mr.
Kim was taken to Astoria General Hospital, where he was pronounced dead.
Detective Royster said that Mr.
Kim's wife was in the store at the time of the 8:30 P.M. robbery but was not harmed.
Investigators have not determined whether Mr.
Kim's assailant was working alone or how much money was stolen.


Zemex Corp.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Samuel Manu-Tech reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Rye Humor? Rangers Not in Laughing Mood
The striking Ranger players were not quite ready to let go of their first-place hockey season, so they skated together one more time today at the old practice rink at Rye Playland.
The experience amounted to good therapy, an unsatisfying workout and a questionable labor tactic.
Something felt wrong.


Senate Vote Supports Fetal Research Funds
The Senate today overwhelmingly voted to end a four-year ban on Federal financing of research using tissue from aborted fetuses and added a provision to insulate research from politics in the future.
The measure, approved 87 to 10, with 33 Republicans joining Democrats, set up a politically hazardous confrontation for President Bush, who has threatened to veto the bill.
Medical and research organizations had lobbied for an end to the ban, as had advocates for people with Parkinson's disease, diabetes and Alzheimer's disease, who might benefit from fetal tissue research.


Reliance Financial Services Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Rangers Set Refund Policy
If you had tickets to last night's Rangers-Penguins game, here are your options: You can use the tickets if the game is rescheduled or you can turn them in for a refund any time before noon on the day of the rescheduled game (night game) or before 10:30 A.M. (afternoon game).


Micro General reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


INSIDE
Closer to Less Sales Tax
The New Jersey Senate approved a 1-cent rollback in the sales tax, but the Governor took a wait-and-see stand, citing the lost revenue.
Page B1 Russia Aid Doesn't Add Up
The United States and Germany failed to get specific pledges from donor nations before they announced the aid package for Russia.
Page A7.
French Get a New Premier
Taking the cautious route, France's President named Finance Minister Pierre Beregovoy to replace Edith Cresson as Prime Minister.
Page A6.


Community Psychiatric Centers reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Father's Papers and a Son's Politics; When Jerry Finkelstein Buys, Andrew Stein's Foes Wonder
Jerry Finkelstein's business is newspapers.
The business of his son, Andrew J. Stein, is politics.
But now the media company that counts Mr.
Finkelstein as its largest shareholder is buying up weekly newspapers all over the New York metropolitan region.
Mr.
Stein, the City Council President, is preparing for a mayoral race.
All of which leaves some of his political opponents wondering if the family businesses have become a little too symbiotic.


Review/Television; Film Institute Honors Sidney Poitier
The American Film Institute is bestowing still another Life Achievement Award, its 20th, and that means still another prime-time television special, taped at the unfailingly elegant awards ceremony in Hollywood.
Standing ovations, speeches of tribute, biography mixed with film clips: the format never varies.
But tomorrow night's "A.F.I. Salute to Sidney Poitier," on NBC at 9:30, has a broader significance than most.
Suffusing the usual glitter is the troubling issue of race and racism in Hollywood, indeed in America.
Beyond being a distinguished actor, Mr.
Poitier is a powerful symbol.
That's made clear at the outset when Denzel Washington recalls meeting him at a bookstore on Wilshire Boulevard in 1977.
Mr.
Washington was just getting started as an actor.
Mr.
Poitier graciously gave him his time and attention.
Looking at the table of honor now, Mr.
Washington says simply: "I love you. I respect you. I imitate you."


James H. Bell, 48, Political Chief For Auto Workers Local, Is Dead
James H. Bell, a vice president of District 65 of the United Auto Workers who was active in New York City's union affairs and political campaigns, died on Wednesday at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in Manhattan.
He was 48 years old and lived in Mount Vernon, N.Y.
He died of lung cancer, union officials said.


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday reporting that the German auto maker BMW was considering building a plant outside Germany referred incorrectly to the plants it has now.
In addition to its operations in Germany, BMW makes cars in Pretoria, South Africa.
The new plant would be its second outside Germany, not its first.


Uniquest Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Michael Knapp, 38, a Member Of Board of AIDS Organization
Michael Knapp, a member of the board of directors of God's Love We Deliver, an organization that delivers hot meals to homebound people with AIDS in New York, died on Wednesday night at Beth Israel Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 38 years old and lived in Manhattan.
The immediate cause of his death was unclear but he had AIDS and had been in the hospital for several weeks, said his father, Richard C. Knapp.


Conwest Exploration reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Prices Little Changed in Slow Day
Prices of Treasury securities were little changed in slow trading yesterday, as market participants prepared for the release today of March employment data.
"We saw very good buying on Wednesday, and now the market is just evening out going into the numbers," one government securities trader said.


Foreign Affairs; Funny Money for Russia
Just in case you think the Bush Administration has a clear idea what it's doing to aid the ex-Soviet states or the cost to the American taxpayer, consider this:
Wednesday morning, President Bush, Secretary of State Baker and Treasury Secretary Brady were asked no fewer than 10 times how much new money would be required from Congress to finance the plan.
And no fewer than 10 times they either dodged the question or descended to Olympian depths of gibberish.


American Greetings Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


At the Movies
Directing 'Power of One'
John G. Avildsen makes no bones about it. "I'm a glutton for luxury," he said.
So when an old friend, the producer Arnon Milchan, proposed a project that would take Mr.
Avildsen to Africa, Mr.
Avildsen had an answer.
"I really love this story," he said, "but you're not going to get me to go to Africa."


Paul Henreid, Actor, Dies at 84; Resistance Hero in 'Casablanca'
Paul Henreid, the suave leading man who won screen immortality as the noble, Nazi-battling Resistance leader Victor Lazlo in the 1942 film classic "Casablanca," died on Sunday at Santa Monica Hospital in Santa Monica, Calif.
He was 84 years old and lived in Pacific Palisades, Calif.
He died of pneumonia after a stroke, said Henry Alter, Mr.
Henreid's former secretary.
The family did not want to announce the death until Mr.
Henreid was buried yesterday in Santa Monica, Mr.
Alter said yesterday.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Voters; Clinton Trying to Hold Support Among Blacks
Gov.
Bill Clinton is campaigning hard among black New Yorkers, who in recent years have typically constituted nearly one out of four voters in Democratic Presidential primaries in the state.
He is hoping that black voters will support him here Tuesday by the same large margins that helped him win in primaries across the South and Midwest.
But working against him is a concerted effort by Edmund G. Brown Jr., tacitly aided by the Rev.
Jesse Jackson, to undercut Mr.
Clinton's standing among blacks.


Argentine Sees Falklands' Return But Pledges, 'Never Again War'
Marking the 10th anniversary of Argentina's ill-fated invasion of the Falkland Islands, President Carlos Saul Menem predicted today that his country would recover the archipelago in the South Atlantic "before the year 2000."
But he added that Argentina would gain sovereignty over the islands, which the Argentines call the Malvinas, "by diplomatic channels and methods."


For Children
Nkiru Books  68 St.
Mark's Avenue (at Sixth Avenue) Park Slope, Brooklyn (718) 783-6306 Recommended for all ages
Lee Owens may look as slight as a young girl, but she's the powerhouse behind Nkiru, a children's bookstore that specializes in multi-cultural books, cassettes, games, videos and puzzles.
In this smallish but homey emporium, the shelves are stocked with fiction, nonfiction, picture books and young-adult books featuring American Indians, black Americans, Africans, Latin Americans and people from the Caribbean.
The store, which carries bilingual books in English and Spanish, and English and French, also focuses on books about women as role models.
"I started out distributing multi-cultural books in 1978," said Ms.
Owens, the owner, who grew up in Crown Heights.
"Then I decided to put them all together in one place."


'Works on Paper' Sale Opens Today at Armory
The fourth annual "Works on Paper" fair will be held this weekend at the Seventh Regiment Armory in Manhattan.
The show, a compilation of works from more than 95 art galleries, offers prints, posters, watercolors, drawings, photographs, illustrated books and architectural renderings for sale and viewing.


Lilco Offers Schools Deal: Rate Freeze for Tax Freeze
With the local economy in turmoil, the utility with the highest electric rates in the country today turned to the governments imposing the highest tax burdens in the country and said let's make a deal.
Call it barter, call it a challenge grant, call it creative financing: the Long Island Lighting Company told 127 Long Island school districts that it would freeze their electric rates over the next two years if all the districts agreed to freeze property taxes in return.


Embrex Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Review/Film; Dolly Parton Dominates A Comedy
Perched atop her five-inch stiletto heels, the full-busted but otherwise tiny Dolly Parton towers above "Straight Talk" like a laughing colossus of Rhodes.
In the flat landscape of this new romantic comedy, no other body or thing comes up to the ankle straps of the irrepressibly positive-thinking star.
She appears in virtually every scene and accompanies herself on the soundtrack almost nonstop, singing in upbeat Dolly-style a half-dozen songs she wrote for herself.


Superior Will Meet Wisconsin In Final
Wisconsin won a stirring game against Michigan tonight and will play Lake Superior State for hockey's national championship here on Saturday night.
The Lakers won an earlier match over Michigan State, a plodding one by contrast, in the semifinals of the National Collegiate Athletic Association's 44-year-old tournament.
The scores of both contests were 4-2, but there were few other similarities.


House Democrats Push for Permanent Jobless Pay
House Democratic leaders today demanded a permanent expansion of unemployment benefits and other relief measures, and they pressed President Bush to go along by linking them to proposals to aid Russia's depressed economy.
The steps, proposed by Representative David E. Bonior of Michigan, the third-ranking House Democrat, and indirectly supported by the majority leader, Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri, are intended to entangle Russian aid and unemployment in election-year politics.


Art in Review
Peter Schuyff  Sperone Westwater Gallery 121 Greene Street SoHo Through tomorrow
This lively show includes no fewer than 200 works, primarily watercolors depicting the sort of geometric patterns for which Peter Schuyff has become known.
About half of the works are painted directly onto 19th-century European drawings, and some onto English drawings from between the wars, that Mr.
Schuyff found in flea markets and elsewhere.
For the most part, the found drawings are done by anonymous academic artists.
Whether Mr.
Schuyff is defacing or improving on their efforts is a constant source of tension in the work.
At times the circles, tinted areas and spiral designs he creates seem to echo the images underneath, but more often the relationship is intentionally mysterious and disjunctive.
The layering of seemingly unrelated imagery owes something to the likes of David Salle, and Francis Picabia before him.
In Mr.
Schuyff's hands the touch remains determinedly snappy.


Raveling Gets Reward
His season ended when Georgia Tech beat his Trojans at the buzzer in the second round of the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament, but GEORGE RAVELING, the Southern California coach, had a pretty good season, anyway.
The Trojans (24-6) tied the school record for victories, finished second in the Pacific-10 and made it to the N.C.A.A. playoffs for the second straight year.
The 54-year-old Raveling, saying he wanted to carry out a commitment he had made to his players, got a further reward yesterday, a multiyear contract extension.


A Pitch to Freeze 2 Bills
In an attempt to bolster the local economy, Long Island Lighting Company told 127 local school districts that it would freeze their electric rates for two years if the districts froze property taxes.
Article, page B5.


Opera Winners to Sing
The 38th annual audition winners' concert of the Metropolitan Opera National Council is to take place on Sunday at 2:45 P.M. at the Metropolitan Opera House.
The singers will be accompanied by the Metropolitan Opera Orchestra, conducted by Sir Charles Mackerras.
Tickets are $5 to $35.
Information: (212) 362-6000.


McRae Is Arrested
CONRAD McRAE, the Syracuse center, spent the night in jail after the police accused him and three other men of jumping a police officer trying to make an arrest at the scene of a mass brawl outside a campus restaurant early yesterday morning.





Macland Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Opening a new front in the drive to reduce smog, a coalition of New York, New Jersey and the New England states announced an agreement to impose extensive controls on electric generating stations to cut the emission of nitrogen oxides.
The states' action was spurred in part by the Federal Clean Air Act amendments of 1990, which call for controls but give few details.  [ Page A1. ]


To Fight Smog, 8 Northeast States Adopt New Curbs on Power Plants
A coalition of eight Northeastern states announced an agreement yesterday to impose extensive controls on electric generating stations to cut the emission of nitrogen oxides, thus opening a new front in the drive to reduce smog.
Nitrogen oxides, which are among the chemicals created during combustion, play a major part in the formation of smog.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Nicklaus Takes Lead  Jack Nicklaus was uncharacteristically erratic yesterday, but his flashes of brilliance outweighed his mistakes and gave him the lead in the first round of the Tradition in Scottsdale, Ariz.
Nicklaus made only seven pars but offset a bogey and double bogey with eight birdies and an eagle for a seven-under-par 65.
Nicklaus is after his third straight championship in the $800,000 tournament, played on the 6,864-yard Cochise Course that he designed.
Scores were low because of greens softened by nearly a week of rain.
Nicklaus's round tied the tournament record set by Phil Rodgers in the first round last year.
In all, 31 players in the field of 81 bettered par and 16 others matched it. (AP)


Cambex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Koger Equity reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Thomas H. Lee In Snapple Deal
The Thomas H. Lee Company, a private investment concern in Boston, effectively acquired the company that makes Snapple iced teas and other beverages for undisclosed terms.
Under the deal, Thomas H. Lee and the founders of Snapple jointly created a new company, the Snapple Beverages Corporation, to acquire the Unadulterated Food Corporation, the maker of Snapple drinks, based in Valley Stream, L.I.


Mitterrand Names an Old Ally as French Premier
With France gripped by uncertainty since the governing party's drubbing in regional elections last month, President Francois Mitterrand finally chose caution over daring today and named Finance Minister Pierre Beregovoy to replace Edith Cresson as Prime Minister.
Mr.
Beregovoy, who is credited with bringing order and prosperity to the French economy in the 1980's, now has the job of restoring public confidence in the Government in the hope of saving Mr.
Mitterrand's Socialist Party from being thrown out of power in next year's parliamentary elections.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-9  ISRAEL CLEARED OF ARMS CHARGE
The State Department said that investigators had found "no evidence" that Israel had transferred Patriot missile technology to China and that the matter was closed.
A1  PROTESTS BY PALESTINIANS
Violent protests swept the Gaza Strip in the aftermath of a deadly clash in which Israeli forces killed four Palestinians and wounded dozens of others.
A9
A group accuses Israeli security forces of routine torture.  A8
Surrounded by clouds, Israel's leader seeks a silver lining.
A9  NICARAGUAN BACKWATER REBUILDS
With the cold war ended, Miskito Indians are returning to a Nicaraguan town once deemed strategically important by the Sandinistas.
The Miskitos are replacing the pine forests that were burned down by the Sandinista army.
A3  STILL COVETING THE FALKLANDS
Marking the 10th anniversary of Argentina's ill-fated invasion of the Falkland Islands, President Menem predicted his country would recover the archipelago in the South Atlantic "before the year 2000." A2  AID TO RUSSIA LOOKS VAGUE
The United States and Germany failed to obtain specific pledges from most of the donor countries before announcing an extensive aid program for Russia.
A7
Russia eases the burden on its top economic adviser.  A7  FRANCE GETS A NEW PREMIER
Choosing caution over daring, President Mitterrand named Finance Minister Pierre Beregovoy to replace Edith Cresson as Prime Minister.
Mr.
Beregovoy faces the job of restoring confidence in France's battered Socialist Government.
A6  POLAND'S THAW WITH GERMANY
As President Walesa of Poland ended a five-day visit to Germany, both countries said their dark relations had improved and that they hoped to cement a friendship.
A6  LIBYANS ATTACK EMBASSIES
Demonstrators in Tripoli attacked embassies of nations supporting the Security Council's threat of economic sanctions, prompting a strong condemnation from the Council.
A8  TANKER VIOLATES HAITI EMBARGO
United States officials seized a tanker in Puerto Rico after it delivered 250,000 gallons of diesel fuel to Haiti in violation of a United States embargo, an Administration official said.
A5  National A10-16  GUNS AND AMERICA
Despite measures in Congress and local governments, the real debate about the role of guns in American society has barely began: Should new laws simply try to keep firearms away from criminals or should they cut more deeply into legal gun ownership, too.
A1  A NEW TWIST IN PROTECTION
In Milwaukee, a newly created bodyguard agency found that most of its clients were battered women, not the rich and famous its founders had expected.
A10  BISHOPS ISSUE WARNING
A committee of Catholic bishops warned against the increasingly widespread practice of withdrawing nourishment from people in irreversible comas.
A10  CLINTON AND RACE
An examination of Governor Clinton's record in Arkansas not only proves his ability to forge biracial coalitions that work through racial animus, but also shows that his policies are not without critics.
A14
The Clinton campaign to retain black support.  A12
Sparks flew at a Jerry Brown meeting with Jewish voters.  A12
A non-candidate, Paul Tsongas, resurfaced in New York.  A12
The Kansas primary? The campaign is all TV.  A13
Vintage Clinton in a campaign stop in lower Manhattan.  A12
The wizardry of organizing a political rally.  A13  TRIPS BY BAKER DETAILED
Secretary of State Baker used military aircraft for 11 personal trips at a cost to taxpayers of $371,599 over a 26 month period and repaid the Goverment $17,159, a newspaper reported.
A16  An Alzheimer's victim was reunited with a daughter.
A15  Senator Kent Conrad of North Dakota will not seek re-election.
A16  House and Senate conferees agreed on a campaign spending bill.
A10  The shuttle returned to earth after a nine-day mission.
A16  House Republicans wanted more details about bank overdrafts.
A16  Law Page A19  The new law school dean at the University of California at Berkeley  Concerns about the hiring of minority women for law faculties  At the Bar  Metropolitan Digest, B1 CRIME BOSS FOUND GUILTY
A Federal jury found John Gotti guilty of murder, racketeering and all other charges against him in a swift verdict that crushed his reputation for eluding conviction as boss of the Gambino crime family.
A1  TRIUMPH FOR PROSECUTORS
With years of diligence and a few good breaks, Federal prosecutors shattered the aura of invincibility of John Gotti, who haunted them with Houdini-like trial escapes.
A1  COURT ASSERTS ITSELF
New York's highest court ruled that people are entitled to more protection from improper searches and seizures by the police than is currently afforded by the United States Supreme Court.
A1  Business Digest, D1  Sports B7-13  THE WAY THE BALL BOUNCES
Is there life after the Final Four?
For the college basketball players who took part five years ago, the rebounds have been different.
A1  Baseball: Barfield might be Chicago-bound.
B7  Basketball: Not everyone's laughing at Knight.
B7  Hockey: Owner calls strike unnecessary.
B7  Weekend C1-30  Supper clubs back in style.
C1  Theater: Stephen Lang in "Hamlet." C3  Film: "The Living End." C1  Photography: A Helen Levitt show at the Met.
C1  Obituaries A16-17  Paul Henreid, actor A16  Lord Havers, Attorney General under Thatcher A17  James H. Bell, political chief for auto workers local A17  Editorials/Op-Ed A28-29  Editorials A28  John Gotti, guilty.
Heir to the earth.
Desegregation: Loss of zeal.
Letters A28  A. M. Rosenthal: New York and Clinton.
A29  Leslie H. Gelb: Funny money for Russia.
A29  Gay Talese: A last blast from the past.
A29


Hawkins Energy Corp. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Savings Regulators Halt Work
Lacking even the authority to pay out money it already has on hand, the savings-and-loan bailout began grinding to a halt today following a House vote on Wednesday evening against continued Federal spending on the industry cleanup.
The Resolution Trust Corporation, the Federal agency in charge of selling institutions taken over by the Government, said today that it would stop arranging such sales, delay a planned streamlining of its staff and postpone some property management and appraisal contracts, steps that could cost taxpayers millions of dollars a day.


At the Bar; The Marshall Islands Has Blue Lagoons, Pacific Breezes and an Opening on a Court
Some enchanted evening, you may see a plaintiff.
The Marshall Islands, a collection of 1,136 bits of land sprinkled like confetti over the South Pacific, has an opening on its High Court.
None of the country's 12 resident practicing lawyers among the 50,000 islanders is in the running.
So the newly independent republic is advertising the opening in the National Law Journal.


ACOI Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Appeals Court Rules Artist Pirated Picture of Puppies
A Federal appeals court in Manhattan ruled yesterday that the artist Jeff Koons unlawfully copied a greeting card photograph to create four sculptures of a couple with eight German shepherd puppies.
In its ruling, the court also castigated Mr.
Koons for piracy, arrogance and greed.
The ruling affirmed a 1990 United States District Court decision that held that Mr.
Koons committed copyright infringement in using a widely distributed 1980 photograph by Art Rogers, a California photographer.


Celerex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


General Communication Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Former Mayor of Waterbury Found Guilty of Corruption
The former mayor of Waterbury, Joseph J. Santopietro, was convicted today on Federal charges of conspiracy, bribe-taking and tax evasion in a case that rocked the city he once led.
A jury of eight women and four men took just under 11 hours to convict Mr.
Santopietro, who is 33 years old, on 15 separate charges that he used his office to arrange favorable deals for developers, obtain fraudulent loans, accept bribes and steal Federal money meant for job-training.
He was also convicted of three counts of tax evasion and filing false tax returns.
He was cleared of three additional counts of accepting bribes.


Alloy Computer Products reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


NVF Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Taipei Journal; The Horror of 2-28: Taiwan Rips Open the Past
A jeep pulled up in front of Lin Mao-sheng's house at 11 A.M. one March day and two plainclothes officers summoned him for a meeting with the provincial Governor.
Mr.
Lin, the dean of National Taiwan University and the first Taiwanese to earn an American Ph.D., was never seen by his family after that day in 1947.
He was one of thousands killed in a massacre that has haunted Taiwan ever since, but that almost no one dared mention in public until a few years ago .


Review/Film; A Dog, a Dad and, Yes, an Evil Veterinarian
"Beethoven" is no classic, but it's a sunny, energetic children's film with a good notion of what young audiences like.
That includes a gruff, lovable Dad (Charles Grodin) who takes a lot of pratfalls, a wide range of mess-minded sight gags and, of course, a shaggy dog story, complete with huge, drooling shaggy dog.
First seen as a cuter-than-cute St.
Bernard puppy, the pooch of the title strays into the lives of the Newton family, who are living the 1990's equivalent of a 1950's sitcom dream.
Father thinks he knows best, and he certainly thinks the house ought to be clean.
So he is staunchly against keeping the puppy when it appears.
His idea of a pet is a goldfish or an ant farm, not a St.
Bernard.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Primary; Far-Removed Feeling in Kansas Race
Here in the middle of the country, the New York Presidential primary campaign is a distant spectacle playing on national television news, but for Kansas voters, what they learn from the video backwash is of particular interest.
Next Tuesday they, too, will be voting in a state primary, but their choices will be made without contact with candidates, or even candidates' commercials.
It is a phenomenon that has a lot of Democratic politicians here worried.


Off Broadway Theaters Offer a Discount Month
More than 70 Off Broadway productions will offer discounts of up to 50 percent this month as part of a program organized by the Alliance of Resident Theaters/New York.
As part of the monthlong "Passports to Off-Broadway" program, some tickets will cost just $5.
A series of lectures, discussions and backstage tours is scheduled this weekend.


Bush to Name Labor Official
President Bush said today that he planned to nominate Marvin H. Kosters of Arlington, Va., an economist who worked in the White House under President Gerald R. Ford, to be Commissioner of Labor Statistics at the Labor Department.
If confirmed by the Senate, Mr. Kosters would succeed Janet L. Norwood.


Brooke Group Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Columbia Laboratories Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Senate Passes Bill on Jobs In Big Economic Package
Capping a nearly festive day spent showing off their new political muscle, Republicans today pushed through the New Jersey Senate a bill to generate nearly 100,000 new jobs, an idea that Gov.
Jim Florio proposed in his State of the State address.
In a legislative session in which bipartisan cooperation has been rare and agreement between Mr.
Florio, a Democrat, and the new Republican majority has been almost nonexistent, the bill establishing the Economic Recovery Fund passed, 39 to 0.


The Insurance Challenge; By Granting Rate Increase, Aides to Cuomo Put Senate Republican Leaders on the Spot
By raising health insurance rates for 1.2 million New Yorkers now and threatening to grant an even larger increase in October, the Cuomo administration is hoping to force the Republican-controlled Senate to agree to fundamental changes in the way insurance is offered and rates are set in New York State.
Yesterday, Insurance Superintendent Salvatore R. Curiale raised rates by an average of 14.2 percent for people and small companies covered by Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield, the nonprofit company that provides health insurance to more than eight million residents of the New York City, Albany and Hudson Valley areas.


Libyans Riot at Embassies; U.N. Protests
Libyan demonstrators, protesting the threat of sanctions over the downing of Pan Am flight 103, today attacked the embassies in Tripoli of Council members supporting the embargo.
The United Nations Security Council then issued a statement strongly condemning Libya for the rioting.
The protesters set fire to the Embassy of Venezuela, which held the Council presidency last month when the sanctions threat was made.


Correction
An editorial yesterday misidentified the Connecticut firearms maker that is suing the city of Columbus, Ohio, to overturn its ban on assault weapons.
It is the Colt's Manufacturing Company.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Clinton; Clinton Braves an Unruly Crowd In Courting Wall Street Doubters
Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas scanned the thousands of people who had poured onto Wall Street for his lunchtime rally yesterday and spied the most obvious symbol of discontent in a crowd so unruly that it had just roundly booed Carol Bellamy, the former City Council president.
Directly in his line of sight was a man holding up a hand-lettered sign that read: "Slick Willie," the derisive nickname that Mr.
Clinton hates.


On Not Executing an Innocent Prisoner
To the Editor:
"Can They Execute the Innocent? Probably" (Op-Ed, March 11) by Jordan Steiker discusses the Supreme Court's decision to hear the case of Leonel Herrera, who is on death row in Texas.
The Court has agreed to consider whether or not the Constitution prohibits the execution of an innocent person.
Professor Steiker suggests, surprisingly, that the Court may answer the question "no."
It was my responsibility as Attorney General for Texas from 1983 to 1991 to enforce our judgments of death.
During my tenure, more than 25 people were executed by Texas.
Professor Steiker's tentative prognosis troubles me deeply.
My worst nightmare would have been the execution of an innocent person.
As one who had to agonize over this prospect, I believe the proper interpretation would be that our Bill of Rights is intended to prevent such an obvious travesty of justice.
I favor executions for people who deserve such punishment, but I do not think people should be put to death before they have an opportunity to present nonfrivolous claims.
It was my policy as Attorney General not to oppose a stay of execution when such claims were being considered by the courts.
A claim of innocence, especially in a capital case such as Mr.
Herrera's, is perhaps the most legitimate reason to grant relief.
Executing someone with a plausible claim of innocence is abhorrent to any standard of decency marked by a civilized society.
No person, including Mr.
Herrera, should be executed while any such claims remain unresolved.
To the degree Professor Steiker's fears are formed by the Court's legitimate impatience with seemingly interminable capital appeals, that impatience must be tempered when a claim of actual innocence is presented.
For the Supreme Court to write otherwise would be a sad day for those who favor, as well as those who oppose, capital punishment in this country.
JIM MATTOX  Austin, Tex., March 19, 1992


Broadcast International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


The Spoken Word
DRAMA DISCUSSION, Actors Theater Workshop, 145 West 28th Street, Manhattan.
Post-performance discussion of "Directors Showcase of New Works," with Thurman E. Scott, the workshop's artistic director, and the actors who were featured in the day's performances, along with the playwrights.
Tomorrow at 7 P.M. and Sunday at 3 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 947-1386.
POETRY READING, St.
Mark's Church in the Bowery, Second Avenue and 10th Street, Manhattan.
Allen Ginsberg and other poets will read from their works in a tribute to the film maker and musicologist Harry Smith.
Today at 10:30 P.M.
Admission: $5.
Information: 674-0910.


Caldwell Partners reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Markborough Properties reports earnings for Year to Jan 31


William Schuman Is Remembered With Selections of His Own Music
Leonard Slatkin conducted the Juilliard Orchestra and Chorus in a small but representative group of works by William Schuman on Wednesday afternoon at the Juilliard Theater as part of a tribute to the composer, who died on Feb. 15 at the age of 81.
Between selections, Mr.
Schuman's family, friends and colleagues offered anecdotes that illustrated the genial wit for which Mr.
Schuman was known, as well as his warmth as a mentor and his vision as an administrator, both as president of the Juilliard School from 1945 to 1962 and as the first president of Lincoln Center, from 1962 to 1968.


Democrat Urges Foley to Resign In Bank Scandal
Democratic leaders of the House of Representatives were on the defensive again today as Republicans demanded more details about overdrafts at the House bank and even some Democrats sharply criticized Speaker Thomas S. Foley.
Mr.
Foley, a Washington Democrat, was described by some members of his own party as a weak, indecisive leader, and one Democratic lawmaker, Representative John Bryant of Texas, called on Mr.
Foley to step down as Speaker at the end of this session.


Late Night (or Early Morning) Work Yields a State Budget


Linpro Specified Prop reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Art in Review
Edouard Vuillard  New York Studio School 8 West Eighth Street Greenwich Village Through April 18
Until recently, an exhibition of the work of the French painter Edouard Vuillard was a rare event.
In the last few years, fortunately, there have been several of them here and abroad, including excellent shows at the Katonah Gallery in Katonah, N.Y., and the Brooklyn Museum, both organized by Elizabeth Easton.
The current one, put together by Ann Dumas, is the first in memory to concentrate on the artist's drawings.
It brings together about 45 works that do not pretend to represent the cream of the crop.
Most of the drawings are slight, but there are a few ambitious and very beautiful examples.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo; Insider, Outsider, Brown Runs on Contradictions
In an unlikely admission for a Presidential candidate who casts himself as the stir-up-the-pot champion of the forgotten, Edmund G. Brown Jr. confessed to black publishers at breakfast in Manhattan this week, "I'm a politician, you know, just like all the rest of them."
But by lunch time, the former California Governor had reverted to his anti-politician mode, declaring to hospital workers that "politics has degenerated into a hateful ritual of hot buttons, a lot of campaign consultants and a lot of noise."


North Stars Owner Calls Strike Unnecessary
As the National Hockey League strike entered its second day, hints of discord emerged among owners yesterday, but there was no sign of any immediate breakthrough in the dispute that threatens the conclusion of the season.
Norman Green, the owner of the Minnesota North Stars, said yesterday that his fellow owners should give the league's president, John Ziegler, greater power to negotiate a settlement to the two-day strike by the players.


Train Hits and Kills Youth
An empty New Jersey Transit Authority passenger train struck and killed a youth who had been riding his dirt bike on the train tracks in East Rutherford, N.J., last night, transit authority officials said.
Jeff Lamm, a spokesman for the agency, said the accident happened about 6:30 P.M. as the train, operating on the Hoboken, N.J., to Suffern, N.Y., line, was returning to Hoboken to pick up more passengers.
Mr.
Lamm said that the youth, whose identity was not released, appeared to have been alone on the tracks.
The accident caused delays of 30 to 60 minutes on the line, Mr.
Lamm said..


Adviser to Dinkins Again Tops List of City Lobbyists
A law firm headed by a close friend and tennis partner of Mayor David N. Dinkins made more money lobbying the city last year than any other concern.
Overall, the amount of money that lobbyists earned for their attempts to influence city government rose only slightly from the previous year.
A report issued yesterday by the City Clerk showed that spending on lobbyists rose 3.5 percent in 1991, to $8.8 million, compared with $8.5 million in 1990, when the figure was up a third over 1989.


Network Relief Fails to Get N.F.L. Support
It was a brief, shining moment, a tiny blip in time when the TV networks thought the National Football League would make their financial woes its own and grant much-needed financial relief.
So ABC, CBS and NBC looked toward a Dallas airport hotel on Wednesday, hoping for passage of N.F.L.
Commissioner Paul Tagliabue's bold proposal: a $238 million reduction in 1993 payments and a two-year extension at the 1993 level.


Walesa Ends Visit to Germay Stressing New Ties
President Lech Walesa of Poland concluded a five-day state visit to Germany today during which he and his hosts depicted the historically troubled relations between the two countries as better than they have ever been and as likely to improve further.
At a news conference in Berlin, Mr.
Walesa called his trip through Germany "the greatest and most important visit I have made in my life." German leaders said they were committed to building a special friendship with the country that Nazi armies attacked, to start World War II.


Guardian Capital Group reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Would-Be Thai Chief Vows to Form Cabinet
The veteran politician selected as Thailand's next Prime Minister insisted today that he would press on with his efforts to form a government despite American assertions that he is linked to Thailand's flourishing drug trade.
The politician, Narong Wongwan, has demanded that the United States make its evidence against him public.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Behind the Scenes; Reflections on People, Props and (Oh, Yes) Issues
The New York primary happens to fall on the Yankees' opening day.
But modern politics is anything but baseball: Just because the candidate shows up doesn't mean the people will come.
In this age of television politics, where the reality on the nightly news is more real than the day-in, day-out of the campaign, nothing, paradoxically, is more important than the crowd.


Foote, Cone Chief Forgoes His Bonus
Amid outcries over extensive, and expensive, executive compensation, Bruce Mason, chairman and chief executive of Foote, Cone &amp; Belding Communications, decided to forgo his eligibility for any incentive bonus last year as a result of the advertising company's disappointing financial results.
Mr.
Mason's decision meant that he declined a sum on the order of $400,000, a spokesman for the company in Chicago said yesterday.
The move meant he ranked last among Foote, Cone's six most highly paid executives in 1991 salary and incentive compensation.


Gotti Guilty of Murder and Racketeering
John Gotti was found guilty of murder, racketeering and all the other charges against him yesterday in a swift, stunning verdict in Federal District Court in Brooklyn that crushed his reputation for eluding conviction as boss of the Gambino crime family.
Mr.
Gotti wore the same tight-lipped smile he had maintained throughout the trial as the jury forewoman began reading out the verdicts against him and his co-defendant, Frank Locascio, at 1:19 P.M., after only 13 hours of deliberation over two days.


Cabletron Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Critic's Choice; Winnipeg Ballet's Old Favorites
The Royal Winnipeg Ballet has long been the little ballet that could, surviving and flourishing for 52 years in a rugged Canadian prairie city and establishing a high level of performance and repertory.
The company is now under the direction of John Meehan, an Australian dancer of wickedly sophisticated humor whom New York audiences came to know as a danseur noble with American Ballet Theater in the 1980's.
Will the troupe look different?
It's hard to tell.
But there will be much about the company that is reassuringly familiar.
Evelyn Hart, the company's beloved former prima ballerina, will return for its New York engagement this weekend at the Brooklyn Center for the Arts at Brooklyn College.
A featured choreographer named Mark Godden, whose "Symphony No. 1," set to music by Christopher Rouse, will be performed tomorrow night, is a proudly homegrown product.
And the repertory, a mini-tour of late-20th-century ballet, is as fearlessly wide-ranging as ever.


Ad Spending in New York City


Consulier Engineering reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Alpha 1 Biomedicals Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Cambodia Rivals Take Vital Steps Toward Peace
The four political groups that divide this country continue to speak of one another with undiminished hatred, but, under international pressure, they took two vital steps this week to fulfill their reluctant commitment to peace and reconciliation.
Since Monday, daily truck convoys have been crossing into western Cambodia from Thailand, beginning the resettlement of about 370,000 Cambodians who, starting in 1979, had gone to live in huge camps for displaced people on the border.


Allwaste Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Report Accuses New York of Faking Jail Data
In an attempt to evade a Federal court order protecting prisoners' rights, New York City jail supervisors and guards falsified records last year in at least 85 cases and in perhaps hundreds more to hide how long it took to provide inmates with proper housing, city investigators said yesterday.
A report from the city's Department of Investigation says records were altered for 85 inmates who were placed in the Manhattan Detention Complex between Jan. 1 and March 17, 1991.
But Susan E. Shepard, the Investigation Commissioner, said that in a review of 2,686 admissions, records in at least 571 other cases were inaccurate and may have been tampered with by the Correction Department, the agency that operates the jails.


Review/Film; Bored Young Europeans Adrift in San Francisco
Who are this country's new bohemians?
"Steal America," a grainy, quintessentially bohemian-looking film, which opens today at the Cinema Village, suggests that some of them are young Europeans adrift in the North Beach district of San Francisco.
Spiritual descendants of Jean Seberg's American expatriate in Jean-Luc Godard's "Breathless," they are driven by wanderlust, along with vague dreams of American-style glory that aren't likely to pan out.
When not working at their boring day jobs in video stores and postcard shops, they sit around wondering where to go next and complaining about how claustrophobic they feel in San Francisco.
Their romantic couplings seem more perfunctory than enthusiastic.
Early in the film, Christophe (Charlie Homo), a Frenchman who has taken a job parking cars, sullenly confides his fantasy of conquering the American Wild West in a big flashy car.
Instead, he complains, here he is, eating croissants for breakfast.
The movie's liveliest scene takes place when he is fired from his job, steals a customer's car and takes Stella (Clara Bellino), a Swiss cabaret singer, and her bisexual pal Maria (Diviana Ingravallo) to New Orleans.
Although Christophe disappears from the film, it is revealed later that he was arrested and deported to Haiti.


Workingmens Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Rise and Tragic Fall of the Arts Endowment; Taxpayers Also
To the Editor:
In "Meet the New Willie Horton" (Op-Ed, March 6), Marlon T. Riggs injects a fresh sense of reality into the debate over public funds for the arts: namely, that gay people pay taxes, too.
It seems quite simple to me.
Each year the National Endowment for the Arts gives out a certain amount of grant money.
Of course, those funds are collected by the Government through the tax system.
And also not surprisingly, some taxpayers (about 10 percent) are gay people.
Therefore, it is quite reasonable to expect that at least a small share (far less than 10 percent) of all art funded by the Endowment for the Arts should speak to the themes and issues most important to gay people.


Economic Scene; Facing Dangers Of a Global Bust
THE American economic recovery is being threatened by a global recession.
In all the major countries, including this one, the recessions of the 1990's have proved to be deeper and more tenacious than the consensus forecasts of economists or governments.
What distinguishes the present slump from earlier postwar dips are the structural drags, especially the huge public and private debts and the inflated asset values built in the careless and speculative boom of the 1980's.
"The unwinding of an asset-driven credit mania is always longer and more difficult than observers and economic actors at first believe," said Kenneth S. Courtis, the Tokyo-based strategist and senior economist of the Deutsche Bank Capital Markets in Asia.


CMI Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Continental Pharma reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Minnesota Housing Finance Agency is offering $15.4 million of tax-exempt single-family mortgage bonds priced to yield from 4.8 percent in 1993 to 6.65 percent in 2005 through underwriters led by Paine Webber Inc.
For longer maturities, there are bonds due in 2009 and 2016 priced to yield 6.90 percent and 6.95 percent, respectively.
Underwriters said the financing had been rated double-A by Moody's Investors Service Inc. and the Standard &amp; Poor's Corp.
*
New York State Housing Finance Agency is offering $49.8 million of tax-exempt insured multifamily mortgage housing revenue bonds that are rated double-A by Moody's and S.&amp; P. and priced to yield from 5.7 percent in 1998 to 6.25 percent in 2002 through underwriters led by Bear, Stearns &amp; Co..
For long maturities, there are yields of 6.95 percent in 2012 and 7 percent in 2022.
*
Plastic Containers Inc., Demopolis, Ala., a unit of the Atlantis Group, is offering $110 million of 10.75 percent senior secured notes due in 2001 at a price of 100 through Citicorp Securities.
Callable after five years, the notes were rated Ba-3 by Moody's and B+ by S.&amp; P.


Music Stops With 166 Players on New Teams
The National Football League's fourth, and perhaps last, period of Plan B free agency has ended with something that pleases the players: more movement and more money.
When the Plan B two-month window closed at midnight on Wednesday, 166 of the 541 eligible players had signed with new teams.
That was an increase from 1991, when 139 of 518 players moved.
The National Football League Players Association estimated that the players who moved will earn an average of 60 percent more money from their new teams.


Worldwide Collections reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


National Health Enhancement reports earnings for Year to Jan 31


Mills and the Nets Focus on the Playoffs
Even though he was Milwaukee's first-round draft choice in 1990, the 16th player selected, Terry Mills experiences no extra emotion when playing against the Bucks.
"Not at all because I was never really with the team," Mills said in Milwaukee on Wednesday night, after the Nets defeated the Bucks, 121-117, in the first game of a home-and-home series that returns to Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
"Because of the salary cap and everything, I didn't know who I was going to be with for 90 days. Then they traded me to Denver in exchange for Danny Schayes."


Ballistic Recovery Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


John Gotti, Guilty at Last
After years of dodging conviction and making the Government seem impotent, John Gotti stands convicted of racketeering that includes the 1985 murder that promoted him to boss of the Gambino crime family.
To win that verdict, the Justice Department stretched its plea-bargaining, eavesdropping and courtroom advocacy powers to new and necessary lengths.
Yesterday's judgment in a Federal court in New York City was a major achievement, a community and national service.


Vantage Point Energy reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


When Words Cross the English Channel
To the Editor:
Your March 3 report that French schools will begin teaching English to 9-year-olds gives the impression that the "invasion" of French by English words is relatively recent and symbolized by "weekend." The exchange between the two languages has been continual since the Middle Ages.
In early modern times the trend accelerated.
We find "paquebot" (packet boat) used in 1634 and "wagon" (as "vagon," meaning a coal cart) soon after.
With the invention of railroads, came "wagons-lits," sleeping cars.
In the 18th century, French borrowing increased with admiration for English political institutions.
"Meeting" dates from that time, and so do "bulldog" (1745), "toast" (1750) and "jockey" (1776).
"Sport" made its debut in 1828 and became the name of a magazine in 1853.


NO EVIDENCE FOUND OF PATRIOT SALES BY ISRAEL TO CHINA
The State Department said today that its investigators had found "no evidence that Israel had transferred a Patriot missile or Patriot missile technology" to China, and added that the matter was now closed.
Administration officials said that the investigation had not resolved all questions, but that given the turmoil the case was causing in United States-Israel relations, the State Department saw no point in continuing the inquiry.


Zvereva Upsets a Shaky Navratilova
The shadows cast by the palm fronds that rim the brand-new stadium court caught and held her eye too often.
The chill in the air seeped into her serving shoulder and took the heat out of her serve.
The passing shot of the opponent made an unwelcome breeze as it streaked down the sidelines.
The slippery clay undermined her movement and provoked her into indecision she could ill afford.
Martina Navratilova was shaky, showed it, and helped her opponent play like a can't-miss kid.


Art in Review
'Solitary Visions'  Prints by Rodolphe Bresdin and Odilon Redon The Grolier Club 47 East 60th Street Manhattan Through May 9
Rodolphe Bresdin (1822 to 1885) was the quintessential bohemian artist.
He moved in the circles of writers like Theophile Gautier and Champfleury, whose novel "Chien-Caillou," about an engraver, seems to have been a tribute to Bresdin.
Only once did his art receive serious critical notice, with the success of his 1861 lithograph "The Good Samaritan." For stretches of time, Bresdin, discontented and unrecognized, sought work outside Paris, in Toulouse and Bordeaux and as far afield as Montreal.
His works are full of images of wandering and of flight from hostile forces.
He died, penniless and obscure, in a garret.


Armada Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


For Gotti Prosecutors, Hard Work And Breaks Pay Off in Conviction
It wasn't a death knell for the mob or a great precedent for the law books.
But the conviction of John Gotti yesterday was a scintillating triumph for a team of Federal prosecutors who, with years of diligence and a few good breaks, breathed new life into a tired old script and shattered the maddening aura of invincibility of a notorious gangster who called himself a plumbing salesman.
The conviction was especially sweet for Andrew J. Maloney, the ruddy-faced, street-smart United States Attorney for the Eastern District of New York, and John Gleeson, the scholarly chief of his organized-crime bureau whose tenures had been haunted by one of Mr.
Gotti's Houdini-like trial escapes and who were determined to rewrite the courtroom scenario.


Corel Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Review/Film Festival: The Living End; Footloose, Frenzied and H.I.V.-Positive
BLACK humor doesn't get much darker than "The Living End," the story of two H.I.V.-positive young men who manage to turn potential tragedy into a desperate, uproarious celebration of their new-found nihilistic freedom.
Doing himself a great disservice, the writer and director Gregg Araki labels his work "an irresponsible movie" when in fact it has the power of honesty and originality, as well as the weight of legitimate frustration.
Miraculously, it also has a buoyant, mischievous spirit that transcends any hint of gloom.
Working on a shoestring, Mr.
Araki has made a candid, freewheeling road movie that ably represents the boom of gay-oriented talent evident in this year's New Directors/New Films series at the Museum of Modern Art (where the film will be shown today at 6 P.M. and Sunday at 9 P.M.).
Among the festival's several entries with gay themes, this is easily the most uncomplicatedly entertaining.


Review/Film; Val Kilmer as an F.B.I. Agent Among the Sioux
The "Washington redskin" of "Thunderheart," as he is derisively called by the film's American Indian characters, is an F.B.I. agent who is sent from Washington to an Oglala Sioux reservation to investigate a crime.
Raymond Levoi (Val Kilmer) does not welcome this assignment.
Part Sioux himself, and too culturally assimilated to acknowledge that heritage, he resents having been selected for the job on the basis of his background.
He refers contemptuously to various Indians as "Geronimo" and "Tonto" as a means of registering his unfamiliarity with their world.
But during the course of the story, Ray is freed from his high-handed superiority to Indian culture, made to understand the many problems of the violence-torn Indian community (the film is set in the late 1970's) and forced to accept his own past.
"The same blood that was spilled in the grass and snow at Wounded Knee runs through your heart like a buffalo," he is told by one of the story's far more spiritually aware Indian characters.


Beeba's Creations Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Winpak Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Fans of the Don Remain Loyal Despite Bitterness
Two years ago, the last time John Gotti walked out of a courtroom at the end of a trial, a free man acquitted of assault and conspiracy charges, he was received by his minions as though he were a king at his coronation, and the celebrations in the Manhattan and Queens neighborhoods where he hung out were long and jubilant.
Yesterday, as Mr.
Gotti was returned to prison for what is likely to be a life sentence, his supporters remained ardent, though bitter and angry.
"My father is the last of the Mohicans," said Mr.
Gotti's daughter, Victoria, as she left the family's home in Howard Beach, Queens.


Back Home, Miskitos Can Sing Again, but Face Daunting Job of Rebuilding
With the cold war over, this primitive backwater, once deemed strategically important by the Sandinistas, Fidel Castro and Oliver L. North, has returned to being a place where a man can race his car through the surf with wild abandon.
"We could go all the way to Bluefields this way," a taxi driver, Joel Kingsman, told his passengers with a tone of discovery one recent day.


Review/Photography; Through a Lens, Into a Child's Universe
THE career of the photographer Helen Levitt, whose work is featured in a retrospective at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, is curiously bifurcated.
After a period of brilliant achievement in the late 1930's and early 40's, Ms.
Levitt stopped making photographs for 15 years while she worked as a film editor and camera operator.
Although she returned briefly to photography in 1959, virtually all the photographs she took in the following two years were stolen, and she did not begin photographing again until the early 1970's.
Thus, there is a lacuna of more than 25 years in her photographic work.
Moreover, the pictures she made after her return to photography are in general less interesting than her early work.
But those early photographs, made in the brief period between 1938 and roughly 1942, have long been recognized as a singular and wonderful achievement.
Working with a 35-millimeter camera and a right-angle attachment that allowed her to photograph people without being noticed, Ms.
Levitt produced an astonishing group of photographs of children at play in the streets of New York.
Made with a perfectly limpid style, these pictures capture the anarchic energy and exuberant mix of fantasy and reality that the children bring to their enterprise.


Art in Review
Saint Clair Cemin  Robert Miller Gallery 41 East 57th Street Manhattan Through tomorrow
Saint Clair Cemin's recent sculpture seems to turn away from the furniture forms he has favored in the past to models from art history, though for what purpose it is hard to say.
"War," for example, is reminiscent of Donald Judd's open-topped cubes, although here the pure Minimalist surfaces are sullied by a faint pink stain and the interior corners are filled with stepped forms.
Any number of modernist biomorphic sculptors are referred to in "How to Screw In a Light Bulb," a sluglike form of bronze that seems to squirm tumescently across the floor.


New Mexico Issues Student Loan Debt
The New Mexico Educational Assistance Foundation is offering $84 million in tax-exempt student loan revenue bonds through underwriters led by Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Company.
Underwriters said the entire issue was insured by the Ambac Indemnity Corporation and, as a result, was rated triple-A by Moody's and S.&amp; P.


Stock Tumbles At Price Co.
Stock of the Price Company tumbled 23 percent yesterday after the discount retailer reported disappointing second-quarter earnings.
The company, which runs a chain of membership warehouse clubs, said net income in the quarter that ended March 15 fell to $20.6 million, down 26 percent from the $27.9 million earned in the quarter last year.
Revenue rose to $1.52 billion from $1.36 billion.


Edisto Resources Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Sounds Around Town
Preppy and Antic
Loudon Wainwright 3d, the Bottom Line, 15 West Fourth Street, Manhattan, (212) 228-6300.
Out of the legion of acoustic singers and songwriters who became popular in the early 1970's, Mr.
Wainwright emerged as the comic genius of his generation and a performer whose mixture of preppy polish and Jerry Lewis-style antics treat life as a serious comedy.
As Mr.
Wainwright has matured, his songwriting has expanded from suburban satire to embrace career crises, middle-age fears and family deaths with an honesty that still manages to find a pungent humor in all the angst.
Shows are at 8 and 11 tonight and tomorrow, and tickets are $15.


Campaign Financing Bill Advances (Toward Veto)
Democratic House and Senate conferees agreed today on campaign finance legislation that would set spending limits on Congressional elections and cut donations by political action committee in half.
Republican conferees called the measure a sham even before the agreement was announced and said President Bush would veto it because of the spending limits and because of the partial public financing it would provide.
Earlier versions of the bill passed both houses with majorities too small to override a veto.


Invasions of Privacy
BARRY SWITZER, the former University of Oklahoma football coach, and JACK TAYLOR JR., a newspaper reporter, were guilty of invading each other's privacy, a jury ruled yesterday.
But jurors said Switzer had not libeled Taylor in the former coach's autobiography, "Bootlegger's Boy."
Taylor contended that Switzer's book had linked the reporter to a scheme to plant drugs on an Oklahoma football player around the time of the 1988 Orange Bowl.
After four days of deliberations following a six-week trial, the jury voted, 10-3, to award $95,000 in exemplary damages to Taylor and $18,500 in exemplary damages to Switzer.


When Fear Takes Over: A Bank Run
Bank runs, with depositors lining up to demand their money out of fear that a bank will soon fail, are supposed to be a thing of the past, from a time before Federal deposit insurance was adopted.
But yesterday, a run developed at a bank in Kansas City, Mo., caused in part by depositors' fears that bank insurance can no longer be completely trusted.
"This is a classic for the textbooks on rumors," J. Webster Hull, the chairman of the Metro North State Bank, a $550 million institution, said in a telephone interview late yesterday afternoon.


Cinram Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Diner's Journal
Fount of Many Bistros
Park Bistro, the relentlessly popular Gallic outpost on Park Avenue near 28th Street in Manhattan, is growing a sequoia-like family tree.
First there was the steakhouse Les Halles and then a carryout around the corner called Park Avenue Gourmandises and Town House, to be followed by a venture in the theater district this year.
And Park Bistro alumni are turning up all over town.


Art in Review
Anne Poor  Terry Dintenfass 50 West 57th Street Manhattan Through tomorrow
Anne Poor uses oil paint with the delicacy and discretion of a watercolorist, which is one reason the several oil paintings in this show have a great sense of intimacy despite their large scale.
Her models seem to embrace both the European modernism of an earlier day (her first one-woman show was in 1943) and East Asian brush painting.
She works in thinly applied curtains of paint and favors neutral beiges, grays, sepias and blacks to achieve an effect of indefinable depth.


CHRONICLE
BARBARA BUSH was in New York for a day of wide-ranging activities yesterday: bridal shopping, chatting with homeless single mothers and receiving honors from Covenant House and Boston College.
In her "mother of the bride" role, she took her daughter, DOROTHY BUSH LeBLOND, to the showroom of ARNOLD SCAASI to choose dresses for Mrs.
Le Blond's wedding on June 27.
Mrs.
Le Blond, who is divorced, will marry ROBERT KOCH, the administrative assistant to one of PRESIDENT BUSH'S most vocal critics, RICHARD A. GEPHARDT, the House majority leader.


Austin, Tex., Bond Offering Has a High Yield of 6.63%
A $271.3 million tax-exempt offering of refunding revenue bonds by Austin, Tex., was tentatively priced yesterday through underwriters led by Morgan Stanley &amp; Company.
The serial bonds offer investors yields ranging from 5 percent for a bond due in 1995 to 6.05 percent in 2000, 6.45 percent in 2005 and 6.60 percent in 2008.
For a longer maturity, there is a bond due in 2016 that was initially priced at a discount to yield 6.63 percent.


Fisons Looks Within To Select a New Chief
Fisons P.L.C., the troubled British drug giant, promoted Cedric A. Scroggs, 51, to be chief executive and chairman of its pharmaceutical division yesterday after the resignation of G. Peter Fothergill.
Robert G. Lankester, 50, the chairman of the Fisons horticulture division since August 1989 and a main board director since January 1991, succeeds Mr.
Scroggs as managing director of the company's scientific equipment division.


Comarco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Specific Pledges for Money Are Absent in Russia Plan
The United States and Germany went ahead and announced an extensive aid program for Russia without obtaining specific pledges from the seven countries involved in much of the $11 billion direct-aid part of the package, American and European officials said today.
Many of the countries jostled today to take credit for the aid.
But apart from the United States, none could say how much each was donating, and one accounting suggested that about $4 billion was in the form of only a vague promise to provide the aid "if it is needed."


Rise and Tragic Fall of the Arts Endowment
To the Editor:
John E. Frohnmayer's address before the National Press Club bespeaks a Greek tragedy that has already brought down Mr.
Frohnmayer's chairmanship of the National Endowment for the Arts, sadly diminished the President and his advisers, and may destroy the arts agency (news article, March 24).
From the very outset the Endowment for the Arts was structured to keep partisan politics at the greatest possible distance.
What was to assure this separation was the system of peer panels.
It was as wise and fair a system as any country has had, the envy of art constituencies throughout the world.


Communications World International reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Market Place; Stock Funds Attract Money But Produce Mixed Results
For stock mutual funds, the first quarter was a perplexing combination.
The money poured in from investors, but the profits from investing all that money were decidedly mixed.
The average equity fund in the quarter had a total return to investors of a negative 0.82 percent, Lipper Analytical Services reported yesterday.
Among the 19 types of funds that Lipper tracks, only one narrow category, financial-services funds, showed a gain of more than 5 percent, with a rise of 6.31 percent.


General Parcel Service Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Lard Havers, 69, Former British Attorney General
Lord Havers, who as a prosecutor and Attorney General was involved in some of Britain's most controversial trials of the last 20 years, died on Wednesday in London.
He was 69 years old.
Lord Havers retired from Government service in 1987 because of ill health after serving only four months as Lord Chancellor, the highest-ranking legal office in England and Wales.
As such, he had presided over the House of Lords.


Reyes Gets Reprieve
The arbitrator GEORGE NICOLAU ruled yesterday that catcher GILBERTO REYES of the Montreal Expos should not have been suspended 60 days for drug use but treated instead as a first-time offender.
The ruling should reduce by about half the time Reyes was scheduled to miss.
As a first-time offender, Reyes will undergo in-patient rehabilitation, which usually lasts about four weeks.


United Systems Technology reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Pop/Jazz; Jazz Series With Something for Everyone
When the Brooklyn Academy of Music opens tonight for the introductory lecture of an eight-week modern-music festival, it will try to embrace music aficionados of just about every age and taste.
The festival, titled 100 Years of Jazz and Blues, will include standard jazz, blues and world-music concerts, but along with them will be films and a book of essays.
For children, the festival is offering the Living Music Expo at the academy's Lepercq Space.
For people interested in the ramifications of black musical culture in the 20th century, there are four panels.
And for musicians and dancers, there are four master classes.
In addition, much of the activity is free.
"We thought it was important to put together something multi-cultural," said Leonard Goines, who with Mikki Shepard put the series together.
"We mean that in a broad sense. jazz is America's original music, but it's also international music and everyone plugs into it. But people don't really understand what all of jazz and blues means, so we want to take a look at all of its various styles, and see what this means to rap and pop music, and try to draw as many different people as we can."


Yes, Virginia, Majerus Is Feeling Post-N.I.T. Pain
Rick Majerus, wearing his signature floppy sweater and perplexed look, stood off to the side as ecstatic Virginia students shed their preppy image and wildly cheered a basketball victory.
This consuming moment Wednesday night in Madison Square Garden symbolized the collegiate hardcourt game: the brassy bands, the bouncing cheerleaders, the ecstatic parents with tears in their eyes.


The Steel Man With Kid Gloves
On a recent trip to the USX Corporation's largest mill, in Gary, Ind., Thomas J. Usher unexpectedly strolled into the offices of the United Steelworkers local to listen to what union leaders might have on their minds about the mill.
A visit by the president of the corporation's vast steel operation to a union office might seem like business as usual.
But "it was very, very unusual," said Cary Kranz, president of the local.
"Other heads of U.S. Steel would never have dreamed of being in the same room with the union people. He is bringing in a breath of fresh air."
Mr.
Kranz's testimony itself represents a significant shift in relations between management and labor at the nation's largest steel company, which had long been characterized by criticism -- not compliments.
To many, Mr.
Usher, 49 years old, represents a historic changing of the guard at Big Steel, replacing the autocratic managers that President Kennedy once referred to as "a bunch of S.O.B.'s."
"Our long-term interests are exactly the same," Mr.
Usher said recently in an interview at the company's headquarters here.
"Whether you are a manager or a member of the union, everyone wants to do a good job, and they want to provide for their families. But I think there is a growing realization that we are not going to make it without the union and the union is not going to make it without us."
That realization has led to a number of changes in the way the two sides treat each other and has helped forge a big comeback for America's largest steelmakers.
Although the biggest steelmakers are losing money in this recession, there has been a marked improvement in efficiency and quality.
For those reasons and others the Bush Administration decided not to extend limits on imported steel.
But the task ahead for Mr.
Usher, who took over the steel operation in 1990, is to find ways to cause the business to grow profitably and retain customers as well as find still more ways to make better steel more efficiently.
At the U.S.
Steel Group, USX's steel division and America's most efficient large steel producer, there are now regular meetings with managers and union officials that cover everything from retraining and environmental progress to health-care costs.
And under Mr.
Usher's guidance, groups of union workers and managers have started visiting customers to interview them about their products.
Slowly, the carefully drawn line between management and labor, which existed for generations, is beginning to blur. 'A Different Breed'
"He is an excellent manager, and he is a different type of manager from what we have seen before," said Paul T. Sullivan, executive director for purchasing and transportation at the Ford Motor Company, a large USX customer.
"From my perspective, Tom Usher is an effective manager who seems to be totally committed to getting everyone involved in the process of quality. To me, he is a different breed of fellow."
Many suggest that Mr.
Usher's style reflects his exposure to foreign steel companies, particularly those in Japan and South Korea.
Mr.
Usher, who came to U.S.
Steel in 1966 as an industrial engineer and has held numerous management positions in plants and headquarters ever since, has had his executive tenure shaped by the waves of joint ventures between USX and the Pohang Iron and Steel Company of South Korea and the Kobe Steel Company of Japan.
"He has been more open with customers and employees," said John Jacobson, an analyst with AUS Consultants in Philadelphia.
"He has managed in a short time to create a sense of team spirit there."
Mr.
Usher is unwilling to acknowledge that his management style has been heavily influenced by those partnerships.
But he insists that there was a need to run matters differently.
"Twenty years ago, there was very little that was ever expected of anyone who wasn't in management, particularly to come up with an idea," Mr.
Usher said.
"Everyone looked up to the oracle on high for all decisions."
Indeed, the American steel industry has long been a symbol of rigid management.
Like many in American industry, steel executives gave orders to managers, who in turn passed them along to foremen who barked them at workers.
Today, steel managers are more likely to have committees made up of union members and executives to discuss quality, customer service or productivity.
Executives often ask workers to help in devising methods to shave minutes from one process or another.
"As a culture in this company, we have asked a lot of people's backs, but not enough of their minds," Mr.
Usher said.
Mr.
Usher's climb up U.S.
Steel's corporate ladder began after he earned an undergraduate degree in industrial engineering, a master's degree in operations research and a doctorate in systems engineering, all from the University of Pittsburgh.
By 1975, he had become the assistant to the general superintendent of the company's large plant on the South Side of Chicago, which he recently decided to close.
Mr.
Usher went on to hold posts in strategic planning and research for the corporation and became vice president for engineering for the steel business in 1984.
A year later, he was a senior vice president and five years later became president of the steel division, succeeding Thomas C. Graham, who retired last year at age 63.
Mr.
Graham, who came to USX in 1983 after a lengthy career at the former Jones &amp; Laughlin Steel, saw the nation's largest steel producer through its toughest years.
Although Mr.
Graham is credited with investing huge sums in new equipment and forging important joint ventures with foreign steelmakers, he was nonetheless widely seen inside the company and by workers as having an autocratic style of management.
Facing New Tests
Mr.
Usher's management will be put to the test in the coming years.
He is leading the steel business at a time when manufacturers like auto makers are turning away from steel to substitute lighter materials.
He also faces growing competition from nonunion, low-cost mini-mill steel producers like the Nucor Corporation, which make steel from scrap.
Those companies have been more aggressive about taking market share from large steel companies.
Also, there will be more stringent environmental regulations.
Mr.
Usher said his strategy in dealing with the mini-mills was to make flat-rolled steel -- the steel for cars and appliances and the bread and butter of his company -- as inexpensively and efficiently as he can.
He said he would continue to have a presence in the export market, something historically uncommon for steel companies in the United States.
"He has a lot of constituents he has to keep happy," Mr.
Jacobson said.
"The company has done a good job of cutting, but you can only go so far in cutting. You eventually have to address the issue of how to grow the business profitably and hang on to customers and to assure that steel is going to be desired by various industries."
Mr.
Jacobson added that Mr.
Usher's big contribution to the company would have to be in "generating dialogue with customers and workers and management so that everyone is talking to each other." He said: "But that's something that will require a shift in that company's culture. It's too soon to say how well he is doing in establishing that, but he has made a good start."


Eljer Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 29


Art in Review
Jorg Immendorf  Michael Werner Gallery 21 East 67th Street Manhattan Through April 18
In the early 1980's, the German Neo-Expressionist Jorg Immendorf burst upon the New York scene as a master of the political cartoon as painting, an artist whose big, brash, darkly humorous canvases took aim, alternately, at his divided country, its Nazi past and the international art world.
But as with many other European artists, Mr.
Immendorf's earlier development has remained obscure to his American audience, a problem that this illuminating exhibition of paintings from the early 1970's will help solve.


Ringo Starr Plans Tour Of U.S. This Summer
Ringo Starr is to tour the United States and Europe this summer with a revised version of the All Starr Band, the group of rock stars he assembled for his first post-Beatles tour in 1989.
The tour is to begin on June 2 in Fort Lauderdale, Fla., and includes performances at Radio City Music Hall on June 19 and 20, and at the Garden State Arts Center in Holmdel, N.J., on June 21.
The band will perform in Europe in July, and will return to the United States in August.
Besides Mr.
Starr, who will sing and play the drums, the band includes the guitarists Joe Walsh, Dave Edmunds and Nils Lofgren, the bassist Timothy B. Schmit, the saxophonist Tim Cappello and the keyboardists Todd Rundgren and Burton Cummings.
Zak Starkey, Mr.
Starr's son, will also play drums.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows, performances and art exhibitions in the New York metropolitan region that will be closing soon: Closing This Weekend
"SEARCH AND DESTROY." Howard Korder's black comedy, directed by David Chambers, about one man's pursuit of fame and fortune in the movie business.
Circle in the Square, 1633 Broadway, at 50th Street.
Tonight at 8, tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M., and Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $36 to $40.
Reservations: (212) 307-2700.
"THE WHITE BEAR." Daniel Besnehard's drama, directed by Peter Muste, about a Polish countess, her lover and a young emigre aboard an ocean liner bound for Ellis Island.
Ubu Repertory Theater, 15 West 28th Street, Manhattan.
Today and tomorrow at 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $15 ($10 for students and the elderly).
Reservations: (212) 679-7562.
MASK DISPLAY.
Six masks made of match sticks, by David Mach.
Barbara Toll Fine Arts, 146 Greene Street, SoHo.
Today and tomorrow, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 431-1788.
"1992 INTERNATIONAL STUDIO ARTISTS EXHIBITION." Two art exhibitions: "Encounters With Diversity" and "Sites of Intolerance." P.S. 1 Museum, 46-01 21st Street, Long Island City, Queens.
Today, tomorrow and Sunday, noon to 6 P.M.
Donation: $2. (718) 784-2084.
NEW DIRECTORS/NEW FILMS SERIES.
Museum of Modern Art, 11 West 53d Street, Manhattan.
The series, a collaboration between the Film Society of Lincoln Center and the museum's film department, runs through Sunday.
Tickets: $7 a screening.
Schedule and information: (212) 708-9480.
"WHILE THEY FOUGHT: THE HOME FRONT IN NEW YORK CITY." Photographs, artifacts and posters from the 1940's.
New-York Historical Society, 170 Central Park West, at 77th Street Through Sunday.
Today and Sunday, 11 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Admission: $4.50 ($3 for students and the elderly, $1 for children) Information: (212) 873-3400.
Closing Next Week
"DEREK JARMAN: A TRIBUTE." A film retrospective including "The Last of England" (1987), "The Garden" (1990) and "Caravaggio" (1986).
Through Thursday.
Public Theater, 425 Lafayette Street, Manhattan.
Tickets: $7 a screening. ($6 for students and the elderly).
Schedule and other information: (212) 598-7171.


Accounts
*
Sony Corp., Toyko, to Leo Burnett Manila, to advertise consumer products in the Philippines.
A review on the account, for which there was no previous agency, also involved Avaicom, Manila, and Lintas Manila.
Billings were not disclosed. *
Mitchell Lane Kitchens, New York, to Altschiller Reitzfeld/Tracy-Locke, New York, to advertise a new line of gourmet refrigerated soups.
Billings were not disclosed. *
Datamation, Newton, Mass., to Mullen Inc., Wenham, Mass., for the magazine's trade advertising.
A campaign is expected to begin later this spring.
Billings were not disclosed. *
Bristol-Myers Squibb Co., New York, to DDB Needham Worldwide, New York, for its Therapeutic Mineral Ice account.
Billings were not disclosed. *
Merck Human Health division, a unit of Merck &amp; Co., Rahway, N.J., to Vicom/FCB, San Francisco, for two pharmaceutical products, Mevacor, a cholesterol-reducing agent, and Plendil a calcium channel blocker, handled previously by Gross Townsend Frank Hoffman Inc., New York.
Billings were not disclosed.


Quayle Says Rules Review Saving U.S. $10 Billion
Pressing what has become a chief domestic theme in the election year, the Bush Administration said today that its 90-day review of Federal regulations would produce savings of $10 billion to $20 billion a year.
The White House is now seeking ways to subject permanently to Administration review the thousands of regulations Congress mandates for everything from chemical exposure in the workplace to meat labeling.


New York Court Voids Searches Allowed by U.S.
In its latest move to assert the primacy of state law over Federal law, New York's highest court ruled today that people are entitled to more protection from improper searches and seizures by the police than is currently afforded by the United States Supreme Court.
In a pair of 4-to-3 decisions, both of which overturned lower court rulings, the Court of Appeals ruled that the police cannot conduct warrantless searches of open fields where marijuana might be grown or so-called chop shops where stolen cars are disassembled.
The United States Supreme Court has upheld warrantless searches in similar cases.


Questa Oil &amp; Gas Co.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


As a Caesar Goes, So Goes His Family
The conviction yesterday of John Gotti, a Mafia Caesar, virtually assures the decline of the Gambino family as the nation's pre-eminent organized-crime family.
It is also another sign that Mafia families across the nation are on the run, battered by aggressive prosecutors, betrayals and internal strife.
"This could be the death knell to organized crime as we know it in the United States," asserted James M. Fox, the assistant director of the New York office of the Federal Bureau of Investigation.


Cutting Costs of Brain Injuries
Sandra Malcolm was dancing through Jazzercize class when she suddenly could not understand what people were saying.
A moment later the 44-year-old airline stewardess lay sprawled on the floor, her left side numb and frozen.
Within hours she was confined to a hospital bed, her life transformed by a severe stroke.
For thousands of people like Ms.
Malcolm -- stroke and head injury victims with comprehensive insurance -- rehabilitation might mean months of living in an institution like a nursing home or a for-profit brain injury rehabilitation center.
For-profit centers charge as much as $30,000 a month.
Visit by Therapists


Top Posts at Momenta To Ex-Apple Official
Delbert W. Yocam, a former chief operating officer at Apple Computer Inc., is coming out of retirement at 48 years old to become the chairman, president and chief executive of Momenta International, a start-up company that sells pen-based computers.
Kamran Elahian, the founder and until now chief executive, will become executive vice president in charge of strategic relationships.
If Mr.
Yocam, who left Apple in late 1989, has gotten tired of relaxing, he has certainly picked a good way to get busy again.
Momenta, one of the more closely watched start-ups in Silicon Valley, has had a lot of money invested in it, and industry executives say it will be a huge challenge to make the business successful and reward the investors.


Review/Theater; A High-Keyed 'Hamlet' Starring Stephen Lang
As one of our more accomplished and versatile actors, Stephen Lang may be ready for "Hamlet," but "Hamlet" may not be ready for him, at least until he is given more clearsighted directorial guidance than he receives from Paul Weidner at the Roundabout Theater Company.
Although Mr.
Lang is always interesting to watch onstage, his restless energy cannot compensate for the imprecision that surrounds him.
The production that opened last night at the Criterion Center is without any sense of a cumulative vision, either in the play or the performances.
Mr.
Weidner has proven himself to be adept with small-scale contemporary plays, but he is uneasy in his assault on Elsinore.
This is the first American "Hamlet" on Broadway in a number of seasons.
Regrettably, it is not of a caliber with that of Kevin Kline at the Public Theater or Mark Lamos's version starring Richard Thomas at Hartford Stage, both of which offered compelling insights into the play.


Biochem Pharma reports earnings for Year to Jan 31


The Pinstripes May Be Getting Alterations
Even though Manager Buck Showalter finally selected the Yankees' 25-man roster today, there are indications it could be altered as soon as Friday.
A Yankee official said the team was on the verge of trading outfielder Jesse Barfield to the Chicago White Sox for two minor league pitchers.
Such a trade would enable the Yankees to position themselves with an outfield for the present and the future: 23-year-old Bernie Williams leading off in left field, 27-year-old Roberto Kelly batting third in center field and 29-year-old Danny Tartabull batting fourth or fifth and playing his natural position in right field.


Cable Bill Snagged in Effort to Weaken It
A bill to regulate the cable television industry bogged down today on objections from both Democrats and Republicans, making it likely that the measure will be substantially weakened in order to pass the House of Representatives.
The House telecommunications subcommittee, which has been trying to act on the measure all week, put off action until at least next week as lawmakers try to work out an agreement that can pass the House.


BTU International reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Shamir, in Rough Water, Still Swims Confidently
With clouds all around him, Yitzhak Shamir plucked the thread of a silver lining today out of the morning headlines.
As was once again made apparent in a visit to his office, these are, by any standard, rough days for the Israeli Prime Minister.


Nielsen to Widen Survey of Viewers
For the first time, Nielsen Media Research will measure total television viewership, as part of a Network Television Association survey, to be conducted in the fall.
The survey, which will be financed by the association's three members, ABC, CBS and NBC, is aimed at providing advertisers with better data on the millions of people who watch television outside the home.
Nielsen ratings measure only in-home viewing, which the broadcast networks contend understates their total viewership by omitting people like college students and office workers watching daytime soap operas.


Heineken Sets '93 To Enter Germany
Heineken N.V., Europe's largest brewer, said it had decided to make its long-awaited debut in Germany, Europe's beer-drinking heartland, in 1993.
Heineken's chairman, Gerard van Schaik, told a news conference that the brewer would export its Heineken brand to selected German outlets, mainly in large cities.


Amy L. Levine Has Wedding
Amy Lynn Levine, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter Levine of Short Hills, N.J., was married yesterday in New York to Brian William Koppelman, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles Koppelman of Roslyn Harbor, L.I.
Rabbi Peter J. Rubinstein performed the ceremony at Central Synagogue.
Mrs.
Koppelman, 22 years old, graduated from the University of Pennsylvania.
She is the director of leasing for Levcom Shopping Centers Inc. in West Paterson, N.J., of which her father is the president.


Court Upsets Physical Test For Children In Sex Abuse
The New Jersey Supreme Court ruled today that courts may not compel children who are victims of sexual abuse to undergo physical examinations at the request of defendants without first determining that there is a substantial need for the tests.
The court overturned lower-court rulings that dismissed an indictment because a 10-year-old victim who had been examined by a physician for the state refused to have a second test.


Mets Worried? Not About Murray
Eddie Murray is 36 years old.
He has hit .212 this spring.
The temptation, then, is to believe that the numbers add up to trouble.
It's a temptation, though, the Mets have so far managed to resist.





Stocks Mixed in Tokyo
Japanese stock prices were mixed today, with the Nikkei index of 225 issues closing higher while the broader market was weaker.
Short-covering in both stocks and futures and active buying of export-related issues helped lift prices after program and small-lot selling drove the Nikkei below 18,000, its lowest level in five years.
The Nikkei ended the week at 18,559.71, up 273.68, or 1.5 percent, on the day, with about 350 million shares traded.
For the week, it fell 1,077.28, or 5.5 percent.
The Nikkei ended the morning trading session today down 387.80 points, or 2.12 percent, at 17,898.23.
On Thursday, the index fell 295.76 points, or 1.59 percent, to close at 18,286.03.


Hornets Get Brunt Of Knicks' Anger
Losing to the Chicago Bulls at home on Tuesday night upset the Knicks.
Tonight, they appeared to take their frustration out on the road against the Charlotte Hornets.
Leading throughout the second half, New York cruised to a 117-96 victory at the Charlotte Coliseum.
The victory, the eighth in the last nine games for the Knicks (47-26), increased their first-place lead to four games over Boston in the Atlantic Division with nine games to play.
Every victory puts the Knicks closer to winning the division.
And as far as the Knicks are concerned, the sooner they win the division, the better.


Art in Review
Henry Holmes Smith  Photographs, 1931 to 1986 Howard Greenberg Gallery 120 Wooster Street SoHo Through April 18
As this valuable retrospective shows, Henry Holmes Smith (1909 to 1986) was fascinated by the expressive possibilities of abstract photography.
Deeply influenced by the ideas of Laszlo Moholy-Nagy, the Bauhaus master who emphasized the possibilities of using photography to discover new ways of seeing, Smith was already experimenting with photomontage, multiple printing and color solarization in the 1930's.
In 1937, he joined the faculty of the New Bauhaus, the short-lived design school Moholy-Nagy founded in Chicago.
Smith remained an influential teacher long afterward, heading the photography program at Indiana University for 20 years.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Ad Campaign; Clinton: Running Against the Press


Lampley Joins NBC
JIM LAMPLEY, who has done stints with ABC and CBS Sports, has joined NBC Sports as the late-night anchor for its Summer Olympics broadcast from Barcelona, Spain, and pro football play-by-play announcer.
He will also play an unspecified role on NBC's Notre Dame football telecasts.
Lampley, whose three-year deal with NBC will pay him about $400,000 annually, will stay with HBO as its boxing announcer and Wimbledon host, and is set to join KMPC Radio in Los Angeles as the host of an afternoon sports talk show.


Georgia Power Mortgage Bonds
The Georgia Power Company, a unit of the Southern Company of Atlanta, yesterday priced $100 million of first-mortgage bonds due in 2022 through competitive bidding for offering to the public.


Thorny Issue in Gun Control: Curbing Responsible Owners
The gun controls most likely to be adopted in the near future would cause only modest inconvenience for legal gun buyers.
But the controls, like the Brady Bill, which mandates a waiting period for handgun purchases, would also mean small gains at best against the murderous violence that is increasingly traumatizing an entire nation.
Even a little progress would be welcome.
A 1 percent drop in firearm deaths -- which totalled 35,000 in 1989, including 18,000 suicides, 15,000 homicides, 1,500 accidents and others unspecified -- would mean hundreds of lives saved.
Debate Has Just Started
But real debate about the role of guns in society has scarcely begun.
A central issue is this: Should new laws simply aim to do a better job of keeping firearms away from criminals, the main goal of the Brady Bill and most of the thousands of Federal, state and local laws already on the books?


Shopko Stores reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Comverse Technology Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Heir to the Earth
Nils Hellstrom was wrong.
Film buffs of a certain age recall Dr.
Hellstrom as the manic narrator of "The Hellstrom Chronicle," a 1971 picture that featured stunning footage of insects -- insects fighting, insects mating, and everywhere, insects eating.


Today's TV Listings
Television and radio news, listings and advertising, normally found in Weekend, appear today on pages B15-16.


The Final Four: Five Years Later -- A special report.; Players Find Glory is Replaced by Reality
When Federal drug agents, guns and rifles at the ready, raided Room 110 of a Cincinnati motel on the night of Nov. 10, 1989, they apprehended five men in the middle of a drug deal and confiscated packages of crack and weapons.
One of the agents then noticed something else: a suspect, caught trying to flee out of the sliding glass door, wore a ring from the 1987 National Collegiate Athletic Association's Final Four basketball tournament.
Derek Brower was wearing the ring.
He had been a junior forward for Syracuse when it lost two years earlier in the final seconds of the championship game to Indiana, 74-73, on Keith Smart's 15-foot jump shot.


METRO DIGEST
METRO DIGEST  THE GOTTI VERDICT  'GUILTY, GUILTY, GUILTY'
John Gotti was found guilty of racketeering, murder and all the other charges against him in a swift, stunning verdict that crushed his reputation for eluding conviction as boss of the Gambino crime family.
A1.
SWEET VICTORY FOR THE GOVERNMENT
It wasn't a death knell for the mob or a great precedent for the law books.
But the conviction of John Gotti was a scintillating triumph for a team of Federal prosecutors.
A1.
Prognosis for the Gambinos: swift decline.
News analysis, B2.
From Gotti's supporters, bitterness and anger.
B2.
NEW YORK CITY  LOBBYING CITY HALL
The law firm headed by sid Davidoff, A close friend and tennis partner of Mayor Dinkins, once again made more money lobbying the city last year than any other concern.
The amount of money that all lobbyists earned for their attempts to influence city government rose only slightly.
B3.
THE BATTLE OF BROOKLYN
The long-running dispute over what to do with almost 80 acres of prime Brooklyn waterfront kicked into high gear this week as the Port Authority said it would sell the property, complete with its five piers and panoramic view of Lower Manhattan, for private development.
B3.
PORTRAIT OF THE ARTIST AS A PIRATE
A Federal appeals court ruled that the artist Jeff Koons deliberately and unlawfully copied a greeting card photograph to create four sculptures of a couple holding eight German shepherd puppies.
The court also castigated Mr.
Koons for piracy, arrogance and greed.
B3.
REGION  PROTECTION FROM SEARCHES
In its latest move to assert the primacy of state law over Federal law, New York's highest court ruled that people are entitled to more protection from improper searches and seizures by the police than is currently afforded by the United States Supreme Court.
A1.
CUOMO TACTIC: FORCING THE SENATE'S HAND
By raising health insurance rates for 1.2 million New Yorkers now, while threatening to grant an even larger increase in October, the Cuomo administration is hoping to force the Republican-controlled Senate to agree to fundamental changes in the way insurance is offered and rates are set.
News analysis, B4.
JOB FUND WINS APPROVAL
Capping a nearly festive day spent showing off their new political muscle, Republicans pushed through the New Jersey Senate a bill to establish a $1 billion fund to generate new jobs, an idea that Governor Florio proposed in his State of the State address.
B6.
ANGRY IN WEST HAVEN
The near fiscal collapse of the waterfront city of West Haven, Conn., took few residents by surprise, but it has left many of them angry and cynical about government.
B5.
New Jersey court rules on child-abuse cases.
B6.
Ex-Waterbury Mayor convicted.
B5.
Our Towns B5


Failed by Law, Women Seek Bodyguards' Help
When Gregory J. Kottke opened his bodyguard agency here a few weeks ago, he figured most of his clients would be professional athletes, wealthy business executives and maybe a visiting rock star or two.
It has not worked out that way.
Most of his clients are women with low incomes, frightened faces and sad stories.


Advantage Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Car Mart reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Quotation of the Day
"I'm not saying it's going to happen in a year, but the mob as we know it in New York City and this country is on its way out." -- JAMES M. FOX of the F.B.I., after the Gotti verdict.  [ A1:6. ]


Yeltsin Lifts a Ministerial Load Off an Economist's Shoulders
President Boris N. Yeltsin freed his chief economic adviser, Yegor T. Gaidar, of his duties as Minister of Finance today, but Mr.
Gaidar will remain Deputy Prime Minister charged with overall economic strategy.
Mr.
Gaidar and his aides said he had requested the change because Finance Ministry routine was taking too much of his time.
He was succeeded as minister by Vasily V. Barchuk, 51 years old, a career official who had been First Deputy Minister of Finance.


Israeli Study Finds Torture Common
A leading human-rights group in Israel says torture by Israeli security forces has become so routine that Palestinian prisoners often no longer bother to complain about it.
The rights group, B'Tselem (In the Image), estimated in a report on Wednesday that at least 5,000 prisoners were tortured or otherwise mistreated in the last year, or about one-fourth of the 20,000 Palestinians said to have been arrested in that period.


A Need for Security Kept Numbered Jurors Cloaked in Anonymity
John Gotti's jurors were nearly as much of an issue as the evidence itself.
For 10 weeks they endured as numbered, nameless citizens held virtually incommunicado, all to insure their safety and the integrity of their deliberations.
Those concerns have always been raised at Mr.
Gotti's trials.


Off-Duty Transit Officer Is Shot on Long Island


Arizona Land Income Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Memorial for John Everett
A memorial service will be held Monday for John R. Everett, the first chancellor of the City University of New York and the retired president of the New School for Social Research, who died Jan. 21.
The service will be at 4 P.M. in the Wollman Hall of the New School's main building at 66 West 12th Street.


Let Mets Stay Mum: And That's a Quote
Twenty-five years ago, at my first Yankee spring training, Manager Ralph Houk shouldered me into a corner of the locker room, cocked his cigar at my forehead, and asked, "You a booster or a ripper?"
I pretended not to understand until he leaned into me and asked, "You with us or against us?" When I mumbled that the coaches I worked for were back at Times Square, he seemed displeased with the answer, but satisfied that he had intimidated me.
He said, "Remember, we are all in this together," clapped my shoulder and swaggered away.


Lafayette American Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


CHRONICLE
The 900 people in the grand ballroom of the Waldorf-Astoria yesterday afternoon gave Sir RUDOLF BING a standing ovation when ALTON PETERS, the president of the Metropolitan Opera Guild, announced that the former maestro of the Met was in attendance at the guild's 56th annual luncheon.
Sir Rudolf, 90 years old, reigned over the company as its general manager from 1949 to 1972.
He now lives in a New York nursing home and suffers from Alzheimer's disease.


Edwards (A.G.) (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Control Resource Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Appian Technology Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Loss of Zeal on School Desegregation
For those seeking guidelines for winding down school desegregation litigation, the case from DeKalb County, Georgia, was potentially the most significant the Supreme Court has handled since Brown v.
Board of Education.
Unfortunately, the Court has delivered an unworthy decision that threatens to undermine that 1954 landmark.
To say that the result could have been even more disheartening is not very consoling.
Brown's promise of equality would have been honored best if the high court had sought not merely to free school districts from judicial control but to make sure the districts had earned their freedom by completing the job of desegregation.
Instead this Court offers its brightest hope not to children trapped in segregated schools but to officials seeking relief from the Court's demand in 1968 that they get busy and establish "not white schools, not black schools, just schools."


Review/Film Festival; A John Lennon-Brian Epstein Holiday
"The Hours and Times," written and directed by a young American named Christopher Munch, is a sharp, concise, evocative film about friendship, about its limitations and the recognition of those limitations.
It is novel-size yet short (60 minutes), and utterly specific.
Everything superfluous has been cut away.
The film takes as its starting point the fact that in the spring of 1963 Brian Epstein, the Beatles' brilliant, troubled manager, and John Lennon, a Beatle still very much on the road to self-discovery, shared a four-day vacation in Barcelona.
The Beatles had just finished a winter of touring.
Beatlemania was on the cusp.
That much is known.
Everything else in "The Hours and Times" is fiction, though it is fiction of an unusually disciplined, sinewy sort.


U.S. Bonds Rally in Reaction to Jobs Data
An employment report that was generally weaker than anticipated helped to push up prices of Treasury securities and force down interest rates yesterday.
The report, which showed that non-farm payrolls expanded by just 19,000 in March, came a day after the Federal Reserve Board said that important monetary aggregates contracted in the week that ended March 23.
Most analysts had forecast an increase of about 50,000 jobs in March.


Phyllis Q. Blundell, Sculptor, 102
Phyllis Q. Blundell, a British sculptor and ceramist, died on March 24 at the A. O. Fox Hospital Nursing Home in Oneonta, N.Y.
She was 102 years old and had lived at the nursing home for six years.
She died of congestive heart failure, said Jeanine Peterson, a friend.


Classical Music in Review
'Amphigorey: The Musical' American Music Theater Festival Plays and Players Theater 1714 Delancey Place, Philadelphia Through April 12


Welfare Reform Proves Sluggish
The 1988 Family Support Act, celebrated by liberals and conservatives alike, promised to transform welfare into a program that provides education, training and jobs to the needy rather than cash alone.
So far, it hasn't worked out as its proponents had hoped.
A study released this week by two professors at the State University of New York at Albany found that states have been painfully slow to put the new program into effect -- reluctant to spend, during these recessionary times, much money on radical new programs.


William Drury, 71, Ecologist and Expert on Eastern Sea Birds
William Holland Drury, eminent ecologist and former research director of the Massachusetts Audubon Society, died on March 26 at his home in Bar Harbor, Me.
He was 71 years old.
He died of cancer, said Elena Tuhy, a spokeswoman for College of the Atlantic at Bar Harbor, where he taught and did research until his death.


Students March to Protest Handling of Teaneck Shooting
About three dozen black college students marched about 18 miles from Teaneck to the Federal office building here today to protest the fatal shooting of a black teen-ager, Phillip Pannell, nearly two years ago and the recent acquittal of the police officer who shot him, Gary Spath of Teaneck.
One of the organizers of the protest, Charles Webster, a leader of the African Council in Teaneck, called it a "march for justice."


Review/Film Festival; The Tenants Come and Go, Telling the Story of Mexico
"City of the Blind" ("Ciudad de Ciegos"), Alberto Cortes's new Mexican drama, is an ambitious attempt to chart the changes in a nation's social, sexual, political and economic manners from the late 1940's until today.
The focus is on a single upper-middle-class Mexico City flat and the succession of people who inhabit it.
Among those who come and go are a Communist revolutionary, a businessman who faces bankruptcy, assorted pairs of lovers and some punk musicians.
One astonishing sequence seems to have been lifted whole from "La Voix Humaine," the Jean Cocteau play so beloved by actresses who like to have the stage all to themselves: a distraught woman ponders suicide between telephone calls to the lover who has deserted her.
The only difference is an O. Henry ending.


No Blame Assigned In Water-Pipe Death
New York City construction officials and contractors failed to recognize the need for additional security at a 500-foot water shaft in the Bronx where a 12-year-old boy fell to his death while playing with friends last September, an investigation by the city's Department of Environmental Protection has found.
But the inquiry did not assign blame to any one party and concluded that all parties involved with the accident -- city construction managers, planners, and contractors -- were at fault but that they had "conscientiously acted to safeguard the site from the risks they perceived."


Corrections
An article on the Health page on Wednesday about minority representation in medicine included an incorrect identification and location, from The Journal of the American Medical Association, for one of six predominantly white medical schools with large black enrollments.
It is the New Jersey Medical School in Newark, part of the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey; it is not the university's unit in Piscataway.


Virus Linked To Increase In Seal Deaths
A distemper virus that swept through the seal population in Europe several years ago, killing more than 17,000 harbor seals in the North Sea, has been linked to an increase in the number of dead and dying seals stranded along the East Coast.
So far there is no proof that the disease has spread widely.
Acute clinical symptoms of the virus have been recorded in eight animals, and the virus was first isolated this week in a harbor seal found stranded on a Long Island beach.
All nine seals have died.


A Day of Mozart Works For the Fortepiano
A daylong festival of fortepiano music by Mozart, featuring 10 pianists, will take place tomorrow at Alice Tully Hall.
The event, part of the Mozart bicentennial, will be divided into two performances, the first from 2:30 to 5:45 P.M. and the second from 7 to 10 P.M.
There will be no intermissions, but concertgoers are encouraged to come and go as they like.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The job market showed only slight improvement in March, with the unemployment rate remaining at a seven-year high of 7.3 percent, the Labor Department reported.
Payrolls grew by 19,000, a meager gain that owed much to the fact that pollwatchers and other election workers briefly held jobs related to the Super Tuesday primaries, which came during the survey week.
With the economy a main electoral battleground, Democrats were quick to urge a permanent expansion of jobless benefits.
The President's chief economic adviser noted that improvements in unemployment generally lag economic growth.  [ Page 1. ]


When to Wink at Price-Fixing
Price-fixing is a dirty word, conjuring up images of corporate C.E.O.'s conspiring against defenseless consumers.
But not all price-fixing is bad.
Resale price maintenance, for instance, can help consumers.
That's the practice whereby a manufacturer sets a minimum price below which retailers are not allowed to sell a product.
Manufacturers like the practice, even though it is nominally illegal, to insure that retailers provide sales information.
So when the Senate recently passed legislation to make prosecuting manufacturers easier, it did consumers no favor.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Voters; Yarmulke in Place, Clinton Courts Crucial Constituency
Eager to win over one of New York's largest Democratic constituencies, Gov.
Bill Clinton put on a yarmulke and went to Brooklyn last week.
Appearing before hundreds of Hasidic Jews at the Royale Hall in Borough Park, the Arkansas Governor addressed a subject few in the audience had anticipated: race relations.
"He believes Jewish voters care about more than one thing," said a nervous Dee Dee Myers, Mr.
Clinton's press secretary, as she surveyed the crowd from the back of the room.
"He doesn't want them to think he is a one-issue candidate."


Not a Typical Campaign Stop, Not Even for the British


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Brown; Brown's Coalition: America's Young and Those Who Would Be
None dare call it pandering, but no Presidential candidate has done as much to cultivate the young as Edmund J. Brown Jr.
Tabitha Soren, a 24-year-old political reporter for MTV news, said she never had difficulty getting lengthy, exclusive interviews with the former California governor.
"He's the only candidate you can have a conversation with about Chuck D," she said, "and not have to explain that he's with Public Enemy."
The 53-year-old Mr.
Brown, who has showcased his insurgent, anti-establishment campaign at huge college rallies and rock-and-roll fund-raising events, has positioned himself as the youth candidate.


Serbs Attack Muslim Slavs and Croats in Bosnia
Serbian irregulars backed by Yugoslav Army contingents today clashed with Muslim Slavs and Croatian forces in Bosnia and Herzegovina in what diplomats called a clear attempt to block European Community recognition of the republic's independence.
Today's clashes in Bosanski Brod and Kupres came a day after Serbian guerrillas under the command of an underworld figure captured Bijeljina from Muslim Slavs.
Sporadic gunfire was reported in Bijelina again today.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.50
6.50
9.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
6.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.50
4.15
6.12
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.95
4.00
5.70
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.02
4.10
5.72
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.07
7.13
7.86
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.87
7.89
8.17
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.80
8.85
9.25
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.74
6.75
7.26
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Henry Greenbaum, 85, Retired Psychoanalyst
Dr.
Henry Greenbaum, a retired psychoanalyst affiliated with New York City hospitals and colleges for nearly 40 years, died March 25 at Beth Israel Hospital in Boston.
He was 85 years old and lived in Boston, having moved there from Forest Hills, Queens after his retirement at the end of 1990.
His family said he died after a brief illness.


Patents; Patent Chief's Plans
Harry F. Manbeck Jr., the Commissioner of Patents and Trademarks, who is leaving his post later this month, will join the Washington office of Morgan &amp; Finnegan, a large New York patent law firm.


They Came to Mourn a Man They Hardly Knew
They buried Robert Walther yesterday, watched his plain gray coffin into the New Jersey ground, a handful of mourners saying goodbye to a man hardly any of them even knew.
Mr.
Walther died a most horrific and dehumanizing death, set on fire, like a heap of trash, by a group of teen-agers as he slept on a subway train in the Bronx.
He lived apart and died alone, and perhaps it was fitting that he was buried without the company of anyone who knew the kind of man he had been.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Beck Leads by 4


Momentum Is Building for Afghanistan Peace Plan
A peace plan for Afghanistan has suddenly gained momentum, with United Nations officials predicting that President Najibullah could relinquish his office within the next two weeks.
With food supplies in Kabul, the Afghan capital, all but exhausted, restlessness increasing among dissident Government militia leaders and the patience of neighboring countries wearing thin, the United Nations official charged with finding a route to peace says he expects a cease-fire and a new interim government in Kabul by the end of the month.


Linus Pauling Belongs In Vitamin Discussion
To the Editor:
"Vitamins Win Support as Potent Agents of Health" (Science Times, March 10) is a splendid report on vitamins and how they "influence the health and vibrancy of nearly every organ" in the human body.
Your treatment of the antitoxidant compounds (vitamins E, C and beta carotene) is unusually edifying and useful.


Quotation of the Day
"What it says is that people can't stand either candidate. That's not too surprising, since all they've seen is one candidate attacking the other and reporters attacking both." -- PROF.
GERALD M. GOLDHABER, poll taker, on the 53 percent undecided in a Buffalo survey.  [ 8:3. ]


Maine Left Wing Honored as College's Top Player
Scott Pellerin of Maine, whose absence as a competitor here is conspicuous, today was named the winner of the Hobey Baker Memorial Award as college hockey's player of the year.
Pellerin, a senior left wing from Shediac, New Brunswick, was the scoring leader of the University of Maine team that swept through the season with 31 victories in 36 games.
Then came the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament, and the Black Bears stumbled.
They were eliminated by Michigan State, 3-2, last Saturday night in the East Regional final at Providence, R.I.


Mandela Calls for International Monitors to End Violence in South Africa


CHRONICLE
Ms.
Sarandon may not be going to the capital, but there will be plenty of other celebrities tomorrow at the rally billed as a "March for Women's Lives."
Officials of the Hollywood Women's Political Campaign, for example, said that its delegation would number 330, up from 220 two years ago.
Among those expected are JONATHAN DEMME, fresh from his triumph at the Academy Awards, where he won an Oscar as best director, FAYE DUNAWAY, JANE FONDA, CYBILL SHEPHERD, MOLLY RINGWALD, JOANNE WOODWARD, JILL EIKENBERRY and MICHAEL TUCKER.


Pittsburgh Journal; No Subway, No Buses, But Plenty of Sore Feet
There is nothing unusual about some of the picket signs being brandished by striking transit workers at subway stations and bus stops around the city.
"Unfair!" and "America works best when we say, 'Union, Yes!' " the mass-produced signs declare.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Primaries; CLINTON STRATEGY CHANGES, PUTTING BROWN ON DEFENSE
Trying to throw his opponent on the defensive heading into the final, frantic weekend of the New York primary race, Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas spent yesterday issuing a series of increasingly strident attacks against Edmund G. Brown Jr.
In new television and radio advertisements and in campaign stops in New York and Wisconsin, Mr.
Clinton questioned Mr.
Brown's support for abortion, accused him of pandering to black voters and charged him with trying to undermine the Social Security system.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: New York; Upstate, Neither Clinton Nor Brown Stir Passions
Four years ago, the key to Michael S. Dukakis's triumph in the New York primary lay in upstate cities like this.
Aided by a large black vote, the Rev.
Jesse Jackson carried New York City, despite hostility toward him among many Jewish voters.
But while attention was focused there, Mr.
Dukakis ran strongly in the suburbs and amassed a huge majority upstate.


Observer; That Was No Lady . . .
Has there ever been a richer year for political farce?
Well, maybe 1948.
That was the year the Democrats went to Philadelphia and tried nominating everybody but their own President in an effort to avoid defeat by the invincible Thomas E. Dewey.
That was the year polls elected Dewey so far in advance of Election Day that Merriman Smith, famous as "the dean of White House correspondents," left President Truman's campaign well before November to cover President-inevitable Dewey.


Looking for Ways to Treat Sex Offenders
Law-enforcement officials and mental health professionals across the country do not quite know what to do with repeat sex offenders like Jose Velez.
What they do know is that there are a lot of them.
About 80 percent of sex offenders are likely to repeat their crime if they are not treated, according to statistics from a Department of Justice report.


Campaign of Contenders Runs From East to West
With four weeks to go to the main event, half a dozen of the leading candidates for the Kentucky Derby will go to the races on the East and West Coasts this afternoon in the steepening attempt to find a challenger for the heavily favored Arazi.
The contenders include New York's ranking candidate, the Claiborne Farm's colt Lure, a record-breaking sprinter trying to graduate into the longer distances of the Triple Crown races.
He will face seven rivals at Aqueduct in the $250,000 Gotham Mile, and he is the 9-5 favorite to emerge from the race as a serious Derby horse.


Spring Cleaning on Coney Island


A Washout for Yanks: No Game and No Trade
The Yankees did not play their final Florida spring training game today because of rainy weather.
They did not make any trades either, so clouds of uncertainty followed them north for two exhibition games against the Mets this weekend.
Outfielder Jesse Barfield has still not been traded to the White Sox for two minor league pitchers, but the clubs continued negotiating.
Though General Manager Gene Michael said the Yankees might make a trade involving a minor leaguer today, he insisted it is not "the one we're looking for," which would seemingly involve Barfield.


Bill Proposes to Aid Bailout By Tapping Healthy S.&amp; L.'s
The chairman of the House Banking Committee introduced a bill today that would help pay for the savings and loan bailout with a levy on healthy institutions.
A measure providing continued Federal spending on bailouts was defeated in the House on Wednesday, and the agency in charge of selling institutions that have been taken over by the Government has halted its efforts.


HOCKEY: Two Men Locked in a Slippery Standoff; Ziegler Has Kept The Owners Happy
He is the longest-serving chief executive officer among North America's four major professional sports, but he keeps such a low profile that even people who work for him know very little about John Ziegler, the president of the National Hockey League.
A look at the league's official guide and record book shows how low a profile the 58-year-old Ziegler likes to keep.
The book offers biographical sketches of the league's 43 referees and linesmen before it gives a brief profile of Ziegler on the page that lists the four presidents in the history of the league.


New York Area Shows Job Gain
New York and New Jersey both showed improvements in their employment pictures during March, the Federal Bureau of Labor Statistics said yesterday.
In New York, the unemployment rate dropped to 8 percent in March from 8.9 percent in February, while in New Jersey the rate went to 7.1 percent from 7.6 percent.


Len Giovannitti, 71, Writer and Film Maker
Len Giovannitti, an award-winning writer and television film maker, died on March 27 at his home in Manhattan.
He was 71 years old.
He died of heart disease, said his fiancee, Dr. Vera Miller.


Patents; Removing Scratches On Compact Disks
Harald Schmid, an inventor and entrepreneur in Ludwigsburg, Germany, has invented a kit that allows a person to erase scratches from compact disks by grinding down a portion of the outside plastic shell with sandpaper.
Compact disks typically store music in digital code etched in a pattern of tiny pits on the surface of a disk.
Lasers in the compact disk player then read these data and a microprocessor converts the code back into the original music.
But despite optimistic claims that compact disks never wear down like vinyl plastic records, scratches on the disk's transparent plastic coating can interfere with the process of reading the data.


James Barrington, 80, Burmese Envoy to U.S.
James Barrington, a former Burmese Ambassador to the United States and Canada and delegate to the United Nations, died on Monday in a hospital in Edmonton, Alberta.
He was 80 years old and lived in Edmonton.
His family said he died after a long illness.


'Citizen Ch.': Russia Opens Files on Serial Killings
Two weeks from now, a 56-year-old man goes on trial here for a series of murders that may qualify him as one of the worst serial killers of modern times.
"Citizen Ch.," as he is known in the Russian press in keeping with a ban on publishing names of suspects, is accused of killing at least 53 children and young women over a period of 12 years, each involving a ghoulish orgy of mutilation and cannibalism.


Florence Tenzer, Philanthropist, 86
Florence Tenzer, a benefactor of educational institutions, died Wednesday at St.
John's Episcopal Hospital in Far Rockaway, Queens.
She was 86 years old and had lived in Lawrence, L.I., since 1947.
The cause of death was cancer, according to a statement from Yeshiva University.


Before Congress Convenes, Yeltsin Makes Moves in Cabinet Shuffle
President Boris N. Yeltsin dropped another top adviser from a key Government post today, continuing a Cabinet shuffle intended to mollify critics at next week's session of the Russian Congress of People's Deputies.
Gennadi Burbulis, a close aide who managed Mr.
Yeltsin's presidential campaign a year ago, will leave his post as First Deputy Premier as of April 14, but will keep his other job as State Secretary in the Yeltsin Administration, according to a presidential decree issued today.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Candidate's Record; Clinton Relies on Voluntary Guidelines to Protect Environment in Arkansas
The Kings River tumbles clear and cold out of northwest Arkansas and flows past forest and pasture land that is home to one of the largest concentrations of farm animals in the world.
By the time it reaches Table Rock Lake in Missouri, the stream picks up enough fecal bacteria to make it unfit for swimming.
It also accumulates nitrogen and other nutrients that spatter its coves and banks with dark green ooze while smothering the stream bed with chocolate-brown algae.
To Gov.
Bill Clinton's supporters, the Kings River, untouched by development, and the state's other bountiful natural resources are evidence of an approach to environmental issues that effectively balances economic goals with the protection of Arkansas's land and water.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY A CASE STUDY IN VICTIMIZATION


Congress and White House Shed Perks of Power With Rare Zeal
With zeal worthy of an inquisition, Congress and the Bush Administration tried today to outdo each other in abandoning the perquisites of power, burning up privileges enjoyed for decades by Government officials.
The Administration announced that Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d, shocked at the cost of his personal travel on military aircraft, would take commercial flights for private trips whenever possible.
The Milwaukee Journal reported this week that the cost to taxpayers for 11 such trips on military planes was more than $370,000.


Director at Michigan St.
The Michigan State board of trustees voted yesterday to hire MERRILY DEAN BAKER, an assistant executive director of the National Collegiate Athletic Association, as athletic director, the first woman to head both men's and women's athletics for a Big Ten school.
In hiring Baker by a 6-2 vote, the university's board of trustees apparently ended a two-year controversy over football coach GEORGE PERLES's holding both jobs.
Perles has a $137,000-a-year coaching contract through 1997.


Breadbasket of New York Gets a Russian Appraisal
The potato machine had received considerable advance billing.
"That's something that should really make their eyes open up," predicted Joseph Carella, a spokesman for Hunts Point Terminal Market in the Bronx, the world's largest wholesale produce market by volume, which a group of 14 Russian economists and businessmen toured yesterday morning.


Corrections
An entry in the Company Briefs listing in some editions of Business Day on March 26 misstated the amount of a predicted income increase at NBB Bancorp and the reason.
NBB expects first-quarter income to rise by about $5 million because of changes in its method of accounting for income taxes.


Plea Deal Near for Defendant in Glen Ridge Sex-Abuse Case
The Essex County Prosecutor agreed today that one of seven young men charged with sexually abusing a mildly retarded young woman could plead guilty to a charge comparable to a misdemeanor in return for his cooperation.
The defendant, Peter J. Quigley, who is now 21 years old, and six other members of the 1988 Glen Ridge High School football team were indicted in 1990 on nine counts of aggravated sexual assault, aggravated sexual contact and conspiracy.
The charges stemmed from a 1989 incident in the basement of the home of two of the defendants in Glen Ridge, an affluent Essex County suburban community of 8,000.
According to the indictment, the young woman was vaginally penetrated with a baseball bat, a broom handle and a stick.


Brief Word From Mets: Players Will Talk Soon
The Mets players, showing little remorse and lots of solidarity, declared today that their weeklong blackout on interviews with the media would officially end Saturday.
They did so after the unofficial opening of the Baltimore Orioles' baseball stadium.
"We realized from the outset this recourse would have repercussions," said pitcher David Cone, the Mets' representative to the players' union.
"But the benefits to the preparation of the 1992 season far outweigh the ramifications.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-5  U.S. AIRLINES SPAR WITH FRANCE
A dispute between the United States and France over how many passengers United States airlines may carry between the two countries is threatening to disrupt flights and increase ticket prices.  1  JAPAN FAULTS U.S.
ON AID
Showing some irritation, Japanese officials said it was "inappropriate" and "premature" for President Bush to announce a $24 billion aid package for Russia without having worked out details with Japan.  1  SERIAL KILLINGS JOLT RUSSIA
Two weeks from now, Russian prosecutors will begin trying a 56-year-old man for a series of slayings that may qualify him as one of the worst serial killers of modern times.  3  President Yeltsin dropped another adviser to mollify lawmakers.  3  SCOLDING FOR CHINA'S 'LEFTISTS'
China's legislature concluded its annual session with a call to guard against the "leftism" of hard-liners.
The code word suggests that Deng Xiaoping is gaining in his drive to step up economic change.  2  MOMENTUM FOR AFGHAN PEACE
A peace plan for Afghanistan has suddenly gained momentum, with United Nations officials predicting that President Najibullah could resign within the next two weeks.  5  ALBANIA'S EX-DICTATOR RESIGNS
Ramiz Alia resigned as President of Albania, removing the most visible remnant of hard-line Communist rule in the impoverished land.  5  SOUL-SEARCHING IN ITALY
Italians are weighing their choices with unusual introspection as they prepare to vote in national elections.
For the first time in decades, it is unclear whether the Christian Democrats will remain dominant.  4  CLASHES IN BREAKAWAY BOSNIA
Serbs backed by Yugoslav Army units clashed with Muslim Slavs and Croats in the independence-minded republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Diplomats said the fighting was clearly aimed at blocking recognition of the republic.  3  IN FRENCH CABINET, MIXED FLAVORS
In naming a new Cabinet to revive his party's sagging fortunes, President Mitterrand has chosen a combination of French economic orthodoxy and brash flamboyance.  5  Johannesburg Journal: Nelson Mandela's pragmatic point man.  4  National 6-11  DAMAGING REPORT BY UNITED WAY
The United Way of America said its former president and two close aides had transferred more than a million dollars a year to other organizations they controlled and had spent lavishly on their own travel, pensions and insurance.  1  CLINTON GOES ON THE ATTACK
The Administration announced that contrary to previous practice, Secretary of State Baker would take commercial flights for private trips whenever possible.
Not to be outdone, the Senate and the House announced that their members would cast off a host of privileges.  1  Bush demanded a number of changes in Congress.  7  JOBLESS RATE UNCHANGED
The job market showed only slight improvement in March, and the unemployment rate remained at a seven-year high of 7.3 percent.  1  NORIEGA CASE GOES TO JURY
After seven months of testimony and legal argument, a Federal jury in Miami will begin deliberating this morning on the fate of the deposed Panamanian leader.  6  A DEFENDANT BREAKS RANKS
One of four white Los Angeles police officers accused of assault in the beating of a black motorist testified that the beating was unjustified and that he tried to stop it.  11  Pittsburgh Journal: Coping with a lasting transit strike.  6  Religion Notes: God, man and the economy.  11  Metropolitan Digest, 25  A SYSTEM'S FAILURE
Thomas Park, zoologist  Consumer's World 52  Caller ID: Consumer's friend or foe?
When buying a home, know about escrow  Latest fraud preys on loan applicants  Guidepost  Editorials/Op-Ed 22-23  Editorials 22  Israel vindicated on Patriot.
Sluggish welfare reform.
For the community court.
When to wink at price-fixing.
Letters 22  Russell Baker: That was no lady . . .  23  Five heroines for a hard city: Shonda Nereida Prince: Meli Dee's stories.  23  Youngju Ryu: Lunch-hour courage.  23  Michelle Marcellus: Anita Hill and I.  23  Miriam Sampson: Hannah's heart.  23  Trezia Jean Charles: Overcoming Haiti.  23


Yamaha's High-Tech Piano Pays Off
Since the Yamaha Corporation introduced the Disklavier, a high-tech version of the player piano, in 1988, it has gone from an expensive novelty to a major new form of home entertainment.
The Disklavier now accounts for 25 percent of Yamaha's acoustic piano revenues worldwide and has become a major source of profits for the company, the world's largest maker of musical instruments.


When Buying a Home, Know About Escrow
Now that mortgage rates are below double-digit levels and prospective home buyers are venturing into the market again, escrow is an important concept.
Webster's New World Dictionary defines it as, "A written agreement or something of value put in the care of a third party and not delivered until certain conditions are fulfilled."
Escrow applies to situations other than home purchases, of course, but it is during negotiations for a home that most people first come up against the concept.
That's because there is usually a period of anywhere from one to six months between the signing of a purchase contract and the closing of the transaction.


Safety Note
The New York City Fire Department recommends that smoke alarm batteries be changed twice yearly, at the start and the end of daylight time.
The date this spring is Sunday.


Sports of The Times; Ain't Nothing Like the Real Thing
There was a time when I actually mourned the passing of another college basketball season.
With each successive April, however, the college tournament has been reduced to background music for the National Basketball Association playoffs.
While professional athletes are often mercenary and professional sports increasingly heartless, they make it clear that the bottom line is winning and money.


Classical Music in Review
Israel Philharmonic Benefit Carnegie Hall


Israel Vindicated on Patriot
The allegation: that Israel had sold a Patriot missile or Patriot missile technology to China in violation of U.S. law.
The verdict: not guilty.
The sentence: that U.S. officials who hurried to publicize the allegation before all the facts were in owe Israel an apology.
The rush to judgment hurt everyone.
In their zeal to punish arms proliferators, American officials who leaked intelligence reports damaged their credibility and their cause.
They've done all the talking they're likely to do for a while.


Barnacles Need Not Apply
Resurfacing the bottoms of sail and power boats with antifouling paint is a rite of spring.
It must be repeated every year or two to prevent encrustation with barnacles and other aquatic organisms that slow boats.
More than 20 companies sell antifouling paints.
How It Works


Religion Notes
God and Misery
Popular wisdom has it that the tougher the economic times, the more people go to church.
Like the old saying about atheists in foxholes, the reasoning goes that people with holes in their pockets are also drawn to the Lord.


Will Women Do Well? It's Too Early to Know
They should call this Breakfast at the Final Four.
That's what it will feel like Saturday morning at the Los Angeles Sports Arena.
If the men's national championship in Mineapolis this weekend is college basketball's main course, then the women's tournament semifinals here must be a morning snack.


Chilean Wineries Outgrow the Jug
During the day in this semiarid river valley some 20 miles south of Santiago, the sun is hot and dry.
At night, a chill descends.
There is little rain throughout the year, and the winters are cold.
"A perfect climate for producing very fine wine," said Eduardo Guilisasti, president of Chile's largest vineyard, Concho y Toro.
"We really have it all."


Go Ahead With the Community Court
A plan to open a community court in an empty Times Square theater ran into trouble when real estate developers and theater preservation groups objected.
Fortunately, the idea is likely to survive those lamentable gripes -- in another setting.
The court would provide swift justice for low-level offenders -- vandals, drug dealers, card sharps -- that police often ignore rather than going through the trouble of hauling them downtown for processing.
The neighborhood court could resolve such cases in a matter of hours, returning police officers quickly to the streets.
The court would also offer social services, and would sentence offenders to work at neighborhood cleanup, recycling centers, soup kitchens and other useful projects.


U.S. and France Fight Over Piece of Airline Market
Just as the summer season for trans-Atlantic travel begins, a dispute between the United States and France over how many passengers United States airlines may carry between the two countries is threatening to disrupt flights and increase ticket prices.
After the latest round of negotiations in Washington ended fruitlessly on Tuesday, France warned that it intended to act unilaterally to restrict the capacity of the American carriers, which have made strong gains recently, perhaps as early as this weekend.


Knights Getting By With Few Handouts
It's not quite time for a merger between the National Football League and the World League -- give it a few more months -- but the New York/New Jersey Knights seem to be getting along without much help from above.
The Knights open their home season at Giants Stadium tonight against the San Antonio Riders.


Gotti Facing Tough Road on Appeal
Grumbling from John Gotti's defense table began long before his trial opened two months ago, and by this week had erupted into confrontation between defense lawyers, prosecutors and the judge.
Now that Mr.
Gotti has been convicted, his lawyers, frustrated at what they consider an unfair trial, plan to file an appeal arguing that the defense was hampered at every turn.
In interviews yesterday, legal experts said there were few errors -- by the judge, I. Leo Glasser, or by prosecutors -- glaring enough to guarantee a new trial for Mr.
Gotti, convicted Thursday of murder and racketeering.


JURY FINALLY GETS NORIEGA DRUG CASE
After nearly seven months of testimony and legal arguments, the case against Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega was handed to a jury late this afternoon after prosecutors delivered a closing rebuttal and Judge William M. Hoeveler gave jurors final instructions.
The United States Government "has borne its burden" in trying to prove the guilt of the first foreign head of state to be tried in an American courtroom, the lead prosecutor, Michael P. Sullivan, told jurors as he neared the end of his final remarks.
"Now you must bear yours."


United Way's Ex-Leaders
William Aramony
Mr.
Aramony, who retired as president of the United Way in February, was born in Jewett City, Conn., on July 27, 1927.
He attended Clark University in Worcester, Mass., from 1946 to 1949.
He received a master of arts degree in social work at Boston College in 1951.


Tempers Are Short After Racial Brawl at a College in Michigan


CHRONICLE
How many different ways can one sing two sentences?
CARMEN PELTON, a soprano, knows.
On Monday evening at a concert of the Music Today Ensemble, she will sing the premiere of "Vocalissimus," a Sebastian Currier work based on a two-line poem by Wallace Stevens called "To the Roaring Wind."


CHRONICLE
Though SUSAN SARANDON is in her ninth month of pregnancy, she is trying not to let that deter her from working for causes to which she is committed.
On Monday, for example, she was in Los Angeles for the Academy Awards ceremony, to present the award for film editing.


Players Send Proposal To Owners' End of Ice
Talks aimed at ending the National Hockey League strike may be headed for an impolite climax Monday in New York, where a divided board of governors is expected to debate a new proposal by the players that has already received a less-than-enthusiastic welcome from the league president, John Ziegler..
"We've given the owners a proposal we think is fair," said Todd Gill, the Toronto player representative.
"If they accept it, we're back playing. If not, we're out for the long haul."


Review/Circus; Steel Men, Dancing Dogs And a Tiger Bandleader
The Mongolians have come, have been seen and have conquered.
That much was obvious on Thursday afternoon when those snarling titans of New York City subway poster fame materialized in a triple-ring grand finale of the Ringling Brothers and Barnum &amp; Bailey Circus at Madison Square Garden.
There were pretty, rubber-spined contortionists; hurtling tumblers for whom the human body was clearly just a handy projectile, and men-of-steel hefting and lobbing heavy steel balls and barbells without a grunt or hint of perspiration.
Best of all was the closing equestrian number, in which exquisite, sleek horses raced into and out of the center ring, galloping full speed with riders upright, hanging upside down, clinging sideways and even dragged behind them.
One of the riders was a young boy who leaped on and off the charging horses with all the skill of his beaming elders.


China Takes Jab at 'Leftists' and Nudges Economy
The National People's Congress concluded its annual session today with a call to guard against the "leftism" of hard-liners, in another sign that Deng Xiaoping and his allies are gaining ground in their drive to step up the pace of economic change.
The rubber-stamp legislature, in an implicit reproach of Prime Minister Li Peng, amended the Government Work Report he delivered two weeks ago.
The amendments strengthened the calls for rapid economic growth and added a warning about the "leftism" that is widely associated with hard-liners like Mr.
Li.


India Can't Allow Kashmir to Break Away; What Britain Did
To the Editor:
"End Kashmir's Misery" (editorial, March 22) opens with the observation "When Imperial Britain agreed to partition India and Pakistan." Imperial Britain did not
agree
to partition -- Imperial Britain
decided
to partition, and that is the source of the problem.
FRITZ BLACKWELL Director, Asia Program, Washington State University Pullman, Wash., March 23, 1992


Elwood Driver, 70, Wartime Pilot and Transportation Safety Expert
Elwood T. Driver, one of America's first black combat pilots and later a high-ranking safety official with two Federal transportation agencies, died March 26 at his home in Reston, Va.
He was 70 years old.
He died of liver cancer, his family said.


HOCKEY: Two Men Locked in a Slippery Standoff; Goodenow Once Was a Union Foe
A decade ago, when Bob Goodenow was a young lawyer practicing in the field of labor, he represented a Pittsburgh company that was resisting a union organizing effort.
Goodenow was successful on behalf of the management of Fire Fighter Sales and Service.
Frank Caputo, a retired Teamster official, remembered Goodenow as "an opportunistic chameleon" who defeated "a group of 10 overworked and underpaid young men who were trying to get off the bottom rung of the ladder."
"Goodenow made the moral judgment that it was right to accept pay and keep them on the bottom rung and knock them to the ground," Caputo said in a letter to The Pittsburgh Post-Gazette.


Your Taxes; Growing Backlog of Delinquencies
Though the White House has long said that collecting back taxes is a top priority, the Internal Revenue Service has been falling farther and farther behind.
In 1991, collections actually declined by 5 percent, to $24.3 billion from $25.5 billion.
What's going wrong?
"As we chat about this at the G.A.O., we feel this is one of the mysteries of the Government," said Jennie S. Stathis, director of tax policy for the General Accounting Office, a Congressional auditing agency.


Refund for Islander Tickets
Islanders season-ticket holders can request a refund for the game that had been scheduled today against the New Jersey Devils by returning their tickets to the team's season subscription department at Nassau Coliseum.
Subscribers can also mail their tickets to Islanders Season Subscription Department, Nassau Coliseum, Uniondale, N.Y., 11553.
Season-ticket holders who do not return their unused tickets will receive a credit on their season subscription billing for the 1992-92 season.


Unemployment Stays at 7.3%, With Scant Job Market Gains
The job market showed only slight improvement in March, with the nation's unemployment rate remaining at a seven-year high of 7.3 percent, according to Labor Department figures.
Payrolls grew by 19,000, a meager gain that owed much to the fact that many poll watchers and other election workers briefly held jobs related to the Super Tuesday primaries, which came during the survey week.


Easy Prey; Even Diligence Failed to Stop Sex Attacks Against 2 Boys
The two brothers, impish in jeans with toy cars in their pockets, enjoy nothing more than chewing multi-colored Sweet Tarts.
That was what they were doing the first time the man approached them outside the Minimax store in Bushwick, Brooklyn.
The man told the boys, one 8 years old, the other 10, that he needed help looking for spare tires.
He waved them into his light-blue 1978 Chevrolet Malibu.
The brothers never get to ride in a car, so they went along.


Wanted: a Mob Boss Without the Flash
The Gambino family has begun an internal struggle to find a new boss for the nation's largest organized-crime empire.
For 15 months from a prison cell in lower Manhattan, John Gotti ran the family, making the vital decisions about the gang's illicit activities and disputes.
But organized-crime experts say Mr.
Gotti's absolute power as boss of the nation's largest mob family ended on Thursday with his conviction on Federal charges of murder and racketeering.


Tokyo Calls Announcement Of Aid to Russia 'Premature'
Showing some irritation toward Washington, Japanese officials said today that it was "inappropriate" and "premature" for President Bush to announce a $24 billion aid package for Russia without having worked out details with Japan.
Several officials who insisted on anonymity said they assumed that Mr.
Bush had rushed into the announcement this week because of pressure from critics, including former President Richard M. Nixon and Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas, the front-runner for the Democratic presidential nomination.


Officials Kick Off Renovation of Hell Gate Bridge


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Labor; Union Members Do Footwork Of Candidates
Most of the telephone calls, post cards, letters and leaflets that will reach New York voters before the Democratic Presidential primary Tuesday will come not directly from either major candidate but from the state's powerful labor unions, which have organized dueling phone banks and get-out-the-vote drives for Bill Clinton and Edmund G. Brown Jr.
Short of time and swamped by the costs and complexities or reaching individual voters, the candidates' organizations do most of their electioneering through paid television advertisements and public appearances to draw free ink and air time.
They are leaving the old-fashioned shoe-leather and reaching out efforts to their union backers.


Latest Fraud Preys On Loan Applicants
Scam artists have found a new way to profit from the recession: bilking hard-pressed consumers who are looking for loans.
The ways of deception are many, but the most common is for thieves to set up a company that poses as a lender or loan broker promising a "guaranteed" loan.
What's the hitch?
The prospective borrowers must pay a fee up front.


BUSH CAMPAIGNING AGAINST CONGRESS
President Bush visited the Revolution's birthplace today to install himself as leader of what he called "the forces of change," then declared that what he first planned to change were the rules and political habits of the Democrat-controlled Congress.
Deemed Government business and paid for by the White House, the visit nevertheless dovetailed with an election-year makeover of Mr.
Bush by his political strategists as a tireless foe of business-as-usual Washington.


Doctors Advise King To Stay Off Right Knee
Doctors have told BERNARD KING of the Washington Bullets to rest his injured right knee until July, leaving his prospects for playing next season doubtful, according to General Manager JOHN NASH.
"I don't think this is a setback; there has just been no progress," Nash was quoted as saying in The Washington Times yesterday.
"Bernard may or may not be able to play next season. We won't know until late this summer."


To Relieve the Suffering of Mental Illness
To the Editor:
As executive director of an organization representing 35,000 of the 5.8 million Americans who suffer major depressive and manic-depressive illnesses, I am deeply disturbed by "We Could All Learn a Thing or Two From the Chimpanzees" (letter, March 15) by Peter Breggin, which is an attack on the the views of Frederick K. Goodwin, director of the National Institute of Mental Health.


Comptroller's Office Enforcing Wage Laws
To the Editor:
"New York State and City agencies responsible for enforcing labor laws," you report (news article, March 7), "have taken years to act on complaints, leaving thousands of workers with no recourse. The statement that the New York City Comptroller's office has failed to enforce wage laws is flatly erroneous. The laws are being enforced.


COMPANY BRIEFS
*
Beech Aircraft, Wichita, Kan., said it would lay off about 180 workers because of sluggish sales of its smaller planes.
Most of the clerical and administrative cuts are expected to come in Wichita.


Johannesburg Journal; Polite and Soft-Spoken, He Forges a Revolution
On a wall of Cyril Ramaphosa's corner office in the high-rise headquarters of the African National Congress hangs a political cartoon satirizing his more radical economic pronouncements.
The cartoon, published in a Johannesburg newspaper, shows Mr.
Ramaphosa shouting "Giddyap!" at a draft horse, labeled South Africa's economy, that he has just shot dead.


Patents; New Muffler Cuts Noise, Not Power
Researchers at a small Connecticut company have patented an electronic muffler for cars and trucks that uses computer-generated "anti-noise" to suppress the roar of an engine.
A conventional muffler suppresses noise by forcing the engine's exhaust through a baffle or labyrinth that absorbs sound.
Such mufflers are quite effective, but they also create back-pressure in the exhaust system that drains power and makes an engine run less efficiently.
For that reason, race cars generally run without mufflers.


Mancini, After Knockout By Haugen, Ends Career
Greg Haugen is the new North American Boxing Federation junior welterweight champion.
Haugen, 31 years old, beat up on a former world champion, Ray Mancini, before knocking him out at 2 minutes 27 seconds of the seventh round of a scheduled 12-round bout at the Reno-Sparks Convention Center tonight.


Patents; A Talking Cane For the Blind
Hsieh Chi-Sheng, an independent inventor in Taiwan, has patented an electronic "talking stick" for blind people that can detect obstructions and warn users with words uttered through a voice synthesizer.
The new stick amounts to a sophisticated variation on the canes that blind people use today.
Its handle, however, would contain a range-finder that would detect objects in its path by shooting out infrared beams of light and analyzing the signals that bounce back and hit a light-sensitive diode.
If an object is within about five feet, the patent says, the voice synthethizer will bark out a warning with the word "Obstruction!"


Nets Regain That 8th Spot With 9 Games Left to Play
After the Nets suffered a wrenching loss in overtime to Golden State last Saturday, Coach Bill Fitch sized up New Jersey's chances of making the playoffs for the first time in six years by saying the Nets would have to win all their remaining games.
So far, that's exactly what they've done.


Officer Calls Beating of Driver Unjust
A defendant in the Rodney G. King beating case gave the most dramatic testimony of the trial, and the most damaging to his three co-defendants, when he testified today that the clubbing Mr.
King received had been unjustified.
The witness, Officer Theodore J. Briseno, who is accused of kicking Mr.
King once, repeatedly described two co-defendants, Officer Laurence M. Powell and former Officer Timothy E. Wind, as having been "out of control," and placed much of the blame on the remaining defendant, Sgt.
Stacey C. Koon.
The beating was so wild, he asserted, that several times his fellow officers nearly struck him by accident.


Gaming Bill Goes to Full Legislature
The legislative committee that controls all revenue bills has approved and sent to the full legislature a bill legalizing slot machines in Connecticut and a plan to study whether casino gambling should be legalized.
The committee also passed a catchall measure to revise the state's new income tax, but it was so encrusted with contradictory amendments that it seemed destined only to provoke future battles.


Beach Club Settles Suit On Race Bias
A New Rochelle beach club that had been sued by the state for excluding blacks agreed today to a series of measures aimed at opening its doors to minority-group members.
In a settlement with the State Attorney General, the Colony Beach Club agreed to advertise in black-oriented newspapers, to set aside $15,000 to compensate people who might have been discriminated against and to suspend for three summers rules requiring that applicants be sponsored by current members.


Sarah Vaughan Tribute
A tribute to the jazz singer Sarah Vaughan on the second anniversary of her death will be held at 7 P.M. tomorrow at St.
Peter's Chruch.
Lexington Avenue at 54th Street.
Miss Vaughan die of lung cancer in 1990 at age 66.
Among those participating will be Billy Taylor, Sylvia Syms, Annie Ross, Priscilla Baskerville and Thelma Carpenter, with messages from Frank Sinatra, Wynton Marsalis and Gunther Schuller and a poem by Gene Lees.
Information: (212) 674-2729.


India Can't Allow Kashmir to Break Away; Stakes Are Higher
To the Editor:
"End Kashmir's Misery" (editorial, March 22) is a welcome contribution to the growing debate over United States policy toward Kashmir.
Your historical analysis and call for a free and fair plebiscite in Kashmir are, I believe, correct -- as is your discussion of the deplorable human rights situation in the Vale.
However, it is important to note that while human rights abuses in Indian-occupied Kashmir are well documented -- by both international and Indian human rights organizations -- there are no reports of human rights abuses in Azad Kashmir, the Pakistani-held area.
That thousands of Kashmiri refugees are fleeing to it from Indian-occupied Kashmir attests to this.


John J. Feketie, 67, Personnel Executive
John J. Feketie, the executive in charge of labor relations for the construction and operation of the Meadowlands racetrack and stadium, died on March 25 at his home in South Orange, N.J.
He was 67 years old.
He died after suffering a heart attack, his family said.


Twins Make Trims
The Minnesota Twins made final roster cuts of the spring Friday, optioning pitcher WILLIE BANKS to Class AAA Portland and putting first baseman KENT HRBEK and third baseman MIKE PAGLIARULO on the 15-day disabled list.


EXECUTIVES
*
Calvin Klein Cosmetics Co., New York, a unit of Calvin Klein Inc., named Sam Ghusson senior vice president of operations. *
Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce, Toronto, appointed Al Flood chairman and chief executive.


Review/Dance; Danish Feast for Balletomanes: Just Bournonville
Auguste Bournonville, Denmark's beloved 19th-century choreographer, is the obvious focus of the Royal Danish Ballet's current Bournonville Festival II.
But so many aspects of his work and even of his dancers are being celebrated in Copenhagen this week that the entire event has turned into a grand if not movable feast.
On Wednesday, for example, Queen Margrethe II of Denmark stood up in the royal box at the Royal Theater to lead the applause for Sorella Englund, a principal dancer whose 25th anniversary with the Royal Danish Ballet was observed that night with her performance in "La Sylphide."


Classical Music in Review
Montserrat Caballe  Alice Tully Hall


Del Taco Sale
W.
R.
Grace &amp; Company agreed to sell its Del Taco Restaurants Inc. properties to Pepsico Inc.'s Taco Bell unit.
Terms of the transaction, which involves 100 Del Taco and Taco Villa restaurants, were not disclosed.
The restaurants are primarily in Georgia and Texas.
Most of the restaurants will be gradually converted into Taco Bells during the next nine months.
Some may be closed.


Compuadd Chairman Completes Revamping
About five years ago, Bill H. Hayden decided to take off the 15 pounds he had gained while managing the rapid growth of his Compuadd Computer Corporation.
He started running 20 miles a week and quickly shed the weight.
Last week, Mr.
Hayden, the company's chairman and chief executive, completed a series of changes to keep his 10-year-old corporation similarly lean.
He divided the company into two autonomous divisions, one to handle 125 retail outlets and international markets, and a second to focus on large business and government accounts.


Review/Music; Another Orchestra, a Similar Change
Though they are quite different figures, Daniel Barenboim, in his first appearance in New York as music director of the Chicago Symphony Orchestra, on Thursday night in Carnegie Hall, sometimes brought Kurt Masur to mind.
Mr.
Barenboim is just the ninth music director in the history of the Chicago Symphony, which has had an untroubled reputation in the forefront of the "Big Five" American ensembles; the New York Philharmonic has had a less consistent history and a more troubled recent past.
But in both cases a stylistic shift seems to be taking place, away from overt theatricality and occasional bombast and toward a sort of no-frills musical solidity.
At least that was the impression made by this first concert.
While Mr.
Barenboim's predecessor, Georg Solti, might have pulled out many more stops in the same program, he might also have neglected some of the necessary subtleties, which Mr.
Barenboim did attend to.
The impression that Mr.
Barenboim made was of careful deliberateness.
He is not an intellectual musician, yet one is always aware of his mind at work.
He is thorough and dedicated and sometimes very interesting.
He is less viscerally exciting as an orchestral virtuoso than he might think he is, but there were compensations.


Brooklyn Libraries Bear Unfair Burden
To the Editor:
As a high school teacher in Brooklyn, I often give assignments that require use of the library.
Brooklyn is blessed with a superb central library and 58 neighborhood branches, but sadly libraries in Brooklyn are closed more often than they are open.


Review/Film Festival; Doing Business in Papua New Guinea
"Black Harvest," a documentary of extraordinary historical resonance, is the third film by the Australian team of Bob Connolly and Robin Anderson to study the intrusion of modern culture on the Ganiga, an aboriginal tribe in the highlands of Papua New Guinea.
A sequel to their 1989 film, "Joe Leahy's Neighbors," it focuses on the strained relationship between the Ganiga and Joe Leahy, the half-white, half-aboriginal owner of a flourishing coffee plantation built on land that was sold to him cheaply by the tribe.
The team's 1983 film, "First Contact," told the story of the foray in the early 1900's by Joe's father into the region, which had never before been visited by whites.


Sabatini and Spaniards Restore Chilling Order to Play
Protocol finally ruled today at the Family Circle Magazine Cup, an event that has been ravaged by upsets and further plagued by an unseasonable deluge of bone-chilling weather that left even the winners shivering.
Gabriela Sabatini, who received a special dispensation to import her two-tone Honda 600 to the otherwise motorcycle-free Sea Pines Plantation, kept herself warm by putting in some tennis overtime in between cycling sprees.
First the defending champion polished off Amanda Coetzer, 7-5, 6-4, needing just two games to complete a third-round match suspended by darkness on Thursday.
Then the top-seeded player of this star-starved event subdued Patricia Hy of Canada, 6-2, 6-3, to gain easy admittance to the semifinals, where she will face 12th-seeded Brenda Schultz of the Netherlands.


Idling Connecticut
To the Editor:
On the March 24 editorial page, you advocate closing the Electric Boat submarine facility at Groton, Conn. (in "Mr. Clinton's Tough Choice"), and the Colt Industries factory in Hartford ("Callousness at Colt's").
Why not simply shutter the entire state of Connecticut and be done with it?
RICHARD SCHATZ East Lyme, Conn., March 24, 1992


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball
COMMISSIONER'S OFFICE -- Announced that the 60-day drug suspension of Gilberto Reyes, Montreal Expos catcher, was overturned by arbitrator George Nicolau.
American League


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Economic Proposals; Brown's Tax Plan Seen As Attack on Status Quo
In recent weeks one of New York's Senators in Washington, the Mayor and Finance Commissioner of New York City and a host of economists of all persuasions have joined Gov.
Bill Clinton in dismissing Edmund G. Brown Jr.'s tax proposals as a sop to the rich, a crushing blow to the poor and profoundly anti-New York.
So why are so many Brown supporters in New York unfazed by their candidate's plan for a 13 percent flat tax on all income and a 13 percent value-added tax on goods?
They could, after all, lose the ability to deduct state and local taxes from their Federal tax burden, the largest and most commonly claimed deduction in the state.
And they could end up paying a 13 percent national sales tax on top of the 8.25 percent in state and city sales taxes.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Trail; Thou Shalt Not Pander, but I Am a Different Case
Pandering -- one of the few remaining dogmas of traditional politics -- has received an unusually hostile press this year.
Every blatant attempt to flatter Jews, blacks, women, nuclear-powered submarine manufacturers or the elderly has been set upon with instant venom.


INSIDE
Serial Killings in Russia
A 56-year-old man faces trial in Russia for a series of murders that may qualify him as one of the worst serial killers of modern times.
Page 3.
Pressure for Afghan Peace
As patience wears thin among Afghanistan's neighbors, a United Nations peace plan seems to have gained a sudden momentum.
Page 5.
Bronx Fails to Awe Russians
A group of Russians went to a wholesale grocery market yesterday.
Their hosts expected amazement.
The visitors were polite but blase.
Page 27.


Thomas Park, 83, Dies of Cancer; Helped Ecology Become Science
Dr.
Thomas Park, a zoologist who was instrumental in transforming the field of ecology into a science with quantification and controlled experiments, died Monday at his home in Chicago.
He was 83 years old and died of cancer, his family said.


UNITED WAY FINDS PATTERN OF ABUSE BY FORMER CHIEF
The ousted president of the United Way of America and two close aides transferred more than a million dollars a year to other organizations they controlled and spent hundreds of thousands more on their travel, pensions and insurance plans, the new management of the beleaguered charity said in a report released today.
In contrast to the charity's soothing assurances a month ago that any financial irregularities stemmed from "sloppy record-keeping" and "inattention to detail," today's report revealed, in damning detail, a pattern of financial manipulation over a five-year period far more extensive than the organization had previously disclosed.


OPEC Cut Sends Oil Above $20
The price of oil closed above $20 a barrel yesterday for the first time since Dec. 13.
The market pushed prices up when the International Energy Agency reported that OPEC production had fallen 900,000 barrels a day in March, to 23.5 million barrels a day.
The agency also said that global demand had increased 300,000 barrels a day.


Duke Has 2 More Steps to Go, But They're Really Giant Ones
The way Mike Krzyzewski structured the season to follow Duke University's first national basketball championship -- in small, workable pieces -- the defense of that title was little more than a distant challenge.
Until now.
As the Final Four teams gathered for public practices under the Metrodome roof, the presence of the Blue Devils -- for the fifth consecutive year, and sixth in the last seven -- gives the climax of the college season an added sense of history.


Creating a New Life Through Glimmer and Art
In this city's living rooms and kitchens, there are wars, bloody ones, that rarely pause.
Partly because men are stronger than women, it is women who bear the brunt of this violence.
They are abused prisoners in their own homes.
Sometimes it all becomes too much, and they summon the courage to escape.
They gather their children and a few belongings and take a giant step into the unknown.


John Kai Tien, Metallurgist, 52
John Kai Tien, an expert in high-temperature alloys who was director of the Strategic Materials R &amp; D Laboratory at the University of Texas, died on March 24 at Seton Hospital in Austin.
He was 52 years old.
He died of cancer, his family said.


McNeil Stays With the Jets
Freeman McNeil, the career rushing leader for the Jets, signed a one-year contract for his 12th season with the club.
He is scheduled to be at the four-day minicamp for veterans, which starts on Monday in Hempstead, L.I.
No other details of the contract were announced.
According to a survey by the National Football League Players Association, McNeil made a base salary of $900,000 last season.
Reached at his Long Island home yesterday, McNeil disputed reports that said, with incentive clauses, he would be making that much again.
He indicated he might have taken a 10- to 20-percent cut, which would put him somewhere between $720,000 and $810,000.


President of U S West to Become Chairman
U S West Inc. added to Richard D. McCormick's responsibilities yesterday as president and chief executive by naming him its next chairman.
Mr.
McCormick, who is 51, will take over the telecommunications company's chairmanship on May 1 from Jack A. MacAllister, who has not drawn a salary since retiring as chief executive at the end of 1990.
Mr.
Mac Allister, 64, who started his 40-year career as an telephone installer and repairman in Council Bluffs, Iowa, will devote his time to efforts to improve education, working with national and local organizations.


New York City's Master Penny Pincher
It was often still dark outside when Harvey Robins arrived at a garbage-truck depot, dressed in blue jeans and a T-shirt, to heave himself into one of the front cabs and spend the next eight hours recording with a stopwatch how many stops were made per minute, how many bags were picked up versus cans, and how often the work crew stopped for coffee or had to sit on the side of the road while it waited for a repair truck.
If Mr.
Robins thought there was anything unglamorous about a Ph.D. riding garbage trucks, he showed no sign of it 15 years later, as he recounted the experience with relish.
But then, garbage-bags-per-minute is the kind of subject that Mr.
Robins can really get worked up about.


Vehicle Sales Rose In Period
Sales of domestically built vehicles rose 5.2 percent in late March, led by a strong buying surge of mini-vans, pickups and other light trucks.
Analysts remained divided whether the United States automotive market had turned for the better and was gaining strength.
Financial analysts tended toward caution, while automotive executives expressed optimism.


Caller ID: Consumer's Friend or Foe?
Is caller identification a blessing that will help protect consumers from obscene and other unwanted calls?
Or does the new telephone service represent an invasion of privacy?
That is what consumer groups and consumers in New York State are debating after a decision by the state's Public Service Commission to permit caller ID.


Fed Policy Panel Favored Easing if Needed
The Federal Reserve's policy-making committee unanimously decided in February to give Alan Greenspan, the Fed's chairman, the latitude to lower interest rates further if the economy continued to languish.
The minutes of the February meeting of the Open Market Committee were released today.
Minutes of previous meetings showed that the 12 members of the committee, while concerned about the economy's sluggishness, were divided on whether to ease monetary policy.


Repertory Names Director
David Esbjornson has been appointed artistic director of the CSC Repertory Theater for the 1992-93 season, the theater has announced.
Mr.
Esbjornson takes over from Carey Perloff, who has held the post for the past five seasons.
Ms.
Perloff has been named artistic director of the American Conservatory Theater in San Francisco.


India Can't Allow Kashmir to Break Away
To the Editor:
"End Kashmir's Misery" (editorial, March 22), your call for a United Nations settlement in Kashmir, possibly involving independence for the state, has superficial attractiveness.
As early as the 1950's and 60's, when I often visited there, it was clear to me that the bulk of the people of the Kashmir Valley preferred to be separate from both India and Pakistan and become, as they put it, the Switzerland of the subcontinent.


India Can't Allow Kashmir to Break Away; Perpetuating Error
To the Editor:
A number of historical errors have marred your otherwise thoughtful "End Kashmir's Misery" (editorial, March 22).


Bronx Man, 24, Is Charged in Fatal Stabbing of 2
The police arrested a 24-year-old Bronx man yesterday and charged him with the stabbing death of a 69-year-old woman and her teen-age foster son and the wounding of the woman's 22-year-old daughter on Wednesday during an apparent push-in robbery in a New York City Housing Authority development.
Lieut.
Michael Bramble, head of the detective squad at the 40th Precinct, identified the man as Thomas Cruz, 24, of 683 Dawson Street, in the Melrose section.


Tigers Sign Lancaster
The Detroit Tigers bolstered their pitching staff with the signing of free agent LES LANCASTER, who was released by the Chicago Cubs earlier this week.
Lancaster, 29, was 9-7 with a 3.52 e.r.a. and three saves for the Cubs last season.
He appeared in 64 games, 11 as a starter.
The Tigers had been looking for bullpen help. . . .
The American League batting champion, JULIO FRANCO, was placed on the 15-day disabled list by the Texas Rangers, who signed second baseman AL NEWMAN as a replacement yesterday and also released outfielder GARY PETTIS.


The Campaign On Television
Where voters can find the candidates and coverage of the Presidential campaign on television and radio today and tomorrow.
Today
C-Span will broadcast a live press conference from Albany with Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas and Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo of New York from 9 A.M. to 10 A.M.
An interview with Mr.
Brown and Mr.
Clinton will be broadcast on "Talkline" at 11:30 P.M. on WMCA radio, 570 AM.
Tomorrow
Former Gov.
Edmund G. Brown Jr. of California and Mr.
Clinton will debate live on WNBC-TV, Channel 4, in New York from 11 A.M. to noon.
The debate will also be carried live on C-Span; WATC-TV, Channel 10, in Rochester; WNYT-TV, Channel 13, in Albany; WSTN-TV, Channel 3, in Syracuse, and on National Public Radio.
CNBC-TV, the cable channel, will present the debate at 6 P.M.
An interview with Mr.
Clinton from "Talkline," will be presented at noon on Manhattan Cable, Channel 62; Paragon Cable, Channel 65; Brooklyn Queens Cable, Channel 72; Brooklyn Cablevision, Channel 59; Bergen Cablevision, Channel 33 and on the International Channel.


Revision on Rollbacks
The tabling of a $238 million National Football League rights fee rollback for the three networks on Wednesday in favor of a more modest $28 million plan was done because the original plan was "too shocking," said AL DAVIS, the owner of the Los Angeles Raiders.
"The numbers were not doable."
The $238 million rights reduction plan would have rolled back rights payments for 1993 to $32.5 million a team, from $41 million, and would have extended the contract at that lower level for 1994 and 1995.


Mitterrand Shuffle: Two Aces in the Hole
In an attempt to revive the sagging fortunes of the French Socialist Party, President Francois Mitterrand has chosen a combination of dogged economic orthodoxy to reassure the business world and brash flamboyance to appeal to the young and disillusioned.
The orthodoxy is embodied in his new Prime Minister, Pierre Beregovoy, who personifies the great shift of French Socialism over the last decade from statist interventionism to free-market efficiency and monetarist discipline.


Knicks Showing No Signs of Letting Up in the Stretch
The Knicks have played so well recently, they probably wouldn't mind playing every night.
Winning for the ninth time in their last 10 games, the Knicks dominated the Atlanta Hawks, 115-94, last night at Madison Square Garden.
It was New York's second impressive victory in two nights, and it was even more impressive because the Knicks played in Charlotte, N.C., on Thursday night.


Drivers Union Rejects Offer At Company Times Bought
The drivers union at a newspaper delivery company acquired last month by The New York Times rejected a settlement offer yesterday, taking the first step in what could become a bruising labor-management struggle.
In February The Times announced its plan to buy the assets of Metropolitan News Company and Newark Newsdealers Supply Company, two major wholesalers that deliver The Times and other publications to newsstands and other outlets in New York City and New Jersey.


Bridge
If one ignores the decimal point, the winning score in the National Women's Swiss Teams in Pasadena, Calif., on Sunday was highly appropriate.
It was the first time a combined British and American team, Redcoats and Patriots, had ever won a major American title in bridge, and perhaps in anything else.
The final score was 177.6 victory points for Sandra Landy and Michele Handley of England, and Lisa Berkowitz, Judy Tucker, Gail Greenberg and Dorothy Truscott, all from the New York metropolitan area.
Victory and defeat hinged on the diagramed deal, which for the Englishwomen was the last of the match, the last of the event, and the last of the American Contract Bridge League's Spring Nationals.
The British have a taste for eccentric two-bids, and this is an example.
Two clubs showed either a weak two-bid in diamonds -- in this case very weak -- or a very strong hand with game in view.
The response of two hearts was natural, strong and forcing, leading to four hearts.


The Height of Fashion Salutes Vogue at 100
The fashion world and the worlds that fashion touches collided brilliantly Thursday at the New York Public Library to celebrate the 100th anniversary of Vogue.
The black-tie party brought together fashion designers from Europe and New York, many of the world's top models and leading business and social figures.
It featured a buffet and performances by Tito Puente and C &amp; C Music Factory in the vaulted lobby of the library, at Fifth Avenue and 42d Street.


As Italy Nears Vote, Rare Anxiety About Results
As Italians reflect on their nation's destiny two days ahead of major elections and in advance of Europe's move to integration, they do so with a heightened sense of uncertainty.
By European Community accounting, Italy is the world's fifth biggest industrialized economy behind the United States, Japan, Germany and France -- a statistic that illustrates the nation's postwar transformation from ruin to riches.
Yet as the land votes Sunday and Monday in an election that will decide whether the Christian Democrats of Prime Minister Giulio Andreotti maintain the dominance they have held for four decades, Italians are weighing their choices with unprecedented national soul searching and introspection.


Bias-Crime Rate Up 18%, And Juveniles Led the Surge
Led by a surprising number of hate crimes committed by juveniles, bias offenses increased 18 percent last year in New Jersey, despite one of the toughest laws in the nation, state officials said today.
"The perpetrators of hate crimes in New Jersey are most likely to be between the ages of 7 and 18," the head of the state's bias-crime office, Paul Goldenberg, said today as the state released its fourth annual Bias Incident Report.
Officials also announced a pilot program to try to stem the increase in juvenile bias crimes.


Talking: Minorities; Removing Barriers To Loans
MINORITY and ethnic home buyers have long sensed that they do not get equal consideration when they apply for mortgages and suspected that they were rejected more hastily than whites with similar financial profiles.
Studies have recently confirmed this.
A Federal Reserve Board study based on 5.3 million applications from 9,300 banks, published last October, found minorities twice as likely to be rejected as whites with the same household income.


Children's Books
OREN BELL By Barbara Hood Burgess. 181 pp.
New York: Delacorte Press. $15. (Ages 10 to 14) THERE is nothing fair about a clean slate.
Latonya Bell has been working on her school record her whole life, and it's not fair for a new teacher to avoid looking at records so everyone can start the year even.
Besides, "was it fair for Dink to have to start working into his medium slot all over again?"


CRIME
"The trees were loud with birds, the wind smelled of watermelons, the roses in my garden were as big as fists," and life seemed sweet to Dave Robicheaux from the pier of his bait and boat shop deep in the Louisiana bayous.
But this illusion of well-being evaporates in James Lee Burke's powerful, fatalistic new crime novel, A STAINED WHITE RADIANCE (Hyperion, $19.95), when the Cajun police detective commences to brood on that fragile state of grace in which man coexists with nature.
The existential landscape turns menacing when one of Dave's police officers is executed by killers hired to settle a score with the Sonniers, an old family whose prominent members include a wealthy oilman, an ambitious politician (with Klan credentials as solid as David Duke's), a charismatic television evangelist and Dave's childhood sweetheart.
Soon these sluggish backwaters are crawling with redneck bikers and New Orleans mobsters -- bottom feeders drawn by the rank sins of the Sonniers.


Quotation of the Day
"Everybody's a mall rat to an extent. It's something to do when there is nothing to do. And there is nothing else to do." -- CHRISTINE TAKO  [ 1:3 ]


Kathleen Vagt Has Wedding
Kathleen Graham Vagt, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry T. Vagt Jr. of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married yesterday in Alexandria, Va., to Richard Gentry Robbins, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
William G. Robbins Jr. of Houston.
The Rev.
Deborah J. Elder performed the Episcopal ceremony at Christ Church.


Japan's Bubble Is Deflating, But Not Gently
Nobody has had a tougher job than Yasushi Mieno, the Japanese central banker who set out in 1989 to pierce Japan's "bubble economy," as he called it, without hurting the real economy.
Now, with the Japanese economy reeling -- auto sales have been down for 16 of the last 17 months and industrial production is down 4 percent from a year ago -- Japan is confronting the reality of what John Kenneth Galbraith wrote about Wall Street in 1929: "A bubble can easily be punctured. But to incise it with a needle so that it subsides gradually is a task of no small delicacy."


Grills Are Back, and the Island's Got 'Em
A DECADE ago, a restaurant called Conrad's Bar &amp; Grill would generate little interest.
But these are the 1990's, and grills are hot.
The newcomer in Huntington joins a flood of celebrated grills.
Think of the Mesa, Miracle and Broadway Grills in Manhattan.
On Long Island, the parade is led by the Coyote, Polo, Newport and North Street.
The bar in Conrad's name is more than an afterthought or a nostalgic throwback.
Beverages and food are equal partners.
Choices include 35 single-malt scotches, more than 40 beers from around the world and a prodigious lineup of grappas, ports, sherries, cognacs and Madeiras.


Ms. Weaver, Student, to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Paul E. Weaver of Dallas have announced the engagement of their daughter, Amanda Katharine Weaver, to G. Jeffrey Meiler, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Mark J. Meiler of Oneonta, N.Y.
An August wedding is planned.
Ms.
Weaver is 24 years old, as is her fiance.
She graduated from Elizabethtown College and is a graduate student in journalism at the University of South Carolina.
Her father is the managing partner of Price Waterhouse in Dallas.


Cambodia School Tries to Erase Hanoi's Style
Dean Iv Thong of the Institute of Economic Sciences showed a visitor a pile of discarded volumes of the works of Karl Marx in Vietnamese in his school's thinly stocked library and said, "We won't keep what is outmoded and a little behind the times."
Yet most of the texts in use come from Vietnam, which remains dogmatically Communist, and 24 professors from Hanoi's Economics Institute form the core of the faculty at Cambodia's main center of university-level economic education.
They teach in Vietnamese, a language as different from Cambodian as Russian is from English.


Creating the Look


The Blend Trend
Frank Schoonmaker started it all back in the 1940's.
California wine makers, the serious ones, anyway, were looking for a way to go upscale.
They knew they had the makings of good wine, maybe the best in the world, but they knew, too, that they were never going to get any respect calling it California claret.
Schoonmaker, a travel writer turned wine expert, and one of the early champions of fine American wine, had a suggestion: Call the wine by the name of the grape.
It had been tried in the past but abandoned.
The customer wanted something reminiscent of the old country, like California Chianti, preferably with a label in the colors of the Italian flag.


Free Health Tests Held for Lower Manhattan Neighborhoods


THE ORACLE OF CROWN HEIGHTS
I just got back from Israel, where a Tel Aviv restaurateur has decided to build the Lubavitcher Rebbe a home in Kfar Habad, although there is no indication he will come to live in or even visit Israel.
As mentioned in your article, "The Oracle of Crown Heights" (by Michael Specter, March 15), the Rebbe already has a home in Kfar Habad that is identical to his home in Crown Heights.
This restaurateur has simply to look out his restaurant window to see the many opportunities, like housing for Ethiopians and Soviet Olim, that take priority over a second Israeli home for the Rebbe, who has never even been to the first house.
Turning the Rebbe into an icon and declaring him the Messiah seems contradictory to the very tenets of Judaism.


Alison E. Morham Wed to John N. McVeigh 3d
Alison Elizabeth Morham, a daughter of Anne C. Morham of Glen Ridge, N.J., and the late James C. Morham, was married in New York yesterday to John Newburne McVeigh 3d, the son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
J.
N.
McVeigh Jr. of Blauvelt, N.Y.
The Rev.
Stephen P. Bauman performed the ceremony at Christ Church United Methodist.


How the Amish Stitched Shape And Color Into Art
The Amish surpassed most quilters with the graphic coverlets they produced between the Civil War and World War II.
While the women of this religious sect used patterns known to all needleworkers, such as Log Cabin, Jacob's Ladder, Rolling Stone and Hole in the Barn Door, their versions had a visual impact unseen in quilts made by others.
Amish quilts, especially the colorful examples sewn in Lancaster County, Pa., have been extensively written about and shown since 1970.
Less familiar Midwestern variations dominate the exhibition "Amish Quilts: A Look at Three Communities," at the Textile Museum here through May 3.
These bedcovers are part of the corporate collection of Esprit de Corps, the San Francisco-based sportswear company.


Ms. Hart Weds Mr. Ludington
Jennifer Anne Hart, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John Cushman Hart of Wellesley, Mass., was married yesterday in Boston to William Kingman Ludington, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin L. Ludington of St.
Louis.
The Rev.
Rachelle Birnbaum performed the Episcopal ceremony at Trinity Church.
Mrs.
Ludington, 26 years old, is a research assistant in New York at S. G. Warburg, a London-based securities company.
She graduated from Denison University, as did her husband.
Her father is the managing director of Southgate International, a sales consulting firm in Wellesley.


Marriage Play
Holt McCallany and Tatum O'Neal are in "A Terrible Beauty" by Kevin Breslin.
The play, which takes place in a Manhattan bar and is about an abused wife and her husband, also stars William Hickey, Fiona Hutchison and Michael Healy.
Directed by the author, it opens on Thursday at the Provincetown Playhouse. ("A Terrible Beauty")


Perspectives: City Housing Cutbacks; New York Slashing an Array of Programs
OPPORTUNITY knocked, and Alice Davis responded.
"I'd better jump on this," she remembers telling herself.
She was thinking of buying a new two-family house built with city and state assistance in the Bedford-Stuyvesant section of Brooklyn.
She bought just in time.
Drastic cuts sought by Mayor David N. Dinkins for a planned revision in the capital budget for coming years would all but end city assistance to this and other housing production programs.


CAMPUS LIFE: Simmons; Men in Dorms: Announcement Spurs Protests
A surprise announcement that 30 men will be living in a dorm of Simmons College, an all-women's college since its founding in 1899, has set off protests and sent some students packing for off-campus apartments.
The decision will allow male foreign students of the Language Institute for English, a nonprofit language training organization, to use Simmons's language laboratories and live in Arnold Hall, in the heart of the Boston campus.
The female foreign students will live in Simmons Hall.


TALES FROM THE BABY FACTORY
Are infertility patients hapless victims of medicine technology portrayed by Ellen Hopkins in "Tales From the Baby Factory" (March 15), or are they pioneers working for their doctors to explore new medical territory at personal risk?
As an infertility patient, I hear stories that make me cry with sympathy.
What the article ignored is the extraordinary role women and their partners have played with their doctors in helping to advance reproductive medicine.
The advances in this field are quite remarkable when compared to the level of funding for research.
Infertility treatment has been ignored by the Government, fought by insurance companies and, saddest of all, shunned by women's and reproductive rights groups.
Liberals are for the right to choose not to have a family but politically silent about funding that would enable many to choose to have a family.
Conservatives honor women in their roles as mothers but do nothing to help infertile couples by making adoption or medical treatments easier.


Fair and Square
To the Editor:
Naomi R. Pollock's essay "Foreign Architects Are Building Bridges to Japan"  [ March 8 ]  makes the International Design Competition for the Tokyo International Forum appear as yet another argument to support the Political Plot Theory, which reinforces the American public's paranoid perception of relationships with the Japanese.


Draft of Environmental Rules: 'Global Partnership'
Following is the draft text of a declaration of principles for encouraging environmentally responsible development that is to be considered in June by leaders attending an environmental summit meeting in Rio de Janeiro:
THE CONFERENCE ON ENVIRONMENT AND DEVELOPMENT,


Corrections
An article on March 22 about a dispute between environmentalists and developers over construction misidentified a group that builds low-cost housing.
It is the Long Island Housing Partnership Inc., not the Long Island Housing Alliance.


July Wedding For Miss Smith
Mr. and Mrs.
Sidney S. Smith of New Canaan, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Margarita Schuyler Smith, to Karl Kristian Whiteleather, a son of Dorothy Tovey of Ashland, Ohio, and the late Robert J. Whiteleather.
A July wedding is planned.
Miss Smith, 26 years old, is a book marketing manager at Random House in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Yale University and is a graduate student in media studies at the New School for Social research.
Her father retired as a management consultant.


PATH and N.J. Transit: A Commuter's View
I have been a commuter from Maplewood to midtown Manhattan for a number of years.
The rail and PATH services described in the article "The State of the Manhattan Commute" (March 15) could not possibly be the same services I have been using.
PATH trains that have an on-time record of 90 percent?
I imagine the people I travel with each morning and evening between Hoboken and 33d Street would shriek with laughter at that proclamation.


Samantha Arzonetti Wed in Florida
Samantha Ellyn Arzonetti, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Walter Arzonetti of Palm Coast, Fla., was married in St.
Augustine, Fla., yesterday to Thomas McClure 3d, a son of Renee McClure of Corsicana, Tex., and the late Mr.
McClure.
The Rev.
Dr.
John A. Hunter officiated at Memorial Presbyterian Church.
Mrs.
McClure, 25 years old, graduated cum laude from Boston University.
Until recently, she was an account supervisor at McCann-Erickson Advertising in New York.
Her father, who retired as the chief financial officer of Esso Petroleum in London, is the managing director of Halcyon Holdings, an investment consulting concern in Palm Coast.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Candidate's Wife; Hillary Clinton: Speaking About Rumors
In a newly published interview, Hillary Clinton says it "is apparently well known in Washington" that President Bush has had an extramarital affair.
But yesterday, campaigning for her husband, Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas, she apologized for the remark.
The interview, in the May issue of Vanity Fair magazine, characterizes Mrs.
Clinton as furious at what she perceives as the media's double standard in investigating her husband's personal life and ignoring Mr.
Bush's.
She refers in the interview to "Bush and his carrying on, all of which is apparently well known in Washington."


In the Streets


Big Scoop: Ben Will Be Back With Jerry
BEN &amp; JERRY'S sans Ben? Unthinkable.
But investors thought so for a time late last month when the news got around that Ben Cohen, chairman and chief executive of Ben &amp; Jerry's Homemade Inc., had left the superpremium ice cream business in Waterbury, Vt., ostensibly for a sabbatical.


Social Events
Children's Extravaganza
April 5 -- A cornucopia of children's games, workshops, performances, music, contests and creative activities will fill two ballrooms at the Grand Hyatt hotel at a benefit for the Children's Museum of Manhattan.
From 11 A.M. to 2 P.M., children age 2 to 12 will entertain and be entertained, along with parents, at the benefit, which will include lunch.
Tickets, $175 for adults; $50 for children, who must be accompanied by an adult; $350 for two adults and one child, at the door.
Information: (212) 721-1223.


When the Best Customer -- the Ex-Soviet Union -- Is Broke
In the glory days of Communism and the Soviet Union, East Germany was the Soviet bloc's largest supplier of railroad cars, and Deutsche Waggonbau A.G., as the company is now known, was one of the biggest builders.
Waggonbau had some particular specialties.
One was building all the dining cars for the entire Soviet railway system.
Another was special refrigerator cars for Siberia.
In winter they had to keep things warm at a temperate 50 degrees while outside it was 60 below zero; in the summer they had to maintain the cargo at 4 degrees below zero while outside temperatures reached 100 degrees.


Photographs As Weapons of War And Politics
In the communications era, control of the making and distribution of images is a key to power.
Photographic evidence can be put to many uses, and the publication of pictures is often a political decision or at least one with political consequences.
Consider the Chinese belatedly pulling the plug on Western television broadcasts in 1989, or American censorship in Panama and during the Persian Gulf War, amateur videocam surveillance of police actions in Eastern Europe before Communism's fall (or for that matter in Los Angeles last year).
At the Houston Fotofest, the largest international photography festival in this country (held once every two years and closing today), three shows of material never seen here before -- from El Salvador, the Netherlands and Czechoslovakia -- stunningly illustrate the life-and-death struggle between citizen and government over image and document.
"In the Eye of the Beholder: The Secret Archive, El Salvador 1980-1991" is a selection from 80,000 negatives made for the armed opposition movement and neither published nor shown before this year; they constitute a mammoth and secret record of resistance.


Safety Note
The New York City Fire Department recommends that smoke alarm batteries be changed twice yearly, at the start and the end of daylight time.
The date this spring is Sunday.


What Young Bookworms Pull From the Shelves
ON Tuesday afternoons, the dozen or so members of the Rye Young Critics' Circle gather in the Rye Free Reading Room to discuss their latest literary finds.
An eminently civilized pursuit -- especially when one considers that these book lovers are fourth, fifth and sixth graders.
"We started this program last year for the bookworms," said Judy Greenfield, who has been the children's librarian in Rye for 17 years.


Susan Parkes To Wed in Fall
Dr. and Mrs.
James C. Parkes 2d of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter Susan Marie Parkes to Edward Thomas Cirignano, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Nicholas Cirignano of Bedminster, N.J.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss Parkes, 27 years old, is the promotion coordinator for The Ladies' Home Journal in New York.
She graduated from Villanova University.
Her father is an associate clinical professor of orthopedic surgery at Columbia University and a senior attending surgeon at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital.


CAMPUS LIFE: Swarthmore; No Trees Fall in Forest, And 3 Hear Triumph
By turning their final project for an ecology class into a legal appeal to the United States Forest Service, three Swarthmore College students have blocked management policies that they said endangered the ecosystem of the Monongahela National Forest in West Virginia.
"Rather than fall into the trap of making academia a detached endeavor, we decided to confront the ecological crises of our times directly," said Brendan Kelly, a senior in political science from Locust Valley, L.I.
Mr.
Kelly, along with another political-science major, B. J. Chisholm, a junior from Manchester, Conn., and David Tecklin, a senior from San Juan Ridge, Calif., majoring in biological anthropology, filed a legal appeal on two issues affecting the Monongahela ecosystem.


On an Isle


In Danbury, a Touch of Tropical Cheer
WHILE there is no room to dance at Rumba, the decor of the cheerful new Cuban restaurant in Danbury has the bounce and verve of Latin music.
Within the confines of two tiny rooms, Rumba manages to evoke the spirit of a Caribbean cafe.
White stuccoed walls hung with pink-painted guitars and bongos, parrot-green chairs that match the wood trim and exposed beams, floral tablecloths under glass tops and hanging plants in a front bow window do a terrific job of suggesting a warmer climate than ours.
In fact, after dinner at Rumba, caught up in the spirit of the tropics, it is a shock to go out into the cool Connecticut air.
The menu, printed on paper fans, lends credence to the decorating theme.
Rumba describes its fare as Cuban and Spanish but most dishes are Cuban, offering diners an opportunity to sample a cuisine rarely encountered in Connecticut.


Now It Can Be Told, By Mets
The Mets players, saying they had reclaimed their clubhouse as their own, yesterday lifted their self-imposed ban on communicating with the news media.
In minutes, with quotes and charges flying, there were bold claims of the boycott's value, insights into the political intrigue behind the decisions to impose and then end the silence, threats of repeating the boycott and a request that the commissioner's office formally investigate tactics employed by certain members of the news media in covering the Mets this spring.


TRANSACTIONS
BASEBALL American League  DETROIT TIGERS -- Optioned John Kiely, pitcher, to Toledo of the International League.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Issues; Responses of Rivals Cover Up Similarity
On a television show in New York last weekend, Gov.
Bill Clinton and Edmund G. Brown Jr. were asked where they stood on laws that set aside a specific proportion of Government contracts for blacks.
Mr.
Clinton answered at length.
Such laws are "on balance" worthwhile, he said, because "in order to change the nature of poverty and the nature of our cities, we have to have an empowerment agenda."


Melissa McGlynn to Wed in August
Mr. and Mrs.
Richard B. McGlynn of Jersey City have announced the engagement of their daughter, Melissa Cleaves McGlynn, to Kirk Price Williamson, a son of Peter Williamson of Houston and Sandra Williamson of Hagerstown, Md.
An August wedding is planned.
Miss McGlynn, 25 years old, graduated from William Smith College.
She is an assistant manager of the J. Crew store in Queenstown, Md.
Her father is a senior partner in the Newark law firm of Stryker, Tams &amp; Dill.
Her mother, Victoria McGlynn, is the vice president of Travelong, a travel consulting concern in Summit, N.J.


Why the Heartland Has Math Smarts
THESE ARE states not often heard from and not anywhere near Silicon Valley, Bell Labs or Route 128.
But where do students do best on standardized math tests?
In North Dakota, Montana, Iowa, Nebraska, Minnesota and Wisconsin.
It is in this belt that America's student performance comes closest to that of the rest of the industrialized world, at least as measured by the National Assessment of Educational Progress, a Federal Government project.
Last year, having tested a random sample in each participating state for the first time in any subject, the project published comparisons of mathematics proficiency among public school eighth-graders in 40 states.
What's Their Secret?
Ever since, these six northern and rural states clustered at the top of the nation's map have been asked -- repeatedly -- what they are doing right.
Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan of New York, writing on The New York Times Op-Ed page, even suggested that since proximity to Canada is a much better predictor of math test performance than per-pupil expenditures on education, "disadvantaged states should establish summer capitals in the Thousand Islands of the St. Lawrence River."


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-17  ASSENT ON WORLD ENVIRONMENT


Homemade M.B.A.'s For MCI
ON MONDAYS and Wednesdays, just after the workday ends, 35 managers at MCI Communications Corporation leave their offices, walk down the plush halls of the MCI office building and converge upon one small classroom where they find 12 tables, 2 blackboards and a Fordham professor.
MCI and Fordham's Graduate School of Business Administration are running a fully accredited M.B.A. program, but with a twist.
The program has been customized to meet MCI's needs by incorporating telecommunications and other issues that concern MCI into Fordham's standard M.B.A. curriculum.
And instead of MCI employees traveling to Fordham's Lincoln Center campus, Fordham professors come to MCI's mid-Manhattan offices.


Object Lessons


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Brown; Despite Appeals to Intellect, Brown Touches the Emotions
The baby in a pink sweater crawled onto the stage at Syracuse University as former Gov.
Edmund G. Brown Jr. of California was calling for a revolution to throw out the bums who he says have turned the world into an "armed arsenal" and the planet into a "stinking junkyard."
Taking a page from Fran Lebowitz, the humorist who wrote that children are not much fun because they can't lend you money, Mr.
Brown perked up when he noticed that the baby's father had tucked a dollar bill in her sweater as a campaign contribution.


The Candidates, on April 7; For George Bush and Bill Clinton
The New York Presidential primary election has rarely meant much.
Often, all the suspense has been squeezed out by the momentum of prior results.
This year, New York counts.
If Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas runs strongly, he will virtually lock up the Democratic nomination.
If former Gov.
Jerry Brown of California does well, he will strengthen his politics of anti-politics.
An ambiguous outcome could encourage dissatisfied voters to keep shopping.


CAMPUS LIFE: Skidmore; Sports Clinic For Children Helps a Team
Saturday nights in Saratoga Springs, N.Y., have become somehing of an event for local children who have been flocking to "Kids Night Out," a sports clinic for youngsters that raises money for Skidmore College's men's varsity baseball team.
Three Saturday nights a semester, parents of boys and girls ages 6 to 14 pay $7 for their children to receive four action-packed hours of instruction and free play in activities ranging from basketball and swimming to dancing and weight training.


Linda J. Vigo Marries on L.I.
Linda Jeanne Vigo, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Carl F. Vigo of Plainview, L.I., was married there yesterday to Robert James Farrell Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Farrell of Tenafly, N.J.
The Rev.
Hugh D. Cannon performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Pius X Church.
Mrs.
Farrell, 27 years old, graduated from the State University of New York at Oneonta and received an M.B.A. from Baruch College.
Her father is a tax administrator for the Town of Oyster Bay, L.I., for which her mother, Marie Vigo, is an administrative assistant.


Virginia Women Unable To Stop Time or Stanford
There was barely enough time to take a breath, to even look at the basket, but it was the only hope left for the Virginia women's team today.
Enough time to shoot. Not enough time to dribble.


Works by a Vanished Bolivian Painter
IN the Ben Shahn Galleries at William Paterson College, the situation is one of extremes.
There is a show by Alejandro Mario Yllanes, a Bolivian painter who vanished in 1946 after winning, but not claiming, a Guggenheim Fellowship.
Also on view is a raggedy display by 16 New Jersey artists, "Drawing From Beginning to End," together with landscapes by Thomas Burke.
Yllanes began his career at the age of 19, in 1930, with an exhibition in his birthplace, Oruro.
There followed shows in La Paz and other South American capitals as well as in Mexico City.
His work exists in several public collections, among them the Museum of Modern Art, in Manhattan, and he received critical attention in numerous periodicals.


Earning Airline Miles Without Leaving the Ground
TRAVELERS no longer need to fly to earn free airline trips.
Increasingly, people are earning frequent-flier mileage by eating in restaurants, shopping at department stores, staying at hotels or making long-distance telephone calls.
Only about one-third of the frequent-flier mileage built up last year came from miles actually flown, according to Randy Peterson, who operates an insurance service to protect frequent-flier miles.
And now, two new programs are being offered by companies that are not even in the airline business.


Adventure Fitness
To the Editor: Betsy Wade's article, "Fitness for Active Trips" (March 1), reminded me of an experience on a hiking-climbing tour in Switzerland with Ryder Walker Alpine Adventure.
The first day I insisted on taking a Level 5 (strenuous) tour.
This was in spite of some rather pointed questioning by Peter Walker, the leader.
By midmorning, I knew I had made a mistake and we were still headed up.
I finished the day but passed up a great dinner in favor of a long rest.


Pincay Is Injured LAFFIT PINCAY Jr., the second-leading jockey in career winners, suffered a broken left collarbone yesterday at Santa Anita and will be out for at least a month, a track spokesman said. (AP)


Growing Passions
OBSESSION.
So reads the bold-face title on a flyer advertising a weekend conference.
Closer inspection reveals it is being sponsored not by the American Psychological Association, but by a group of rock gardeners in New Jersey.
Do not think, however, that the participants are unqualified to speak on this mania.
Mark McDonough, of Pepperell, Mass., grows over 125 different species of alliums.
James W. Waddick, of Kansas City, Mo., has 200 varieties of bamboo.
Nancy Goodwin, of Hillsborough, N.C., has spent 29 years cultivating cyclamen.
And Geoffrey Charlesworth and Norman Singer each start over 2,000 kinds of seed every year in their combined garden in Sandisfield, Mass.
These gardeners are not interested in a cure for their deviant behavior; they are simply in search of kindred souls.
The flyer concludes, "Bring your obsession to our session; we understand."
Not all readers, or even all gardeners, will understand this kind of single-mindedness.
Most of the lavishly illustrated books of the past 10 years have emphasized the more photogenic side of horticulture, where gardening is presented as a kind of exterior decorating, with plants the details of an outdoor chintz.
Many novices are more concerned with color schemes than species, and interested only in the limited number of plants that will survive their uncertain ministrations.
But there is another world, in which a passionate plantsman may wait two years for a new fritillary to germinate, where an excited amateur may cross-pollinate hellebores by hand or try to grow the native plants of New Zealand on a New York City roof.


Constructive Advice
Elizabeth Browning Jackson, a descendant of Robert Browning, is startlingly unpoetic when she recalls having work done on her home.
Her first response: Get a pretend husband.
Jackson, a rug and furniture designer in Westport, Mass., converted a Quaker meetinghouse into a studio and added a wing for living quarters when she was still single, which put her at a disadvantage when dealing with elusive and macho male contractors.
She did, however, learn more than a thing or two as the job progressed -- or didn't.
She checked not only a contractor's references, but other work he'd done.
"People were willing to show me," she says.
Jackson eventually found herself pleasantly ensconced in the renovation, deciding everything from the style of the addition to its colors.
Although she primarily used shades of gray for "a contemporary Shaker look," she says, "I wanted Caribbean color to brighten it all up." She painted the upper choir loft hyacinth blue and chose coral for the front hallway.


The New Jersey Tomato Falls on Hard Times
WALTER KATONA, a third-generation vegetable farmer in this Burlington County community, stood at the open end of his huge maintenance shed on a recent rainy day, gazing out over his 2,000-acre farm.
He unhappily pointed toward an area in which he had hoped to grow tomatoes, but which will be planted this year in grains.
Mr.
Katona is not alone.
On Feb. 24, the last major tomato processor in the state announced that it would not buy some 28,000 tons of New Jersey processing tomatoes, about 80 percent of the anticipated production.


Affiliates Fear Bitter Fight By Ex-Head of United Way
The United Way of America scandal has taken on the trappings of a bitter divorce, with William Aramony, the ousted president, denouncing the critical report issued by his successors as "replete with lies" and vowing to fight to retain $4.4 million in pension benefits.
For those most vulnerable, the local United Way affiliates and their member charities that Mr.
Aramony helped put together over 22 years into the nation's leading charity network, the prospect of a vituperative fight between the movement's now-tarnished former leader and a new leader struggling with an organization in crisis added one more worry to their already full plate.


Ms. Dulberg, Banker, to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Jesse Dulberg of East Brunswick, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Andrea Leslie Dulberg to Leigh Scott Platte, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Murray Platte of North Woodmere, L.I.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Dulberg, 31 years old, is a vice president of Citibank in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from the State University of New York at Binghamton and received a law degree from the University of Michigan.
Her father is a consultant with the engineering firm of Ross-Clarke Associates in Port Washington, L.I.
Her mother, Eleanor Dulberg, is the librarian at the Pine Grove Manor School in Franklin Township, N.J.


Mechanisms to Make Chapter 11 Work Better
To the Editor:
Although the authors of "Time to Scuttle Chapter 11" raise some valid concerns in their criticism of bankruptcy reorganizations, they fail to point out that mechanisms already exist within Chapter 11 to curb abuses of the reorganization procedure.
For example, at any time in the proceedings, the company is subject to petitions by creditors and others to force a liquidation.


Life Before Gorbachev
To the Editor:
I am delighted that Melor Sturua finds my book "What Went Wrong With Perestroika" to be "useful, even successful" (Feb. 2).
But he misconstrues several of my arguments.


Review/Fashion; Alaia for the Slim and Curvaceous
Azzedine Alaia does things his own way, showing his collections months after other designers, and shipping his clothes at the end of the selling season.
But it doesn't matter.
Women who like to pour themselves into his curvaceous jackets and slinky knit dresses will buy them at any time.
"There's a kind of die-hard customer who keeps calling to find out when the clothes are coming in," said Barbara Weiser, co-owner of Charivari.
"The Alaia customer won't settle for anybody else."


Review/Film; From France, a Microcosm of Society Gone Wild
"Delicatessen" was shown as part of the 1991 New York Film Festival.
Following are excerpts from Janet Maslin's review, which appeared in The New York Times on Oct. 5, 1991.
The film, in French with English subtitles, opens today at the Lincoln Plaza Cinemas 1, Broadway at 63d Street.
In the studiously zany French fantasy film "Delicatessen," apocalyptic rubble and 1940's American kitsch make for a peculiar mix.
The setting of the title is part of a half-demolished apartment house that stands amid unexplained postwar devastation, in a world where lentils have become currency and underground guerrillas called "troglodists" refer to apartment-dwellers as "surfacers." Despite such apparent hardship, an antic spirit prevails at the apartment house in question, which is presided over by a butcher (Jean-Claude Dreyfus) with Sweeney Todd-like predilections.
"I'm a butcher, but I don't mince words," he says.


Lisa Suisman To Wed in June
Mr. and Mrs.
John R. Suisman of West Hartford, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Lisa Ann Suisman to Edward Vilas Parsons, a son of Jeffrey and Peggy Parsons of Wilmette, Ill.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Suisman, 25 years old, is an admissions officer at Phillips Exeter Academy in Exeter, N.H.
She graduated from Middlebury College, as did her fiance.
Her father is the vice president of Rajco, a real-estate development and investment company in Hartford.
Her mother, Kathryn Suisman, is an antiques dealer in West Hartford.


Club Med's New Columbus Isle
Club Med is opening a resort village in the Bahamas on the island of San Salvador, where Columbus is believed by many to have made his first landfall in the New World.
The village, Columbus Isle, will open on Oct. 12 to coincide with the Columbus quincentennial anniversary.


Braves and Reds Should Set a Scorching Pace
This preview was prepared and written by Murray Chass.
Teams are presented in alphabetical order and the starting lineups are his projections.
His probable starters for the Mets appear on page 3.
Relief pitchers listed are the closers.
Staff predictions for the teams' order of finish in each division appears on page 6.
Atlanta Braves
The pitchers who performed so brilliantly last October will not finish second to any staff.
They are the people the Braves will count on to keep pace with the Reds in what could be a scintillating race.


Cultural Baggage
AN acquaintance was telling me about the joys of rediscovering her ethnic and religious heritage.
"I know exactly what my ancestors were doing 2,000 years ago," she said, eyes gleaming with enthusiasm, "and
I can do the same things now."
Then she leaned forward and inquired politely, "And what is your ethnic background, if I may ask?"
"None," I said, that being the first word in line to get out of my mouth.
Well, not "none," I backtracked.
Scottish, English, Irish -- that was something, I supposed.
Too much Irish to qualify as a WASP; too much of the hated English to warrant a "Kiss Me, I'm Irish" button; plus there are a number of dead ends in the family tree due to adoptions, missing records, failing memories and the like.
I was blushing by this time.
Did "none" mean I was rejecting my heritage out of Anglo-Celtic self-hate?
Or was I revealing a hidden ethnic chauvinism in which the Britannically derived serve as a kind of neutral standard compared with the ethnic "others"?


Corrections
A chart last Sunday with the At Work column listing 16 companies with the largest underfunded pension liabilities erroneously included Harnishfeger Industries, because of misinformation supplied by the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation.
Harnishfeger Industries, whose underfunding amounts to $27.1 million, not $75 million, should not have been on the list.


East Orange Journal; Volunteers Make Textbooks That Open the World to the Blind
IN the basement of the mansion that houses the Essex chapter of the American Red Cross of Northern New Jersey, on the corner of Washington Street and Park Avenue, two large rooms were abuzz with activity.
Leona Coon, bent in concentration, was manipulating a device reminiscent of a waffle iron, impressing a text into a sheet of plastic.


Temple Ponders Selling Parsonage
SHOULD a clergyman be permitted to purchase the home he is provided as "parsonage" from the congregation he serves?
If so, what is a fair deal?
This question will be addressed on Wednesday at Temple Emanuel in Great Neck, when the Reform congregation votes on a proposal to allow Rabbi Robert Widom and his wife to purchase the house they have lived in for more than 20 years.
The house, owned by the congregation, is at 10 Bluebird Lane in the Village of Saddle Rock, in a neighborhood where house prices start at well above $400,000.


Michigan Comes Back With Help of Sub
For most of this season, the only game instructions that James Voskuil heard were the Michigan coaches' exhortations for him to keep his head up and to stay ready.
The 6-foot-7-inch junior had started at the end of last season and done a good job at small forward.
But when the Wolverines brought in their now famous class of Fabulous Five freshmen, Voskuil was relegated to the bench.


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ended March 21  MANHATTAN  Chelsea 712,500
35 West 23d Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 3,500-sq.-ft. condo; terrace, private roof rights; common charge $650, 100% tax-abated (Broker: Corcoran Group)  Gramercy Park Area 1.95 million
141 East 19th Street  4-bedroom, 3-bath, single-family, 4 1/2-story townhouse; elevator, dining room, family room, library, powder room, 3 fireplaces, vaulted ceilings, hospitality suite on top floor, 20- by 75-ft. lot; taxes $12,034 (Broker: Ambrose Mar-Elia)  TriBeCa 499,999
181 Hudson Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 2,040-sq.-ft. penthouse condo in a renovated building; mezzanine level, 2 exposures, Hudson River view, 1,800 sq. ft. of private roof rights; common charge $398, taxes $3,044 (Broker: Island Homes New York)  Upper East Side 615,000
970 Park Avenue (83d St.)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,425-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; manned elevator, dining room, 11-ft. ceilings; maintenance $1,200, 35% tax-deductible (Broker: David Day Realty)(  West Village 415,000
158 West 11th Street  Single-family, 4-story, brick town house in a former stable; one bedroom and bath, dining area, roof deck, 24- by 22-ft. irregular lot; taxes $3,900 (Broker: Eychner Associates)  BRONX  Baychester 175,000
4620 Wilder Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, single-family, detached, brick house; dining room, hospitality suite in finished basement, private driveway, 26- by 74-ft. lot; taxes $1,050 (Broker: Century 21/Best Match Real Estate)  Gun Hill Road Area 195,000
910 Duncan Street  2-family, semi-attached, brick house; dinette in upper unit; 2 bedrooms, 1 bath in each; finished basement, 1-car garage, 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,170 (Broker: Tryax of the Bronx)  BROOKLYN  Canarsie 187,500
612 East 85th Street  2-family, attached, brick house; 3 bedrooms in primary unit; 2 bedrooms in other; 1 bath, dining room in each; finished basement, new roof and boiler, private, 2-car parking, 19- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,650 (Broker: Sure Sale Realty)  Park Slope 253,000
101 8th Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 1,600-sq.-ft. duplex co-op in a prewar building; dining room, private entry terrace, beamed-ceilings, stained-glass windows, rear deck; maintenance $625, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: Brooklyn Properties of 7th Avenue)  Sheepshead Bay 256,000
2614 Voorhies Avenue  2-family, detached, brick house; 3 bedrooms in primary unit; 2 bedrooms in other; 1 bath, dining room in each; hospitality suite on first floor, 40- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,500 (Broker: Jacob Gold Realty)  QUEENS  Bayside 182,000
201-04 33d Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, single-family, semi-attached colonial; dining room, remodeled kitchen, semi-finished basement, new windows, 2-car garage, 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $900 (Broker: Value Lane Realty)  Forest Hills 68,000
69-10 Yellowstone Boulevard  (Mayflower)  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 750-sq.-ft. co-op in a prewar building; part-time doorman, dinette; maintenance $412, 44% tax-deductible (Broker: Kraham Realty)  STATEN ISLAND  Grasmere 171,000
28 Whitney Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, single-family, detached ranch; dining room, recreation room, 1-car garage, lake rights on Cameron Lake, 60- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,300 (Broker: Salmon Real Estate)  St.
George 55,000
350 Richmond Terrace  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 750-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 2 exposures, Manhattan skyline view; maintenance $439, 39% tax-deductible (Broker: Gateway Realty)


In Short/Baseball
THE GREAT ALL-TIME BASEBALL RECORD BOOK By Joseph L. Reichler.
Revised and updated by Ken Samelson.
Macmillan, $23.


British Candidates Still Rely on the Hustings
When Britons vote on Thursday in 651 Parliamentary districts, they will be casting ballots for candidates who, in theory, have won their confidence the old-fashioned way.
Barred from buying time on television, and limited by law to spending no more than the equivalent of about $15,000 apiece, anyone who wants a seat in the House of Commons has no alternative but to campaign vigorously at the grass roots, knocking on doors, shaking hands and handing out leaflets.


Ms. Fall to Wed Robert Dickson
Mr. and Mrs.
Alexander Fall of Cheverly, Md., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Jane Murray Fall, to Dr.
Robert Brent Dickson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Dickson of Fairfax, Va.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Fall, 42, is a clinical nurse specialist in oncology at the Washington Hospital Center in Washington.
She graduated from St.
Mary-of-the-Woods College and the University of Maryland, and has a master's degree in nursing from Yale University.
Her father, who is retired, was an employment security specialist with the Labor Department.
Her mother, Madlyn G. Fall, also retired, was an administrative aide at the House of Representatives.


College vs. Community: The Civil Wars
IN THE MIDDLE of the night, residents in a toney Coral Gables, Fla., neighborhood have been awakened by University of Miami students celebrating too loudly.
The residents have grumbled to city officials about finding fraternity members passed out on their front lawns, apparently from too much revelry the night before.
But the breaking point came with the university's proposed expansion under its master plan.
After three years of negotiations, Coral Gables officials approved the plan last December; residents, however, did not.
Last month they filed a lawsuit in Dade County Circuit Court, charging that the master plan violates the zoning code by proposing dormitory-style housing near single-family homes.


At Work; Is the Forecast Too Good to Be True?
Fabian Linden says he is known around the Conference Board, the business-research organization, as Mr.
Doom and Gloom.
For one thing, he is in charge of polling consumer confidence, which has lately been more of an oxymoron than an index.
"I can't be accused of being an irrepressible optimist," he said in a recent interview.
Nevertheless, Mr.
Linden is author of a report, released late last month by the Conference Board, that seems to contradict the pessimistic figures that cascade across his desk every month as well as the pessimistic prophecies from America's departments of economics.
"The Great Income Reshuffle" predicts that the 90's will be a period of economic growth, expanded personal and household income and increased opportunity.
"The idea that we are losing the middle class and the American dream is tarnished has no basis in reality," Mr.
Linden said.


Computer Science Is Going Down
A great deal of attention is paid to computers as tools in education, but less to computers as a subject.
Though computers are increasingly important in society, and though the computer industry generates thousands of jobs and hundreds of billions of dollars a year, the number of students majoring in computer science in college is declining in the United States.
The cause for the decline is not clear, but the effects are already being felt.
The International Business Machines Corporation says its own internal hiring needs for computer science Ph.D's is greater than the entire supply produced by American universities each year.
Software companies say they cannot find enough top-caliber programmers.
Universities are turning to foreign-trained computer science faculty members.
Small businesses say they cannot find workers with solid computing skills.


Galette as a Finishing Touch
A SIMPLE round of pastry topped with fruit makes for a quick yet impressive dessert.
These galettes, as they are usually known, can be made as individual pastries or as one large pizza-like dessert to be cut in wedges.
Sometimes the fruit is baked on the pastry.
And the ones with baked fruit can be served warm or at room temperature.


'Edward the Second' at Yale Rep
ALONGSIDE a 14th-century procession of political and royal atrocities, hostilities, banishments and slayings, as well as international intrigue and other displays of power, treason and violence -- all comically unrelieved -- Christopher Marlowe's "Edward the Second" is a decadent study of a married king's flaunted homosexual obsession, Edward's for Gaveston.
It is this flamboyant and radical aspect of Marlowe's play that the film director Derek Jarman uses, with much explicit sex and gore, to turn a 16th-century history play into a modern political statement about the persecution of gay people.


Free Baby Sitting Fills Tables at Restaurant
FEW businesses have escaped the pinch of the recession, and for local restaurants things are particularly dismal on the traditionally slow first three nights of the week.
But one recent Tuesday evening at Rockwells, in Bedford Hills, a line of customers was backed up to the door.
What is the big draw?
It's a novel concept that has struck a nerve with Westchester parents: free baby-sitting at the restaurant.
On Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday nights, from 5 to and 9 o'clock, the management at Rockwells transforms an auxiliary dining room into a nursery school.
Doll carts and toy cars are spread across the floor; a toy kitchen is in the corner.
There are storybooks on one table and arts and crafts projects on another.


Dina Flaminio and Kelly Wright to Wed in June
Mr. and Mrs.
Robert D. Flaminio of Clifton, N.J., have announced June wedding plans for their daughter Dina T. Flaminio and F. Kelly Wright, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Andrew R. Wright Jr. of North Arlington, N.J.


Father of the Pill
THE PILL, PYGMY CHIMPS, AND DEGAS' HORSE
The Autobiography of Carl Djerassi.
By Carl Djerassi.
Illustrated. 319 pp.
New York: Basic Books. $25.


Kristan Dana Burkhardt Affianced
January wedding plans have been announced for Kristan Dana Burkhardt, the daughter of Jon Burkhardt of Potomac, Md., and Marilyn Burkhardt of Los Angeles, and Adam Troy Goldfein, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
James Goldfein of New Hempstead, N.Y.
Miss Burkhardt, 23 years old, is the health promotion associate at the Morgan Guaranty Trust Company in New York.
She graduated from Emory University, as did her fiance, and is studying for a doctorate in health education at Columbia University.
Her father is the vice president of Ecosometrics Inc., a transportation planning company in Bethesda, Md.
Her mother is a lawyer in Los Angeles.


Is Bernstein Passe On Television? Only in America.
Leonard Bernstein's landmark Young People's Concerts have at last returned to television, but not in the United States.
From 1954 to 1972, Bernstein's shows for young people, along with his "Omnibus" and New York Philharmonic specials, were cultural flagships on all three American television networks.
The Young People's Concerts have now been refurbished, and rebroadcasts have begun abroad.
But in the United States, where Sony Classical hopes to release 25 of them on videocassette as early as September, a television berth has proved hard to find.
This marginalization of Leonard Bernstein, of programs once a mainstay of commercial television yet now potentially exiled from even noncommercial television, encapsulates the marginalization of classical music in America today.


Prime Area Town-House Sales Rebound
TOWN-HOUSE sales in Greenwich Village, the Upper East Side and other prime Manhattan and Brooklyn neighborhoods have rebounded after a three-year downward drift.
In recent reports, brokerage companies said that last year brought their highest volume of sales since 1988, when the phenomenal price rises of the mid-80's for town houses shifted into reverse.
Many of the buyers in the market in 1991 were responding, the realtors said, to softening prices and the start of the drop in mortgage interest rates.
But practical considerations aside, the upsurge in sales also is strong evidence that town-house living still has a strong appeal in a city where space is a precious commodity and most people must live in apartments with no more charm than a shoebox.


Mr. Berry, Say Hello To Ludwig
After making the error recently of referring to "the Beatles song 'Roll Over Beethoven,' " I was justly taken to task by readers.
I had perpetrated the journalistic equivalent of "Roll Over Chuck Berry." I had casually referred to interpreters as authors, had neglected to notice that the song's edgy swagger was Berry's style, not the Beatles'.
It was a bit like referring to Brahms's Piano Quartet in G minor as Schoenberg's, simply because Schoenberg created an orchestral transcription.
But the real problem was that this error occurred while I was taking the Kronos Quartet to task for cheapening the works it touched, "both high and low." How did I have the nerve to slur the low, one reader asked, when my snobbery was accompanied by ignorance?
In my slip of the mind, I had, of course, not slurred the low at all; I merely noted that a distinction exists.
But that distinction is now a matter of great controversy.
Debate over high and low may be the fundamental esthetic argument of our age.
Why isn't Chuck Berry ("Johnny B. Goode," "My Ding-a-Ling") as important as Beethoven ("Fidelio," Op. 111 Piano Sonata)?
Why shouldn't Madonna's videos be treated with the same respect as any of Donizetti's potboilers?
What makes the popular culture of our time any less worthy than contemporary musical creations that can't find an audience?


POSTINGS: In Historic Structures; A Cornucopia of Events
Dust has no chance to settle on some of the most historic sites in New York City.
The spring calendar shows some 50 events at the houses, churches, synagogues, museums and cultural institutions that make up the Metropolitan Historic Structures Association.
An exhibit titled "The Bronx Bombers -- The New York Yankees: Their Home and History" opens Thursday at the 234-year-old Valentine-Varian House, 3266 Bainbridge Avenue, between Van Cortlandt Avenue East and East 208th Street, in the Bronx.
On Friday, "Alice Austen and the Fair: The World's Columbian Exposition" opens in the house where Austen, a celebrated photographer, lived for nearly eight decades.
It is at 2 Hylan Boulevard, between Bay and Edgewater Streets, on Staten Island.


Good Intention Gone Wrong
To the Editor:
F.
Murray Abraham's suggestion to use Broadway theaters for children's shows in the morning is a good intention gone wrong.
It doesn't work.
As someone who has been involved in children's theater for many years, I have seen this practice in Off Broadway houses too many times to think that it has any merit.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Media; Brown and Clinton's New Tactic: Attacking Each Other's Attacks
The day after Gov.
Bill Clinton broadcast a set of commercials attacking Edmund G. Brown Jr. and then partly retreated from them, Mr.
Brown responded by calling his rival "the prince of sleaze" while at the same time trying to distance himself from attack advertisements that his own campaign had produced.
In several pointed exchanges yesterday, both Mr.
Brown and Mr.
Clinton denounced the other for broadcasting unfair commercials, all the while making sure that millions of New Yorkers would hear their new and increasingly biting criticisms of each other on the evening news.


Separation Anxiety
WHEN A SMALL university is situated in a small town, the relationship between them can be defined by a few individuals, especially if they are extraordinary people.
That seems to be the case for Southwestern University and Georgetown, a little town in central Texas.
With just 1,200 students, Southwestern is tiny compared with public institutions like the University of Texas at Austin, 30 miles away, which has an enrollment of some 47,500.
In Georgetown, however, with a population of just 14,800, Southwestern is the largest employer, the biggest budget and the most extensive landowner.


Adjusting to the Town House
BUYING a town house remains an alluring alternative to apartment living for many New Yorkers, but owners quickly learn that a house is a quite different kind of home.
One challenge is living in vertical space.
Others are managing security, deliveries and repairs without doormen or a resident superintendent.


The Collective Mind
To Janet Roberts, the tiny age cracks that mar her collection of Chinese Export porcelain are no more disturbing than laugh lines on the face of an old friend.
"A lot of people would scoff at what I have," says Roberts, a semiretired theatrical and literary agent whose small Manhattan apartment is crammed with antiques.
"But to me, it's all so gallant. I feel that if these pieces have lasted 200 years, they deserve to be loved."
Purists might also look askance at the iconoclastic habits of Ivan and Marilynn Karp, who collect everything from washboards and mechanical toys to such bizarre items as "naughty Nellies" (19th-century bootjacks in the form of scantily clad women) and Prohibition-era flasks in the shape of dancing couples.


Sorting Out Vines, Annual and Perennial
THERE is something rewarding about having a vine growing in the garden.
When put in the right place, a vine can do wonders to screen out something unsightly or provide a dramatic upright statement.
The best part, most vines grow easily without much tending.
Annual vines are the easiest to start with.
They last for one year and are then killed off by fall frosts.
These vines can be temporary solutions.
If the look is not right for the place in the garden, then the experiment lasted for only a year, and another planting scheme can be tried.


The Clearest Eye
PLAYING IN THE DARK
Whiteness and the Literary Imagination.
By Toni Morrison. 91 pp.
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.


Preserving Performances
To the Editor:
Jeffrey O. Milman's letter to the editor  [ March 15 ]  in response to F. Murray Abraham's article misleadingly claims that "thousands of hours of stunning performances are lost forever each year due to producers' shortsightedness" because the shows are not videotaped.


TALES FROM THE BABY FACTORY
As I read Hopkins's article, I cried for those couples.
I am a veteran of infertility procedures myself, and these stories brought back all the feelings of desperation and helplessness my husband and I endured for three and a half years.
While that may not seem like a long time, I can assure you it seemed like an eternity.
Our lives were consumed with having a baby.
It became so intense that I, too,took a leave of absence (and eventually resigned) from a successful career that I loved.
The emotional roller coaster and physical trauma all but incapacitated me.


Ecology Fuels Energy Studies
IN THE 1950's, when oil was cheap, the United States was an exporter and families still outnumbered cars, energy was not part of the standard elementary school curriculum, unless civil defense drills -- putting a duffel coat over one's head and crouching under the desk while waiting for nuclear attack -- can be considered a lesson in high-energy physics.
By 1980, though, the United States had weathered two oil shortages and children were sometimes drafted as energy wardens, telling parents to turn down the thermostat, turn off lights and drive slower.
What's School Role?
Today, the threat of both nuclear war and oil shortages are fading into the past.
What role is left for energy in the schools?


Galette as a Finishing Touch
A SIMPLE round of pastry topped with fruit makes for a quick yet impressive dessert.
These galettes, as they are usually known, can be made as individual pastries or as one large pizza-like dessert to be cut in wedges.
Sometimes the fruit is baked on the pastry.
And the ones with baked fruit can be served warm or at room temperature.


Soccer Still In Back Seat
To the Sports Editor:
After reading Keir Radnedge's "Stop Sniping. U.S. Deserves World Cup" (The Times, March 22), I realized that I must continue my sniping at an even greater rate.
There is no exposure to world-class soccer in this country, and that is the bottom line.
On weekends, Americans are bombarded on television with golf, bowling, tennis, etc., but there's nothing on the major networks about the most loved sport in the world.
Even the American women, who won the first women's World Cup, got little or no coverage.
This was disgraceful and insulting.


'They X-Rayed My Head and Found Nothing'
DIZ
Dizzy Dean and Baseball During the Great Depression.
By Robert Gregory.
Illustrated. 402 pp.
New York: Viking. $22.
OL' DIZ
A Biography of Dizzy Dean.
By Vince Staten.
Illustrated. 326 pp.
New York: HarperCollins Publishers. $22.50.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Candidate's Record; Brown Opened Doors but Failed to Build Coalitions
Edmund G. Brown Jr. left an unmistakable imprint on California in his two terms as Governor, with a record of far-sighted achievement when he could realize his own vision, but grand failure in matters requiring him to cooperate with other branches of government.
There is broad consensus here, where the Brown legacy can still provoke emotional debate, that the Governor's greatest accomplishment was opening the doors of government to women and minorities and truly integrating the state's highest offices, boards, commissions and judiciary.
Mr.
Brown served from 1975 through 1982, and his appointees have put in motion pioneering air quality standards, energy conservation programs and consumer protections that became models for the rest of the nation.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Mirth by the Bunch
ANYONE looking for a bunch of clowns has only to travel to New Hyde Park on a Thursday night.
"Any clown can come to our meetings," said Steve Reichel of Centerport, whose answering machine announces you have reached Mr.
Reichel's carpentry business and the home of Rickels the clown.


Bridge
The winners of major national team championships are usually players who have been there before.
It was very different a week ago in Pasadena, Calif., when three of the winners of the Vanderbilt Knockout Team Championship reached these heights for the first time.
The captain and sponsor of the team was Andy Goodman of San Francisco, a 45-year-old investment manager.
As a young man he learned the game in Manhattan, and played frequently at the famous Mayfair Club, long a haven for rising young stars.
He made his first serious effort to win a national title a year ago.


Universities Grope For Lost Image
WITH ONE of New Jersey's state colleges named for his family, it is only natural that former Gov.
Thomas H. Kean, now the president of Drew University, should be more sensitive than most university officials to the public's image of higher education.
Recently Mr.
Kean addressed 400 educators in Philadelphia and leveled with them about how colleges and universities, including Kean College of New Jersey, are now perceived by the public.
Ivory Tower Besieged
"Here is the reality, plain and simple," he told his audience.
"Our ivory tower is under siege. People are questioning our mission and questioning who we are. They claim we cost too much, spend carelessly, teach poorly, plan myopically, and when we are questioned, we act defensively."


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Clinton; Bruised Clinton Tries to Regain New York Poise
When Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas was asked yesterday if he still thought of Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo as "mean," he responded with a ritual answer about not wanting "to reopen old wounds."
Then, in the tone of a combat veteran, he added, "But I tell you, after what I've seen in the last two weeks, every now and then, the Governor of New York ought to have to be a little mean to survive in this atmosphere."


The Two Macedonias
Greece, the country that introduced Europe to comedy and tragedy, now leads its European Community partners into a shameful diplomatic farce.
It's all in the name of the name of Macedonia.
Or rather, of two Macedonias.
One Macedonia is a tiny, democratic and unthreatening former Yugoslav republic wedged between Albania, Bulgaria, Greece and Serbia.
It has no army and desperately seeks to distance itself from a widening Balkan war.
It proclaimed itself independent last November.
But its hopes for recognition have been frustrated by Athens.


Union Chief Proposes Creation of 'Master Teacher' Program
Hoping to jar stalled contract talks for New York City's teachers, Sandra Feldman, president of the United Federation of Teachers, yesterday proposed the creation of a "master teacher" program to deal with the thorny issue of gauging teacher productivity.
The union has opposed proposals for merit raises based on reviews by a teacher's supervisor, and supported salary increases solely on the basis of seniority and the number of course credits accrued past a master's degree.


Yankees Take First Round
On a day when the Mets broke their code of silence, the Yankees had the final word, defeating their crosstown rivals, 6-4, before 26,038 spectators at Yankee Stadium in the first of two Mayor's Trophy games.
On a chilly but sunny afternoon, the Yankees got three hits and a run batted in from Bernie Williams, and two hits, a run batted in and a walk from Jesse Barfield.
The Yankees are attempting to trade Barfield to create playing time for Williams.
The Yanks also got two hits and an r.b.i. from Don Mattingly.
Williams, who had three singles, also reached base on one of two errors committed by Mets shortstop Kevin Elster, who is still having problems with his right shoulder.


Wall Street; A New Shocker From the Folks at Orion Pictures
The glaring irony of the 64th Annual Academy Awards Oscar show last week, was, of course, Orion Pictures.
Its "Silence of the Lambs" swept up awards for best picture, best actress, best actor, best director and best adapted screenplay, while its financial future languished in a New York bankruptcy court.
Details of a proposed stock purchase agreement by New Line Cinema Corporation to bring Orion out of bankruptcy suggest that Orion shareholders may be in for a bitter surprise.
The new stock may be valued in pennies, not dollars.
At Friday's closing price of $2 a share, the new company would be worth more than $1 billion.


Ex-Bronx Politician Nears Date for Parole
Stanley M. Friedman, the former Bronx Democratic leader who was convicted of Federal racketeering charges in 1986, has been released from prison to a halfway house in Manhattan.
Once one of the most powerful politicians in the city, Mr.
Friedman, 54 years old, is to be paroled on July 3 after serving four years of a 12-year sentence for racketeering, conspiracy and mail-fraud, Federal prison officials said.


What Aristotle and Cicero Tell Us About the Fate of the Mafiosi
To the Editor:
Robert Stone decries the decline of an ancient code of honor and self-sacrifice shown in betrayals by Mafiosi.
He states: "a Mafioso's self-image as a Man of Honor bound him to a tradition with some heroic pretensions, one deeply rooted in the Mediterranean past" (Op-Ed, March 15).


Review/Opera; 2 Rarities From The Young Rossini
The Rossini bicentennial celebration this year is not likely to elicit as many performances of early Rossini as the Mozart bicentennial last year did of early Mozart.
That is all to the good, for there is less to be learned from the contrast with later works than in Mozart's case: Rossini's early operas already contain most of the elements of the mature composer's work, albeit less fully developed.
Still, there are fresh and individual delights to be had in those youthful creations as well, and it is pleasant to encounter an occasional program like the Rossini double bill the John Brownlee Opera Theater is presenting at the Manhattan School of Music: "L'Occasione Fa il Ladro" ("Opportunity Makes the Thief") and "La Scala di Seta" ("The Silken Ladder"), two one-act comic operas from 1812.
Not surprisingly, both plots involve amorous deceits and misadventures, and in each case the pairings shake out properly at the end.


Technology; A View of Earth Never Seen Before
Imagine floating 500 miles above Earth in a glass-bottomed spaceship.
The ship is traveling 100,000 miles an hour as it circles the planet in less than three minutes.
The view is perpetually in sunlight and cloudless, so passengers can see Earth as if the continents were lifted from the pages of a gigantic atlas.
With public space flight still a distant fantasy, such a view of Earth is possible only with a new video exhibit created by multimedia specialists and an architectural firm here called Cambridge Seven.
The exhibit, created by combining satellite photographs with innovative video and computer technology, was produced for the exposition that is to begin next month in Genoa, Italy, to celebrate the 500th anniversary of Christopher Columbus's voyage.
The exhibit, which took 10 months and $300,000 to produce, brought together artists and graphic designers.


Refinancing
To the Editor:
Your article on Feb. 2 headed "Jumping the Barriers to a Refinancing" shows banks are run by stubborn traditionalists who lack common sense and eschew innovation.


Accenting the Classical With Popular Selections
TODAY is another busy Sunday, with enough concerts to please almost any taste.
Those curious about new music, for instance, can hear the Manhattan Wind Quintet, the ensemble in residence of the National Orchestral Association, at 3 P.M. at the Hudson River Museum.
On the program are works by Anna Rubin, Judith Lang Zaimont, Paul Nelson and Jon Deak.
Ms.
Rubin's "Cool Breezes" will be given its world premiere, and the broadcaster Martin Bookspan will add commentary on all four pieces and the composers.
For more information, call 963-4550.


Dr. Nancy Olds Is Wed on L.I.
Dr.
Nancy Olds, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David M. Olds of Port Washington, L.I., was married yesterday in Manhasset, L.I., to Philip Norman Hollembeak Jr., the son of the Rev.
Philip N. Hollembeak of Buffalo and the late Marilyn P. Hollembeak.
The groom's father, a minister of the Disciples of Christ, performed the ceremony at the Science Museum of Long Island.
Dr.
Olds, who is 35 and is keeping her name, is the curator of natural sciences at the Morris Museum in Morristown, N.J.
She graduated from Antioch College and received master's and doctoral degrees in biology from the City University of New York.
Her father, who is retired, was a radio broadcasting executive.
Her mother, Sally Wendkos Olds, is an author of books about human development.


Flip-Flop in Fortunes: Will Last Be First Again?
Tony La Russa, who spent the previous three Octobers managing the Oakland Athletics in the World Series, reflected recently on last year's World Series and said: "It's amazing. When you think about it, it's like a movie script. The two teams in the World Series went from last to first. On second thought, if you saw it in the movies, you'd say, 'I don't believe it.' "
Before the Minnesota Twins and the Atlanta Braves attained their lofty positions last season, no team in baseball history had ever catapulted from last place one season to first place the next.
Considering that no one had achieved the feat in the first 90 years of this century, maybe no one will do it for the next 90.


INSIDE
Jury Gets Noriega Case
More than two years after his surrender, jurors began deciding the fate of the first foreign head of state ever tried in an American court.
Page 29.
U.S.
Insists 7 Approved Aid
Bush Administration officials said that despite Tokyo's denials, Japan agreed with the size and timing of the aid package for Russia.
Page 16.
BASEBALL '92
A silent spring ends as the sounds of bats on balls are heard throughout the land.
SportsSunday, Section 8.


Corrections
An article on March 22 about the growth of cellular telephones on Long Island misstated the former name of Cellular One.
It was Metro One.


Washington Journal; The 'Bama: Talking and Living the Blues on Radio
It's almost lunch time, and inside-the-Beltway sophisticates are switching on their radios for their weekend fix of down-home delta chic.
Jerry Washington, a certified Washington institution, is starting to dispense his back-porch advice to the lovelorn while in the background Bobby Blue Bland moans the final notes of "Get Your Money Where You Spend Your Time."


Towns Respond to County Overture
AFTER nine years as the Bedford Town Supervisor, Lawrence E. Dwyer was recently forced to take an action he thought would never be needed in his affluent community.
He wrote personal letters to 70 residents urging them to pay their taxes.
The response was immediate.
"People came in, very upset, talking about their problems," he recalled last week.
"Many are out of work and others bought big houses when the market was good, homes they can't sell in this economy," he said.
"It's not 'Panicville,' but people are truly in trouble."


George Schutzer Weds Ms. Ginsberg
Ellen Cindy Ginsberg and George Jeffrey Schutzer, lawyers in Washington, were married last evening at the Ritz-Carlton there.
Rabbi Marvin Bash officiated.
Ms.
Ginsberg, who is 34 years old and is keeping her name, is the assistant general counsel of the Nuclear Management and Resources Council, a trade association for utilities.
She is the chairwoman of the Younger Lawyers Division of the Federal Bar Association.
She graduated magna cum laude from Tufts University and received a law degree from American University.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo; Surprises And Gaffes Add Import To Primary
For one of the rare occasions in its short, noisy and not very distinguished history, the New York Presidential primary could count for a lot on Tuesday.
If Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas wins convincingly, he will once again be considered the presumptive nominee by the politicians and the press, resuming the status he enjoyed before voters' second thoughts and three straight losses -- in Connecticut, Vermont and Alaska -- took the swagger out of his campaign.


Miss McHugh To Wed in July
Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence F. McHugh of Reading, Mass., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Kathleen Anne McHugh, to Carlton Hayes Tucker, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William D. Tucker Jr. of Pelham, N.Y.
A July wedding is planned.
Miss McHugh is the network manager in San Francisco of Seniornet, an organization that teaches people over age 55 how to use computers.
She graduated from Stanford University.
Her father owns Mark Lawrence Photography in Haverhill, Mass.


Phone Operator Throws Snag Into Brown Campaign Premise
Despite the pledge by Edmund G. Brown Jr. to limit his campaign contributions to $100, at least one of his telephone solicitors advised callers how to circumvent that limit, according to a news report.
The charge was first broadcast late Thursday on Cable News Network, which reported that one of its reporters, posing as a potential donor, telephoned Mr.
Brown's toll-free donation line and asked if there was a way to give more than $100.
The reporter was told by the operator that, while she was not supposed to tell callers how to do it, the limit could be evaded by making additional donations of $100 in the name of friends or family members.


Out of This World


June Wedding For Ms. Harper
Philip and Harriet Harper of Hinsdale, Ill., have announced June wedding plans for their daughter Elisabeth Harper and David Persampieri, a son of Nicholas and Elizabeth Persampieri of Harrison, N.Y.
Ms.
Harper, 34 years old, is a senior vice president in institutional marketing at the Putnam Companies, an investment concern in Boston.
She graduated from Williams College and received an M.B.A. from Harvard University.
Her father, who is retired, was president of the Harper-Wyman Company, a manufacturer and distributor of burners for gas stoves in Hinsdale.


Teaching With A Light Touch
"MAVIS Beacon Teaches Typing 2.0": $59.95 list price, The Software Toolworks, 60 Leveroni Court, Novato, Calif. 94949; telephone 415-883-3000 or 1-800-234-3088.
Requires: 286 or higher processor, DOS 2.0 or higher, a hard disk and floppy or one high-density floppy drive, 400KB RAM.


Elena Gordon Has Wedding
Elena Gordon, the daughter of Mrs.
Joseph S. Gordon of Wallingford, Conn., and the late Mr.
Gordon, was married yesterday in Tuxedo Park, N.Y., to Stephen Pierce Duggan 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Duggan Jr. of New York.
The Rev.
Edwin Cromey performed the ceremony at St.
Mary's Church.
Mrs.
Duggan, 41 years old, is the associate director of public relations for American Ballet Theater in New York.
She graduated from Manhattanville College and received a master's in music from New York University.
Her father was a plumber in Pittsburgh.


Uncommon Notes Herald Easter
MUSIC for the Easter season, as prepared by choirmasters and organists throughout Westchester, traditionally hews to the classic and predominantly solemn repertory.
This year the programs are plentiful, as usual, and some music directors have dug deep to find works that are less frequently played but nonetheless inspiring.
Among them is the "Dettingen Te Deum and Anthem" by Handel, a part of which will be performed at the Larchmont Avenue Presbyterian Church under the direction of Judith Brown.
The work was composed to celebrate the June 1743 victory at Dettingen, near Frankfurt, by the English, Hanovarians and Austrians over the French in the War of the Austrian Succession.
The composition was first sung at the Chapel Royal of St.
James's in London in November of that year, and the text begins "The King Shall Rejoice."


STATE GUN PLAN URGED BY DINKINS
On the anniversary of the assassination of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr., Mayor David N. Dinkins, several state legislators, ministers and community-program leaders called yesterday for a statewide gun buy-back program and endorsed a comprehensive plan to lead children away from violence and firearms.
Mayor Dinkins said such a plan was necessary because of what he called "10 incidents involving firearms" within the city's schools since September.
Three teen-agers have been killed in the incidents.
During the same period, 110 handguns have been confiscated from students.


The Quiz
People who coin catchy phrases and wise sayings win a certain respect in the United States;: after all, they sound so witty, so knowing, so profound.
And they are original to boot, for only an original mind could create refreshingly different, choice expressions and pronouncements on human nature.
Not all wordsmiths and phrasemakers are one-of-a-kind, however.
Listen to the wise and witty sayings of one generation and you will sometimes hear the whispered echo of an older wisdom. (Answers, page 14.)
Give the popular versions of the following observations. For example:


Logan Kulwin To Wed in Fall
Dr. and Mrs.
Richard Kulwin of Bedford, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Logan Melynda Kulwin, to Scott Patrick O'Connor, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James O'Connor of St.
Louis.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Kulwin, 24 years old, graduated from Franklin and Marshall College, as did her fiance.
She is an assistant to the chief financial officer in North White Plains, N.Y., for Brunschwig &amp; Fils, the fabric company.
Her father is a dentist in Armonk, N.Y.


Expanding a Bit On Start of J.U.A.
In an article discussing the plight of injured people regarding the J.U.A. freeze ("48,000 Motorists May Face Delay in Injury Awards," March 8), it was stated that the Joint Underwriting Association was "created to provide automobile insurance for drivers whose driving records prevented them from obtaining insurance in the private market."
While that was one of the purposes of the J.U.A., the statement is somewhat incomplete, especially when one is trying to understand the J.U.A.'s current predicament.


Mobutu's Zaire: Magic and Decay
It was Saturday night in La Cite, the great, reptilian slum in Kinshasa.
I had made new friends when the car I had rented bogged down in sand in a dark place.
Someone offered to help me push.
We met up with others.
All night we talked, danced, drank -- strangers pushed together haphazardly, moving from place to place, through the narrow, sandy alleys, the sprawl of gimcrack homes pressed close together.
The music throbbed with primal energy.
Drumbeats followed us down darkened byways lit by kerosene lamps that spread white pools on vendors' wares -- cigarettes, kebabs.


Taking a Chance On a New Play
After reading the March 15 review of "Other People's Money" at the George Street Playhouse in which Alvin Klein speaks of "three burdensome new works" this season and goes on to say that now the George Street Pplayhouse is playing it safe with the present production, I am reminded of two plays I saw in New York City.
As I recall, neither "Mother Courage" nor "Street Scene" received critical acclaim, and they had relatively short runs of about three weeks when they were first performed.
Now, of course, they are considered "classics."


Lisa Rose and Stephen Infante, Lawyers, Wed
Lisa Rose, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Bennett B. Rose of Lawrence, L.I., was married there last night to Stephen Infante, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Anthony Infante of Hollywood, Fla.
Rabbi Joel Zion performed the ceremony at Temple Israel.


It's a Strike


POSTINGS: First Foreigner; Joining the Moscow Union of Architects
Frank LaSusa, a member of the American Institute of Architects since 1975, has become the first foreigner to be admitted to the Moscow Union of Architects.
"I think it would have have taken place regardless of the political changes," said Mr.
LaSusa, a partner in the New York firm of Brennan Beer Gorman.
He began his ties with Russian architects in 1973 when he helped design and develop the Moscow World Trade Center, completed in 1978.


You Must Remember This . . .
When "Casablanca" -- a movie that didn't have a finished script when it started production -- returns to theaters on Friday to celebrate its 50th anniversary, it will bring with it more remembered dialogue than just about any other motion picture.
One could even say that "Casablanca" didn't have a finished script when production ended.
Three weeks after filming was completed, Humphrey Bogart came reluctantly back from vacation and recorded a new last line: "Louis, I think this is the beginning of a beautiful friendship." Unsatisfied with the movie's original fade-out, the producer Hal Wallis wrote the new line.
It became one of the most famous lines in film history, and Bogart replaced Errol Flynn as Warner Brothers' top box-office draw.


TALES FROM THE BABY FACTORY
Couples suffering from infertility technology are fighting a war on many fronts.
They must compromise their attendance at work, undergo invasive procedures, have their sexual relationship on display, cope with family and personal differences and constantly keep abreast of the discriminatory, ever-changing insurance regulations affecting the reimbursement they may receive for their treatment.
What such couples should be spared are the morality-laced parables that seek to define what is "reproductively correct."


Megan Reed Has Wedding
Megan Jane Reed, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles C. Reed of San Marino, Calif., was married yesterday in Pasadena, Calif., to Dr.
David Tyler Bowen, a son of Sheila Stein of Bronxville, N.Y., and the late Dr.
Ralph Bowen Jr.
The Rev.
George Regas performed the ceremony at All Saints Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Bowen, 29 years old, is a development officer for the Museum of Fine Arts in Houston.
She graduated from the University of Virginia.
Her father is the president of Ahmansan Services Inc., a savings and loan company in Los Angeles.


Sunday Dinner; Seafood Fit for Choosy New Yorkers
In the food revolution of the past decade or so, the front line has been in seafood preparation.
Both the quality and the style of preparation have changed markedly.
New Yorkers are more demanding -- and more adventurous -- when it comes to fish.
For a taste of what's new on the seafood menu, these three establishments can be recommended.
Docks Oyster Bar And Seafood Grill
633 Third Avenue (40th Street), (212) 986-8080 -- This seafood house is a spinoff of the popular original at Broadway and 89th Street.
While the formulas are virtually identical, the setting here is more stylish and comfortable.
This 275-seat, two-level expanse has a big arching wood-and-brass bar in the center, where all kinds of iced shellfish are displayed.


Lisa Warner to Wed Glenn Popowitz
November wedding plans have been announced for Lisa Jill Warner and Glenn Robert Popowitz, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Martin Popowitz of Upper Saddle River, N.J.
Miss Warner is the daughter of Alan Warner of Westport, Conn., and the late Linda Leventhal Warner.
Miss Warner, 24 years old, is the president of Quaker Cuisine Inc., a meat and seafood distributor in Philadelphia.
She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania, as did her fiance.
Her father is a certified public accountant and financial consultant in Westport.


Galette as a Finishing Touch
A SIMPLE round of pastry topped with fruit makes for a quick yet impressive dessert.
These galettes, as they are usually known, can be made as individual pastries or as one large pizza-like dessert to be cut in wedges.
Sometimes the fruit is baked on the pastry.
And the ones with baked fruit can be served warm or at room temperature.


Woody Allen: France's Monsieur Right
Woody Allen's 21st film, "Shadows and Fog," opened in the United States two weeks ago.
Finally.
One puts it that way because, for the first time, an Allen film had already been released abroad: "Shadows and Fog" opened in Paris on Feb. 12 and was seen soon thereafter at the Berlin Film Festival and in commercial runs throughout Europe.
This gift to Europe, as the Europeans like to see it, has provoked a renewed flurry of articles and adulation -- the two are usually inseparable here -- attesting to Mr.
Allen's supposedly European sensibility.
This makes special sense with this new film.
"Shadows and Fog" is in black and white and overtly indebted to such German Expressionist film makers as Fritz Lang, G. W. Pabst and F. W. Murnau.
Its inspiration seems more European than any Allen film since such homages to Ingmar Bergman as "Interiors" in the late 1970's.


THE ORACLE OF CROWN HEIGHTS
I am a Jew.
I eat treyf (nonkosher food), I do not attend synagogue on a regular basis and I live with and love a Christian woman.
My rabbi, Levi Baumgarten, is a Lubavitcher.
Each Thursday, he comes to my office.
Along with my partner and others in the office, we put on tefillin and pray.
When my father died last December, Levi got out of a sickbed -- he was home with the flu -- to preside over the funeral and grave-site services.
He made sure that kaddish (prayer for the dead) will be said for my father during the first year following his death.
This I arranged not out of guilt, but because this is what my father would have wanted.
Levi loves me because of what I am, straying from the path and all.
Sure, he would like me to be more orthodox in my beliefs and practices, and will never give up hope for a complete conversion.


Miss Adams to Wed
Mrs.
Lauren Dow of Santa Barbara, Calif., and John Adams of Atherton, Calif., have announced June wedding plans for their daughter, Carolyn Cole Adams, and Dr.
Andrew James Cole, son of Dr. and Mrs.
Herbert L. Cole of Wayne, N.J.


SECURITY COUNCIL CONDEMNS ISRAEL
The Security Council condemned Israel in a statement early today regarding the recent killings and violence against several Palestinians at Rafa in the Israeli-occupied Gaza Strip.
A short statement, read by the Council's President for this month, Simbarashe Simbanenduku Mumbengegwe of Zimbabwe, said the members "condemn all these acts of violence at Rafa" and urge maximum restraint to bring the violence to an end.


Children's Books
OREN BELL By Barbara Hood Burgess. 181 pp.
New York: Delacorte Press. $15. (Ages 10 to 14) THERE is nothing fair about a clean slate.
Latonya Bell has been working on her school record her whole life, and it's not fair for a new teacher to avoid looking at records so everyone can start the year even.
Besides, "was it fair for Dink to have to start working into his medium slot all over again?"


In Short/Baseball; Now You Can Look It Up
Casey Stengel played his first professional baseball game in 1910 and closed his managerial career with the New York Mets in 1965.
In between, "the old perfessor," winner of 10 pennants and seven world championships with the Yankees between 1949 and 1960, did an awful lot of talking or, more precisely, double-talking.
Ira Berkow, a sports columnist at The New York Times, and Jim Kaplan, a former staff writer at Sports Illustrated, have dutifully collected Stengel's words, as well as those of many who knew him, on a variety of baseball-related subjects.
Though Stengel managed teams with power hitters, he believed in manufacturing runs with good base running and timely hitting.
This is pretty much what the authors have done -- that is, manufactured a book where there should not necessarily be one.
This is not to say that THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CASEY: Casey Stengel's Inimitable, Instructional, Historical Baseball Book (Thomas Dunne/St. Martin's, $18.95) is not entertaining; it is, but only in small doses.
It's the kind of book you can read during the lull between innings.
Open it to any page and you'll find gems like Stengel's comment to Mickey Mantle when the slugger kicked a water cooler after striking out: "It ain't the water cooler which is gettin' you out." Or words of wisdom like "When a fielder gets the pitcher into trouble, the pitcher has to pitch himself out of a slump he isn't in." But the authors save the best for last in reproducing Stengel's mind-bending testimony at a hearing of the Senate Subcommittee on Antitrust and Monopoly in 1958.
It is a wily routine that easily rivals Abbott and Costello's "Who's on First" and proves that Stengel's prowess was not limited to the diamond.


Correction
An article on March 1 about climbing Mount Kinabalu in Malaysia misidentified the highest mountain in Southeast Asia.
It is Hkakabo Razi (19,296 feet) in Burma.


Heidi Gwen Pokorny Has Wedding
Heidi Gwen Pokorny, a publicist, and David Neal Ganz, the executive assistant to the New York State Commissioner of Economic Development, both in New York, were married last evening in New York.
Rabbi Martin Zion officiated at the Mark Hotel.
Ms.
Pokorny, who is keeping her name, graduated from Barnard College.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ivan F. Pokorny of Scarsdale, N.Y.
Her father is the president of Pacific Footwear, a shoe importing company in New York.


Personal Statements
Its strange how dated decorating magazines from the 1980's look today.
The sumptuos interiors splashed across page after page of publications from New York to Milan reflected the thinking of an age: a time when opulence and ostentation were preceived as the epitome of dicernment; when architects, decorators and landscape designers were treated like movie stars and could do no wrong.
Times have changed.
Gone is the era when excess was admired, or when a home "done" by a celebrated name had the same status as a couture wardrobe.
No longer can designer formulate and package a look, and assume clients will happily buy it.
Leaner days have made everyone wiser.
So has the increased attention given architecture and the decorative arts by the media, museums and publishers.
As consumers have become more knowledgeable and more sophisticated, they want to be involved in the creative process.


Slaying Renews Sense of Danger for Japanese
Japanese were shocked last week over reports of the abduction and slaying of a Japanese businessman in Panama earlier this month.
The episode, the 10th killing of a Japanese citizen overseas this year, was a new reminder of the perils of traveling and living abroad.
But as fresh details of the kidnapping have come to light, criticisms are being raised about whether the Government in Tokyo is doing enough to help its citizens overseas, and whether bungling and delays in the latest episode may invite more attacks in the future.


FLETCHER CHRISTIAN'S CHILDREN
It says a lot about Pitcairn's isolation that I did not get to read the article by Dea Birkett about us until I got here to New Zealand to have my daughter's tonsils checked out by a doctor ("Fletcher Christian's Children," Dec. 8, 1991).
Another negative report about Pitcairn, and not much we Pitcairners can do about it, as none of us are journalists or authors.
But we do have better access to the truth than those visitors who come rushing by with their little note pads and skim the surface off Pitcairn life and Pitcairn mentality in sometimes less than a month, and present their version to the world.


Elliott Goes Speeding Toward Record Book
The immediate goal for Bill Elliott here on Sunday is to run his stock-car winning streak to record length.
But he also has a less obvious opportunity, albeit a more important one: to show that his domination of the Winston Cup circuit is really as imposing as it looks.
Elliott, a red-headed driver from Dawsonville, Ga., with a drawl as thick as his motor oil has been on the frigid mornings here this weekend, is in his first year with the team owned by stock-car legend Junior Johnson.
Five races into the 29- race season, the combination has been about as successful as either man could have wished.


When in Doubt, Standings Count
To the Sports Editor:
After reading "On a Regional Dream Team, Nets Prevail" (The Times, March 17), which compared the Nets with the Knicks, I can only think that Harvey Araton is living in a dream world.
Take a look at the standings, Harvey; or doesn't that count for anything?
GREGORY J. BUCCI New Rochelle


Used Indoors or Out, Ladders Can Be Crucial
LADDERS are indispensable for a variety of home improvement tasks.
Indoors, a stepladder works best, because it does not have to lean against walls for support.
A five- or six-foot stepladder is adequate for reaching most ceilings.
But avoid shorter models, as standing any higher on a stepladder than the second rung from the top is dangerous.
Outdoors, where greater heights are encountered, use an extension ladder.
They consist of two straight sliding sections that hook together to form a single long length.
Extension ladders that go as high as 35 feet are available.
Choose a length that will enable the ladder to be extended at least three feet higher than the level at which you plan to stand.


Truffaut's Passion Still Glows
When Francois Truffaut was working on his now-classic book of interviews with Alfred Hitchcock, he developed an inferiority complex.
By then, in 1963, he had made "The 400 Blows," "Shoot the Piano Player" and "Jules and Jim." Still, as he wrote in a letter to his friend and translator, Helen Scott, he had just one consolation in the shadow of Hitchcock's brilliance: "I at least am able to make the public feel sympathy for a young kid who steals everything he can get his hands on, for a selfish little coward of a piano player, for a turn-of-the-century bitch who sleeps around."
That wily Truffaut.
Who else could have tossed off such a wry, astute comment, part sincere hero-worship and part deft self-promotion?
Who else would have described his most emotionally engaging characters in such cool, comic terms?
Jean-Pierre Leaud as the mischievous Antoine Doinel in "The 400 Blows" and Jeanne Moreau as the irresistible, destructive Catherine in "Jules and Jim" are among the truly adored screen creations of our time, though they are, as Truffaut says, a thief and a slut.


Ex-Penthouse Model to Appeal Denial of Damages
A former model for Penthouse magazine will appeal a ruling by a New York appeals court that overturned a $4 million punitive damage award for sexual harassment, her lawyer says.
Her supporters denounced an opinion in which a dissenting judge castigated the 41-year-old woman for willingly placing herself at risk by pursuing a career in the sex industry.


Slammin', With In-Your-Face Color
Sneaker wearers are attracted to the colors of the shoes as much as to their touted technological advances, like air pumps and gel-filled heels.
Athletic shoes can be matched to sports outfits and street clothes.
And there seems to be a color -- or a combination of colors -- for every taste, now that companies like Nike and Reebok are mixing colors in their athletic-shoe designs.
Their choices are influenced by the fashion, surfing and ski industries.


This Week's Numbers
Consensus
Last Period
Estimates*
Tuesday
Wholesale trade, percent change
0.1
0.2
Consumer credit, change in billions
-$0.2
$0.0
Thursday
Producer prices, percent change
0.2
0.2
P.P.I. without food and energy, percent change
0.1
0.2
Friday
Consumer prices, percent change
0.3
0.2
C.P.I. without food and energy, percent Change
0.4
0.3
Tuesday: Seven-year note auction *
New York, Wisconsin and Minnesota Presidential primaries  Wednesday: Canadian Prime Minister and French Prime Minister meet in Paris  Friday: World agriculture supply and demand *
Crop production *
Real earnings  (Source: I.D.E.A. Inc.)


Very Small Jokes in a Bedroom Farce
"BEDROOMS," the portentous comedy by Renee Taylor and Joseph Bologna now at the Arena Players Repertory Company in East Farmingdale, is one of those preposterous evenings of theater that is not memorable past the intermission, much less through the final curtain.
Each of its five scenes is a short one-act joke about the sometimes strained relationships between men and women.


Camera
A photographer from San Francisco was rummaging through the books at Photographers Place one recent day.
He said he never missed an opportunity when visiting New York to stop by the shop at 133 Mercer Street, near Prince Street in SoHo, because it was so inspiring.
This rare all-photography bookshop was founded by Harvey Zucker in 1980.
Photographers who have traveled around the world say they are hard pressed to think of another shop like this one, which -- along with its nearby warehouse -- has a collection of more than 40,000 books on photography.


Richard Millard Dies; Accreditation Chief, 73
Richard M. Millard, who headed the national organization that coordinates the accreditation of all public and private educational institutions, died on Wednesday at Georgetown University Hospital in Washington.
He was 73 years old and lived in Bethesda, Md.
Dr. Millard died of pneumonia, his family said.


The Collective Mind
To Janet Roberts, the tiny age cracks that mar her collection of Chinese Export porcelain are no more disturbing than laugh lines on the face of an old friend.
"A lot of people would scoff at what I have," says Roberts, a semiretired theatrical and literary agent whose small Manhattan apartment is crammed with antiques.
"But to me, it's all so gallant. I feel that if these pieces have lasted 200 years, they deserve to be loved."
Purists might also look askance at the iconoclastic habits of Ivan and Marilynn Karp, who collect everything from washboards and mechanical toys to such bizarre items as "naughty Nellies" (19th-century bootjacks in the form of scantily clad women) and Prohibition-era flasks in the shape of dancing couples.


Museum Plays Racial Peacemaker
DURING a recent school exchange visit, James Johnson, a seventh-grader at the predominantly black Frederick Douglass Academy in Harlem, scrunched his forehead and squinted at the first page of his class handout: it was in Hebrew.
"The kid next to me said that I didn't look too thrilled," he remarked afterward.
"I told him, 'I just look serious.' I was trying to figure out how you read those things."
Once James found the translation he was ready to join in a freewheeling Torah studies discussion at the Abraham Joshua Heschel School, a private Jewish Day School on Manhattan's Upper West Side.
Soon he was cautiously arguing whether God was justified in destroying the Tower of Babel.


Def Leppard Shoots For the Mainstream
Unlike a lot of Heavy-Metal bands, the members of Def Leppard have never come across as lunkheads.
Their videos don't rely on scantily clad women brandishing power tools, as do Van Halen's; the lead singer Joe Elliot's hair has never reached the ridiculous length and teased-out proportions of someone like David Coverdale from Whitesnake.
In a genre where niceness and sincerity can be detriments, Def Leppard earned big points for keeping the drummer Rick Allen in the band after he lost an arm in a 1984 car crash.
They've managed to be likable without being wimps.
On their megahit albums "Pyromania," released in 1983 (seven million copies sold in the United States), and "Hysteria," released in 1987 (10 million copies), Def Leppard's concerns have been simple: women and rock-and-roll.
In "Photograph," from "Pyromania," a guy sits around and fantasizes about a girl in a magazine.
The anthem "Rock of Ages," also from "Pyromania," sums it all up in the chorus: "What do you want?/ I want rock-and-roll, all right!/ Long live rock-and-roll." Placed in the context of irresistible pop hooks, soaring background harmonies and guitars that roar without being abrasive, Def Leppard's songs speak directly to the teen-age psyche.
They're intelligent but not intellectual, accessible without being moronic.


Corrections
An article last Sunday about plans for helping entrepreneurs in Russia referred incorrectly to the Entrepreneurial Council.
It is affiliated with the Entrepreneurial Center at Manhattanville College in Purchase, not with the United Nations.


A Not-So-Unfortunate Career
To the Editor:
The unfortunate story that Webster Brown portrays is not so unfortunate.
During his 26-year career, there have been serious recessions that displaced millions of employees throughout America.
How unfortunate is it that Mr.
Brown, as part of I.B.M.'s financial assistance program, received in his early retirement program two years of full salary, a lifetime pension eligibility, free health care for himself and his spouse plus many other company-paid benefits?


Paranoid in Pinstripes
THE LAST YANKEE
The Turbulent Life of Billy Martin.
By David Falkner.
Illustrated. 349 pp.
New York: Simon &amp; Schuster.


POSTINGS: $2 Million-Plus; High End Sales Rise
For the past few months buyers, sellers and real estate brokers have had their poles in the water in a search for signs of a bottoming out in the cooperative apartment market.
The most recent prediction that a market recovery may be near comes from The Corcoran Group, a Manhattan residential sales company.
It holds out as evidence a surge in sales of apartments selling for $2 million or more.


The Laughing Blues Of Louis Jordan Get a Jump Start
"The blues, that's me," said Louis Jordan in one of his last interviews.
"Not the crying blues, but blues with a joke in it, something funny to make you laugh and smile." He was having breakfast on the patio of a Berkeley, Calif., motel in July 1974, the morning after a gig at Ruthie's Inn on nearby San Pablo Avenue, six months before he died.
The bright hazy sunshine made his eyes water, and he stopped to wipe them.
"Me and my bad eyes. It's from spotlights shining in them all my life."
"Now Charles Brown," Mr.
Jordan went on, "Charles was in the same field as me, but he did the crying blues, blues ballads they called it. But songwriters brought me tunes like 'Safe, Sane and Single' -- that was one I could make a hit on, and I did. See, I've given my life to making people
enjoy
my music."


Bosnia Calls Up Guard and Reserve
Battles raged in Bosnia and Herzegovina today, and the republic's President announced the mobilization of national guard and police reserve units tonight.
Reports by local journalists spoke of dozens of deaths in the fighting, which the President, Alija Izetbegovic, said had been caused by outsiders seeking to destabilize his republic and discourage countries from extending diplomatic recognition.


There's No Business Like . . .
To the Editor:
In his essay "An Actor's Modest Proposals for New York's Ailing Theater"  [ March 1 ] , F. Murray Abraham suggests that all commercial shows be guaranteed a four-week run after the reviews are in.
No commercial producer, on or off Broadway, embarks on a production without sufficient reserve in the budget to insure the show's ability to take advantage of positive word of mouth and run, even in the face of mixed reviews.


Level All Fields
To the Sports Editor:
There's no sense denying it, I've been a Mets fan so long that the trait might just as well be in my chromosomes.
But there comes a moment of truth even for guys like me.
Sure, the Mets were able to sign Bobby Bonilla.
How come?
Because they have the bucks, the New York marketplace.
What about the Pirates?
Should they have to seek lesser-quality, lesser-salaried ballplayers just because Pittsburgh is not the Big Apple?
Just like on the diamond, there's got to be a level playing field.
If baseball's talent pool is going to be slanted toward the big media centers, we might just as well stick New York, Chicago and Los Angeles in the same division, the rest of the clubs in the other.
JIM ENGLISH Bayside, Queens


New and Improved? Yanks Have Lots of Proving to Do
The Yankees would love it if everyone concentrated on what is fresh and new about their team -- from the new, young manager to the new cleanup hitter to the new shortstop and the new second baseman to, of course, the new attitude.
They would prefer boasting about an improved product to try justifying higher ticket prices.
But like the box of detergent that adds splashy colors and a logo while the product remains basically unchanged, the Yankees are in certain respects still old and tired.
Their problems with starting pitching are old, and the third-base woes are ancient.


Streetscapes: The New York Yacht Club; Unpainting an Elegant Facade
BEGINNING in the 1930's, owners seeking a fresh appearance for their buildings painted over their soiled granite, limestone and even marble facades instead of cleaning them.
The buildings got a renewed look, but it lasted only for a few years.
A generation of restoration projects has reversed much of this and the latest major stone structure slated for paint-stripping is the ebullient New York Yacht Club at 37 West 44th Street.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
A FAREWELL GALA
For 21 years Liz Rockwell has guided Westchester's Rondo Dance Theater in Bedford, and for 40 years she ran the Elizabeth Rockwell School of Dance.
Now, Ms.
Rockwell is retiring, and she will make that announcement during Rondo's gala performance at the State University of New York at Purchase Saturday at 8 P.M.
After the performance a reception will be held for her in the Follow-Spot Cafe across from the Performing Arts Center ticket office.


Casualties of I.B.M.'s Competition
To the Editor:
Do not let all I.B.M.'ers be tarred with the same brush that Webster Brown (Forum, March 22) used to describe his early retirement.
No one ever guaranteed us unconditional lifetime employment.
We expected to earn our keep every day.


In Search of an Authentic Hero
"The end of the day" is an expression for the summing up at life's end.
It is also the title of Jon Robin Baitz's new play, a tragicomic parable of modern life in America and England, opening Tuesday at Playwrights Horizons with Roger Rees, Nancy Marchand and Jean Smart in the cast.
Mr.
Baitz, at 30, has the severe countenance at times of an Old Testament prophet.
This Jeremiah may wear a red baseball cap and enjoy cream of turkey soup, but he doesn't like what he sees around him.
And he has said so in his plays before.
"The Substance of Fire," which opened last year at Playwrights and has moved to the Mitzi E. Newhouse Theater at Lincoln Center, is an example.
So is "The Film Society," presented at the Second Stage Theater in 1988.


In Short/Baseball
THE PHILADELPHIA PHILLIES An Illustrated History.
By Donald Honig.
Simon &amp; Schuster, $27.50.


Bracing for Worst in West Coast Salmon Country
Faced for the first time with a possible shutdown of all salmon fishing off the West Coast, the coastal communities dependent on the seasonal returns of the legendary fish are bracing for a season of despair.
Anticipating the worst, owners are boarding up their fresh fish markets instead of preparing to open.
Big trolling boats that rolled through a half-century of hook-and-line chases are for sale, and others are being auctioned to pay off bank loans.


Mutual Funds; Balancing Tax-Exempt Yields
Investors who are grousing over their 1991 tax bill are probably looking for ways to lower next year's.
For those who reported extensive interest income from bonds, one answer is to buy mutual funds that produce income tax free.
The yields on municipal bond funds are lower than the yields on their taxable counterparts.
But the tax-equivalent yield -- what the income is worth after taxes are paid -- is currently higher by anywhere from about three-quarters of 1 percentage point to more than 2 percentage points, as the chart shows.


Bo Jackson Gets Hip, And Perhaps Hope
BO JACKSON underwent his much-anticipated hip-replacement surgery yesterday but there won't be any word for a while on whether the operation can save his baseball career.
Doctors who performed the surgery at Palos Community Hospital in Palos Hills, Ill., a suburb of Chicago, said the operation went smoothly.
Jackson, 29, will be hospitalized "for a period of days," a statement from the doctors said.


Kerry McCollough to Marry in Fall
Mr. and Mrs.
William H. McCullough Jr. of Memphis have announced the engagement of their daughter, Kathleen McCullough, to Douglas S. Brown, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley E. Brown of Newtown, Conn.
A November wedding is planned.
Miss McCullough, who is 27 years old and is known as Kerry, is a marketing representative for Titan Sports, a sports entertainment company in Stamford, Conn.
She graduated from William Smith College.
Her father is the manager of marketing and sales for business forms at International Paper in Memphis.
Her mother, Kathleen McCullough, is the vice president of the Memphis Museum Systems Board.


Caitlin Mavroleon to Wed in June
Caitlin Davenport Mavroleon and Yangos Minos Colocotronis are engaged to be married in June.
Miss Mavroleon, 25 years old, is a student at the Heatherly School of Fine Art in London.
She is a daughter of Mace Gwyer Mavroleon of North Miami Beach, Fla., and Ann Davenport Mavroleon of London.
Her father is a stockbroker at Dean Witter Reynolds in North Miami Beach.
Her mother is a watercolor artist.


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York
Senate
1.
Fetal Tissue Research: Vote on an amendment to a National Institutes of Health authorization bill that would have restricted federally financed research to tissue from spontaneously aborted fetuses.
Rejected 77 to 23, March 31.
2.
Foreign Aid: Vote on passage of a foreign aid spending bill for the rest of fiscal year 1992 that includes $270 million for United Nations peacekeeping activities.
Approved 84 to 16, April 1.
1
2
Connecticut
Dodd (D) . . .
N
Y
Lieberman (D) . . .
N
Y
New Jersey Bradley (D) . . .
N
Y
Lautenberg (D) . . .
N
Y
New York D'Amato (R) . . .
Y
N
Moynihan (D) . . .
N
Y
House
1.
Foreign Aid: Vote on passage of a foreign aid spending bill for the rest of fiscal year 1992 that includes $270 million for United Nations peacekeeping activities.
Approved 275 to 131, March 31.
2.
Budget: Vote on passage of a Democratic budget plan that would shift more than $6 billion in military savings to social programs next year by breaking the 1990 budget agreement.
Rejected 238 to 187, March 31.
3.
Savings and Loan: Vote to allow the Federal Government to continue spending $17 billion already authorized to rescue ailing savings and loans beyond an April 1 deadline.
Rejected 298 to 115, April 1.
Connecticut
1. Kennelly (D) . . .
Y
Y
N
2. Gejdenson (D) . . .
Y
N
N
3. DeLauro (D) . . .
Y
Y
N
4. Shays (R) . . .
Y
N
Y
5. Franks (R) . . .
Y
N
Y
6. Johnson (R) . . .
Y
N
Y
New Jersey
1. Andrews (D) . . .
Y
Y
N
2. Hughes (D) . . .
N
Y
N
3. Pallone (D) . . .
Y
Y
N
4. Smith (R) . . .
Y
N
A
5. Roukema (R) . . .
N
N
Y
6. Dwyer (D) . . .
Y
Y
N
7. Rinaldo (R) . . .
Y
N
N
8. Roe (D) . . .
A
Y
N
9. Torricelli (D) . . .
Y
Y
N
10. Payne (D) . . .
Y
Y
N
11. Gallo (R) . . .
Y
N
Y
12. Zimmer (R) . . .
Y
N
N
13. Saxton (R) . . .
Y
N
A
14. Guarini (D) . . .
N
Y
N
New York
1. Hochbrueckner (D) . . .
Y
Y
N
2. Downey (D) . . .
Y
Y
N
3. Mrazek (D) . . .
Y
Y
A
4. Lent (R) . . .
Y
N
N
5. McGrath (R) . . .
Y
N
N
6. Flake (D) . . .
Y
Y
N
7. Ackerman (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
8. Scheuer (D) . . .
Y
Y
N
9. Manton (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
10. Schumer (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
11. Towns (D) . . .
A
Y
N
12. Owens (D) . . .
Y
Y
N
13. Solarz (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
14. Molinari (R) . . .
Y
N
N
15. Green (R) . . .
Y
N
Y
16. Rangel (D) . . .
Y
Y
N
17. Weiss (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
18. Serrano (D) . . .
A
Y
N
19. Engel (D) . . .
Y
Y
N
20. Lowey (D) . . .
Y
Y
N
21. Fish (R) . . .
Y
N
N
22. Gilman (R) . . .
Y
N
N
23. McNulty (D) . . .
Y
Y
N
24. Solomon (R) . . .
N
N
N
25. Boehlert (R) . . .
Y
N
Y
26. Martin (R) . . .
Y
N
N
27. Walsh (R) . . .
Y
N
Y
28. McHugh (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
29. Horton (R) . . .
Y
N
N
30. Slaughter (D) . . .
Y
Y
N
31. Paxon (R) . . .
Y
N
N
32. LaFalce (D) . . .
Y
Y
N
33. Nowak (D) . . .
Y
Y
N
34. Houghton (R) . . .
Y
N
Y
KEY: Y Yea; N Nay; (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.


Yeltsin vs. Parliament: Who Will Rule Russia?
When President Boris N. Yeltsin locks horns with the jealous Russian Congress of People's Deputies next week, the likelihood is that he will prevail.
The question is at what price.
The main issues before the 1,000-odd deputies, whose Congress is the highest legislative authority in Russia, will be the progress of economic change, the powers of the government and a new constitution.


In Short/Baseball
GIL HODGES  The Quiet Man. By Marino Amoruso. Paul S. Eriksson, $19.95.


If You're Thinking of Living in: Millburn
MILLBURN TOWNSHIP, one of the wealthiest communities in northern New Jersey, owes much of its character to the inventor of the spring-loaded window shade.
The inventor, Stewart Hartshorn of New York City, bought a 1,550-acre tract called Short Hills in 1877 when he was 37 years old.
Short Hills, which today makes up most of the northern half of the township, was named for its hills, which have a maximum elevation of 660 feet.
The area offered clear streams, a chestnut forest and the contours that Hartshorn sought to develop an ideal community.


Summer Bridal for Miss Southworth
Mr. and Mrs.
Hamilton Southworth Jr. of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter Anne Dwight Southworth to Dr.
David Richard Marsh, the son of Prof. and Mrs.
Leonard G. Marsh of Lincoln, Lincolnshire, England.
An August wedding is planned.
Miss Southworth, 27 years old, is studying for a Ph.D. degree in ecology at Yale University.
She graduated cum laude from Williams College and has a master's degree in forest science from Yale.
Her father is a senior technical officer at the Chemical Banking Corporation, and her mother, Eleanor Southworth, is the coordinator of alumnae affairs at the Chapin School, both in New York.


Bringing It Home
WORKING AT HOME HAS become a favorite fantasy: no commute, no dress code, no office politics, no pressure.
The reality is less romantic, but that has not stopped millions of Americans from deserting the 9-to-5, while millions more bring work home after hours.
Even George Bush, the ultimate home-office worker, is touting the advantages of telecommuting to save time and gasoline, avoid traffic jams and reduce air pollution.
Whether you are running a country or a business out of your house, or just catching up on work from the office, you are likely to need some combination of the same basic equipment: a telephone, telephone answering machine, fax machine, computer and modem.


After 7 Months and a Final Skirmish, the Noriega Case Goes to the Jury
After a heated legal dispute that was resolved at the last minute this morning, the fate of Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega, the former "maximum leader" of Panama who has spent the last two years as a prisoner in a jail cell here, has at last been placed in the hands of an American jury.
But the nine women and three men are deliberating on a case of such volume and complexity that they face a formidable task in deciding whether the general should remain behind bars for the rest of his life.


Gerald L. Klerman, 63, an Expert On Depression and Schizophrenia
Dr.
Gerald L. Klerman, a psychiatrist and expert on depression who was a former chief of the Federal mental health agency, died on Friday at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 63 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of kidney disease, his family said.


Conner: Late Run Against the Money
When the mast of Dennis Conner's racing yacht toppled during the America's Cup defender trials last month, the effect was as shocking as watching a lead horse in the Kentucky Derby stumble.
But Conner rallied with characteristic tenacity.
Overnight, his Stars &amp; Stripes team replaced the mangled carbon-fiber spar with a new $600,000 mast.
The crew competed the next day against Bill Koch's second-string yacht, Defiant, and lost.
But Conner considered it a victory that Stars &amp; Stripes made it onto the water in the first place.


White Sox Have Right Ingredients to Prevail
This preview was prepared and written by Murray Chass.
Teams are presented in alphabetical order and the starting lineups are his projections.
His probable starters for the Mets appear on page 3.
Relief pitchers listed are the closers.
Staff predictions for the teams' order of finish in each division appears on page 6.
California Angels
Their best players are three starting pitchers and a reliever.
That quartet will not produce many runs, and that's what the Angels desperately need.


Business Diary/March 29 - April 3
INTERNATIONAL Bush's Surprise Plan to Help Yeltsin's Government


Aid for Midtown Homeless May Include Penn Station
A program that has provided treatment, counseling and other services for mentally ill homeless people in the vicinity of Grand Central Terminal since 1990 under an unusual partnership of city, state and private agencies may soon be expanded to the Pennsylvania Station area, city officials and providers of aid for the homeless said yesterday.
At the same time, the officials and aid providers denied an accusation by an advocate for the homeless that the plan was a scheme to remove homeless people from the streets surrounding Madison Square Garden in time for the Democratic National Convention in July.


Revenge of the Lefties
To the Editor:
As a lifelong lefty over 50, I read with bemusement your review of "The Left-Hander Syndrome." A few of my friends and neighbors passed away between 30 and 50; they were all right-handers.
Pablo Picasso, Harry Truman and Charlie Chaplin were southpaws who survived this sinister affliction well past 80.
That right-wing lefty George Bush, despite his health reversals, still jogs as he pushes 70.


Street Fighter at the Dime
When board members of the Dime Savings Bank of New York considered Richard D. Parsons for the president's chair in 1988, some doubted whether the former aide to Nelson A. Rockefeller and Gerald Ford could resist a return to politics.
To ease their worries, he promised to stay at least five years.
With the five-year milestone fast approaching -- and with the bank having just reported a record loss for 1991 -- Mr.
Parsons said last week that he is staying put.
"It's like a street fight," said Mr.
Parsons, who turned 44 yesterday.
"I'm here until I fail or succeed."


Disney World 'Passports' Rise
Walt Disney World has raised the price of its four- and five-day passes to the Lake Buena Vista, Fla., complex by four percent over 1991 levels.
The new prices apply to the multiday "passports," which offer unlimited admission to any of the three parks, monorail transportation among them, and other transportation within the complex.
The new price for the four-day pass is $122.50 for those over 9 years, and $95 for those aged 3 to 9.


CAMPUS LIFE: Rensselaer; Giving Students An Incentive: Cash on the Barrel
Students at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute here now have a new incentive to give fair and honest evaluations of their courses: they are being paid.
Through a program begun last fall, 2 or 3 students in each of 15 classes meet with their professors once a week to discuss how the class is going and what can be done to improve the course.
In return, each student receives $100.


Chess
After seven rounds of the Linares International Tournament in Spain, the Ukrainian grandmaster Aleksandr Belyavsky was tied for first place with the world champion, Gary Kasparov, and the persistent title challenger Anatoly Karpov, both of Russia.
With six rounds to be played, it looked as though Belyavsky was about to put an end to his recent plague of poor showings.
Alas, it was not to be.
To his score of 5-2, he was able to add only 2 1/2 points, and he dropped his last four games to finish 10th among 14 entrants.
The tournament ended on March 14.
This was the third consecutive time that he had posted a negative score, although it still represented an improvement over his previous two last-place results.


Michael Agus to Marry Elisa Deener
Mr. and Mrs.
Jerome A. Deener of South Orange, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Elisa Teri Deener to Michael Samuel Agus, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Zalman S. Agus of Cherry Hill, N.J.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Deener, 24 years old, is a law student at New York University.
She graduated magna cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
Her father is the founding partner of the law firm of Deener, Feingold &amp; Stern in Hackensack, N.J.
Her mother, Brenda Deener, is a sculptor.


Setting Priorities In Public Education
The article "Public Colleges Face Bitter Economic Lessons" (March 8) prompted me to write this letter.
As a person who grew up in a lower-middle-class household in New York City and is now a resident of Connecticut, I am concerned about the remarkable difference in priority placed on public educational institutions and access to higher education between these two jurisdictions.


How Big Is Too Big? Township Can't Decide
WHEN John Wadington started out as clerk and treasurer of this township in 1965, he had a day job as a research chemist.
He could handle his municipal duties at meetings held two nights a week and on Saturdays.
It was a time when the township's population was 4,000, the State Police patrolled the roads and there was no high school.
Mr.
Wadington, now 72 years old, retired last week from his township posts, and it will take two employees working full time to replace him.
Holmdel's population has grown to 12,000, with its own police force and high school.
New stores and office buildings and other outward signs of prosperity and progress are everywhere.


Sympathy for the Devil
"I SIMPLY WANTED, IN THE SPIRIT OF THE GRAND THEATER," Ian McKellen explained once, referring to a vaudeville house in Lancashire where his dreams of greasepaint and the roar of the crowd were nursed, "to step out from the dust and the dark and put on a show."
That was more than a decade ago.
McKellen had just earned a Tony for his bone-chilling performance as the unrepentant revanchist Salieri in "Amadeus." He was leaving that play and about to bring to Broadway his acclaimed one-man show, "Acting Shakespeare," in which he declaimed the bloated Falstaff and sighed the teen-age Juliet within moments of each other.
McKellen's technical wizardry aside, he has always shown a remarkable empathy for his characters, whether Salieri or Iago or Richard III, whom he will depict on a 16-week American tour beginning at the Brooklyn Academy of Music on June 9.
He reaches to their insides, into their dust and darkness, and eases them into the light.


Bronx Youth Fatally Stabbed Near His Home
For years, groups of teen-agers from Morris Park in the Bronx have had a brawling rivalry with youths from Pelham Bay, just across the Hutchinson River Parkway.
Yesterday, the police said that one of those confrontations ended in death.
James Tobin, an 18-year-old who lived on Edison Avenue in Pelham Bay, was stabbed twice in the chest and died in the street two blocks from his home after he was chased down by a gang of teen-agers, apparently from the Morris Park area, the police said.


Competing for the Democratic Primary Voter
THE struggle for the Democratic Presidential nomination came to the county last week in the form of two dramatically different campaigners, Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas and former Gov.
Edmund G. Brown Jr. of California, competing for the New York primary vote on Tuesday.
Mr.
Clinton, seemingly well financed and backed by the county's Democratic leadership, campaigned as a candidate who could no longer depend on his lead over the insurgent Mr.
Brown, whose Westchester backers began to organize only three weeks ago in an effort to influence the county's 151,147 registered Democrats.


Peace Plans
IN THE Victorian-style side streets down the hill from the campus of Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, in Troy, N.Y., it is not unusual to see fraternity brothers moving piles of leaves around the neighborhood on a fall day, or shoveling all the walks on the block after a winter snowfall.
A new hazing ritual?
Not quite -- instead, they are a vivid example of R.P.I.'s "neighbor relations committees" in action.
The committees, which grew out of complaints several years ago about rowdy frat parties and at least two off-campus tavern brawls involving R.P.I. students, represent an extraordinary attempt by the university and its students to soothe any ill will.
The university would like to replace it with an era of good feelings between the 1,650 undergraduates who live off campus and their nonstudent neighbors.


Chasing Pop-Jazz's Elusive Spirit
How is the glorious pop jazz vocal tradition that runs from Ella Fitzgerald to Doris Day going to be perpetuated?
As the generation of singers that reached maturity in the 1940's and 50's heads into its declining years, no one has come along who commands the artistic stature of its finest voices.
But there is no dearth of singers who seem eager to carry on the pop-jazz tradition.
Even without a big-band network to nurture talents like those of Miss Fitzgerald and Miss Day, the public appetite for pre-rock music only appears to have increased with the recent success of albums by Linda Ronstadt, Natalie Cole and Harry Connick Jr.
The newest records by singers with their hearts in the 40's and 50's -- Diane Schuur's "In Tribute" (GRP 2006; cassette and CD) and Mary Cleere Haran's "There's a Small Hotel" (Columbia 52403; cassette and CD) -- are welcome additions to a steadily growing catalogue of old-fashioned pop albums by singers under the age of 45.


Corrections
An article yesterday about negotiations between a newspaper deliverers union and The New York Times misidentified, in some copies, another company negotiating with the union.
It is the Imperial Delivery Service, which is acquiring the assets of the Newspaper Distribution Corporation.


Jake Writes to Survive, but Is That Enough?
Here's what I liked best about "Jake's Women," Neil Simon's new play: Jake's women.
Jake, I had some problems with.
No offense to Alan Alda, who portrays the 53-year-old writer in the grips of a midlife crisis.


Style Makers; J. R. Sanders, Exhibit and Interior Designer
When J. R. Sanders, an Atchison, Kan., painter and sculptor, followed his dreams to New York in 1980, he hoped to get a foot in the door of the city's art world.
He now deals with art, but his own works are tucked in the closet of his Manhattan apartment.
Mr.
Sanders, 39 years old, owns Sanders Design Works, a company that he started in 1985 and that now specializes in museum and interior design.
He coordinates all aspects of an exhibit, including the size and shape of the pedestals and the color of the walls.
And if people remember nothing of his work but the exhibit itself, he considers his job well done.


How School Districts Fared on State Report Cards
The second annual 'report cards' on New Jersey schools were recently released by John Ellis, the State Education Commissioner.
The reports cover all New Jersey school districts, providing information in such areas as teacher-to-student ratios and student test performance.
The report card program is a joint effort of the State Education Department and the Business Roundtable Education Initiative of New Jersey, a group of nine corporations that paid the $85,000 cost of compiling and distributing the reports.


Laugh Track


Into the Woods


Fan Fare


Abroad at Home; Wreck Or Rescue?
This is a year of anger in politics.
Voters are angry at economic misery, at politicians who give themselves perks, at institutions that do not work.
They are in a mood to punish, to destroy.
Jerry Brown fits that mood.
He comes on as a Savonarola who would purge an impure system.
And if there is a real Jerry Brown underneath the various political masks, it may be something like that: Savonarola.


Jaclyn Kaplan, Teacher, Weds
Jaclyn Lori Kaplan, a teacher at Public School 11 in New York, and Todd Nathaniel Morrison, a project administrator in the New York City General Services Department, were married last evening at Shelter Rock Jewish Center in Roslyn, L.I.
Rabbi Myron M. Fenster officiated.
The bride, 27 years old, graduated from Emory University and received a master's degree in education from New York University.
She is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Philip Kaplan of Bay Shore, L.I.
Her father is an ophthalmologist in Bay Shore and a former president of the Ophthalmological Societies of Long Island and of Suffolk County.


Me: 'Don't Finish My -' You: 'Sentence.'
WHEN Charlotte Beers unexpectedly quit as chief executive of a large advertising agency in Chicago, she pointed to three younger executives and told a reporter: "These guys needed headroom. They began to finish all my sentences."
The meaning of
began to finish all my sentences
was "moved in on me, crowded me, assumed part of my authority." It is a metaphor for challenge or derogation, and is not meant to be taken literally.


Bearing Witness for Good Deeds
When Paul Fireman, the chairman and chief executive of Reebok International Ltd., agreed to sponsor a 1988 rock music tour for Amnesty International, he had no idea this one good deed would lead him and his company in a new and risky direction.
"We were very cautious with the concert sponsorship," he said.
"We took a backseat role."
But the experience was so gratifying that Mr.
Fireman, 47, has made human rights the in-house cause at Reebok, the athletic-shoe maker based in Stoughton, Mass.
During the last four years, the company's foundation has given millions to activists around the world.


Outdoor Trips From A.Y.H.
American Youth Hostels, which has been offering travel at low cost for 50 years, has just announced its series of outdoor trips for this year for teen-agers and travelers over 50.
There are 10 itineraries for teen-agers and 5 hiking trips for the over-50's, all under the label of Discovery Tours.
In the program for youngsters aged 15 to 18, there are bicycling tours in the United States, Canada and Europe.
One explores French Canada for 16 days for $675 and another the Finger Lakes area of New York for 10 days for $395.
Rates include lodging in hostels or campgrounds and meals; air and other transportation to the starting point is not included.
Experienced riders, both teen-agers and young adults (aged 17 to 25), can join a tour led by the Swiss Youth Hostels Association and ride from Basel to Lausanne for eight days for $300.
On all tours there are usually nine participants and a leader.


Used Indoors or Out, Ladders Can Be Crucial
LADDERS are indispensable for a variety of home improvement tasks.
Indoors, a stepladder works best, because it does not have to lean against walls for support.
A five- or six-foot stepladder is adequate for reaching most ceilings.
But avoid shorter models, as standing any higher on a stepladder than the second rung from the top is dangerous.
Outdoors, where greater heights are encountered, use an extension ladder.
They consist of two straight sliding sections that hook together to form a single long length.
Extension ladders that go as high as 35 feet are available.
Choose a length that will enable the ladder to be extended at least three feet higher than the level at which you plan to stand.


Lure Acquires a Tie On Road to the Derby
The Eastern end of the road to the Kentucky Derby took some strange turns yesterday when the sprinting star Lure ran a dead heat with Devil His Due in the Gotham Mile at Aqueduct.
And in an echo of past glory and present failure, Strike the Gold lost for the 12th time since winning last year's Derby and was offered for sale next month as part of the breakup of the stable of his three feuding owners.
Lure, who is owned by Claiborne Farm and is widely ranked as New York's best hope for the Derby on May 2, was crowded and maybe jostled on the rail as he ran the mile in 1:353/5.
He dueled fiercely down the stretch with Devil His Due, and they finished nose to nose, with Best Decorated third.
They also dashed some punishing fractions along the way: the quarter-mile in 221/5 seconds, the half-mile in 434/5 seconds and three-quarters in 1:081/5.


Middle-Class Protests Cast a Cloud on Democracy in Venezuela
Two months after a failed military coup here left dozens dead, rising protests by a middle class galvanized by the military action have cast dark shadows over this country's three-decade-old democratic system, Venezuelan experts and foreign diplomats say.
This city has long been accustomed to confrontational student protests and labor strikes.
But these experts and diplomats say raw new displays of anger by the middle class over a patronage-riddled political system and falling living standards threaten the survival of the elected Government of President Carlos Andres Perez as much as continued rumblings in the army.


TV: Why Even the New Seems Like Deja Vu
The prototypical pose of the late 20th-century American is slouched on a sofa with wrist extended perfectly parallel to the floor, clicking a remote control.
And the prototypical thought of that American is, "Why isn't there anything on?"
Through the giggling sitcoms we click, gathering speed at the shopping channels, flying through the ranks of preachers and the congressmen on C-Span and the eternal weather map and the tinny-sounding local-access shows and the look-alike music videos and the round-the-clock news.


Norway's Fjords
To the Editor: Your story about the boat trip up the Norwegian coast ("By Steamer Through Norway's Fjords," Feb. 2) aroused pleasant memories for my wife and me.
We took the round trip a few years ago and were impressed with the beauty of Norway and the friendliness of the crew, both cabin and deck.
However, there was one note that we found not so pleasant.
As our ship went up and down the coast, we noticed many of the villages seemed quite recently constructed, but there was no explanation.
We had to ask about a particularly hideous structure in one of the towns; it had been a German submarine pen in World War II, and the Norwegians had been unable to destroy it.


Raw Materials
Here is a medieval quality to this loft.
Massive brick walls, arched doorways, old tile floors and metal doors give it the air of a distant time and place.
The view, however, puts Tim and Dagny Du Val's Long Island City home into perspective: It offers a panoramic sweep of the Manhattan skyline, with the World Trade Center's twin towers in the distance.


Sports of The Times; What Will Baseball Discover?
FIVE hundred years after Columbus sailed the ocean blue, baseball's Year of Discovery opens tomorrow.
Seldom has the national pastime been confronted by so many new frontiers, from the Florida State Attorney's imminent ruling on the rape investigation involving three Mets players to the Houston Astros' 26-game tour of eight cities over 28 days while the Republican National Convention occupies the Astrodome.


New Flights To Washington
People in western Connecticut and the Westchester area now have an alternative to driving the 75 miles to La Guardia Airport to catch a shuttle flight to Washington.
A USAir commuter line today begins service from Stewart International Airport in Newburgh, N.Y., to National Airport in Washington.
There will be three round trips Monday to Friday, with the early departure southbound at 7:45 A.M., and the last northbound return at 7 P.M.
There are fewer flights on weekends.
The flight is scheduled for an hour and 10 minutes.


Industrial Revolution
SOMETIMES, in a town-gown relationship, the gown can remake the town and become more stylish itself.
Ask George Bugliarello.
In his 18 years as president of what is now Polytechnic University in downtown Brooklyn, Mr.
Bugliarello has shepherded the institution and the neighborhood through a $1 billion-plus construction program called Metrotech -- a 16-acre, university-corporate park that has risen in what was once a rundown neighborhood.


Wall Street; Glossing Over Health Care Fraud
As Congress and law enforcement agencies turn up the heat on health care fraud and abuse, Wall Street analysts generally have been slow to see the issue as a threat to stock prices.
Last fall, for example, National Medical Enterprises, the operator of 74 for-profit psychiatric hospitals, was accused by hundreds of former patients and employees of a wide range of abuses, including misleading marketing practices and insurance fraud.
Law enforcement authorities in several states started investigations of the company and others, which still continue.


Corrections
A subheading on page 23 of the Arts and Leisure section today with a theater article about Alec Baldwin refers incorrectly in some copies to the actor's appearance in "Prelude to a Kiss." It was off Broadway, not on.


POSTINGS: On the River in Stamford; A Nautical Refitting
Suburban office towers often are derided for their sterile architectural styles, but Clearwater Associates, the owners of the Clearwater House in Stamford, Conn., a 10-story building, hope to change that stereotype by giving its facade a facelift with a nautical motif.
The 106,000-square-foot building, on the banks of the West Branch River on Washington Boulevard, opened five years ago and houses mainly companies involved in the shipping industry.


Savannah
Early spring, when the azalea and wisteria embroider Savannah's elegant grid of downtown squares in bright dabs of color, may be the best season to visit one of the South's most historic cities.
Founded in 1733, Savannah began as a rather audacious vision -- an attempt to create a vibrant urban environment built around a symmetrical network of urban squares out of Georgia swampland.
Today, the city is still a work in progress.
It has not gone as far as neighboring Charleston in putting all the pieces together, but its inviting urban geometry, rich sense of history and compact downtown make it an exceptionally inviting place.
This is a good time of year, before the summer heat really sets in, to explore Savannah on foot.
There are at least four focal points for visitors: the restored waterfront, scene of music and arts exhibits the first Saturday of each month; the leafy grid of squares full of intriguing architecture and history; the restored City Market, where old warehouses have been restored into restaurants and shops, and Tybee Island, 18 miles east of downtown Savannah, which offers beaches, fishing and boating for those who have had their fill of downtown.


Ms. Carroll to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Robert A. Carroll of Dedham, Mass., have announced June wedding plans for their daughter Christine Mary Carroll and Jason Walter Reese, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Walter J. Reese 3d of West Babylon, L.I.


General Warning: Bonds Still Plays for Pirates
This preview was prepared and written by Murray Chass.
Teams are presented in alphabetical order and the starting lineups are his projections.
His probable starters for the Mets appear on page 3.
Relief pitchers listed are the closers.
Staff predictions for the teams' order of finish in each division appears on page 6.
Chicago Cubs
The Tribune Company, the team's owner, changed the club's president and general manager, then gave Ryne Sandberg a $7.1 million-a-year contract extension that was widely criticized.
The Cubs also have a new manager, Jim Lefebvre, who left a lot of unhappy players behind in Seattle.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
MONTANA MEMORIES
Two Dot, Mont., might have languished in obscurity were it not for Joy Wulke.
While teaching art at Montana State University, she became fascinated by the gradual decay of an abandoned one-room schoolhouse in nearby Two Dot, observing and photographing its decline over a 10-year period until, she said, "to me, the building came to be a person."


One Man's Opinion
If JUAN ANTONIO SAMARANCH knows what he's talking about -- and maybe he doesn't -- MAGIC JOHNSON won't be playing in the Summer Olympics.
Samaranch, the president of the International Olympic Committee, made his assertion in an interview on a flight to Estonia.
During the interview, he made it clear that he had no objections to having Johnson, who is infected with the virus that causes AIDS, participate in the Olympics.


Lake Superior Storms Back to Win Title
Lake Superior State won the National Collegiate Athletic Association Division I hockey championship tonight with a 5-3 victory over Wisconsin before a crowd of 12,481 at Knickerbocker Arena.
The Lakers came from a 2-0 deficit after one period, tied the match after two and won it in the last 20 minutes.
The winning goal was scored by a third-line center, Brian Rolston, a freshman from Ann Arbor, Mich., at 15 minutes 8 seconds.
The last goal went into an empty Wisconsin net with two seconds remaining.


Two Waitresses a la Samuel Beckett
FOR some 40 years modern playwrights have been beholden to Samuel Beckett, who stripped the theatrical landscape of conventional structure and scenery and got to the essence of being, the void of existence, the meaning of meaninglessness, the hope beyond hopelessness and the implications of words.
Like waiting.
Some playwrights apparently feel obliged to keep reminding us of that debt by invoking parallels to such Beckettian concerns as going on amid barrenness and trifling time away with seeming non sequiturs.
Borrowing from old masters is confused with developing a new voice for some writers.
Like Rachel Sheinkin.


Robin Davies Has Wedding
Robin Anne Davies, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Leslie S. Davies of Ridgewood, N.J., was married there yesterday to Peter Randolph Naylor, a son of Randolph S. Naylor of Prides Crossing, Mass., and Katherine P. Tyson of Sudbury, Mass.
The Rev.
Douglas Fromm, a minister of the Reformed Church of America, performed the ceremony at St.
Elizabeth's Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Naylor, 25 years old, is an advertising account manager at Vogue magazine in New York.
She graduated from Randolph-Macon Woman's College.
Her father is a vice president of Prudential Securities in Paramus, N.J.


Not a Safe Haven for Managers
To the Editor:
In "Time to Scuttle Chapter 11" (Forum, March 8) the authors say, "Chapter 11, far from preserving valuable assets, in fact serves mainly to protect managers' jobs."


Mud, Glorious Mud In Hills Near Padua
THE skies were almost guaranteed to be sunny, the air balmy and Abano, a worldly spa near Padua, in northern Italy, was a soothing place to spend a few days, said friends.
The blue-green Euganean Hills nearby were laced with villas and magical medieval towns.
And (the guidebook informed me) the salty, heavily mineralized water that bubbles out of the ground at temperatures up to 188 degrees has been appreciated for its curative powers at least since Veneti tribes from the Danube came spilling in to occupy the area more than 2,700 years ago.
But there was one thing that seemed slightly distressing about Abano Terme -- the very thing the place is famous for, in fact.


Brenda Bocina Has Wedding
Brenda Ann Bocina, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Casper Bocina of Short Hills, N.J., was married yesterday in Beaver Creek, Colo., to Thomas Johnson Curnin, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas Curnin of Larchmont, N.Y.
The Rev.
Daniel Johnson performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Beaver Creek Interfaith Chapel.
Mrs.
Curnin, 32 years old, is the president of Rustic Ridge Financial Planning Inc., a consulting concern in Dover, N.J.
She graduated from Gettysburg College and received an M.B.A. from Duke University.
Her father is a real-estate developer in Short Hills.


BEST SELLERS: April 5, 1992
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
4
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $22.50.) A woman law student seeks to discover the truth about the murder of two Supreme Court justices.
2
2
8
RISING SUN, by Michael Crichton. (Knopf, $22.) The mysterious death of a young woman leads to an investigation in which technology and the American-Japanese rivalry play major roles.
3
4
4
THE ELF QUEEN OF SHANNARA, by Terry Brooks. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $22.) The third volume in a series about a fantasy land.
4
3
6
THE ROAD TO OMAHA, by Robert Ludlum. (Random House, $23.95.) A retired general and a lawyer scheme to take possession of the state of Nebraska on behalf of an obscure Indian tribe.
5
5
7
VOX, by Nicholson Baker. (Random House, $15.) A man and a woman learn about each other through a telephone conversation on an "adult party line."
6
6
3
PROBE, by Margaret Wander Bonanno. (Pocket, $18.95.) The crew of "Star Trek" 's Enterprise confronts a force that threatens galactic peace.
7
7
15
DISNEY'S BEAUTY AND THE BEAST. (Gallery Books/Penguin USA, $6.98.) A retelling of the classic fairy tale in words and pictures.
8
10
4
OUTERBRIDGE REACH, by Robert Stone. (Ticknor &amp; Fields, $21.95.) A man tries to relieve the frustrations of his lifetime by participating in a solo sailing race.
9
1
ACTS OF FAITH, by Erich Segal. (Bantam, $23.) The stories of three Brooklyn natives, one of whom rises high in the Roman Catholic hierarchy, two who break with their traditional Jewish heritage.
10
8
26
SCARLETT, by Alexandra Ripley. (Warner, $24.95.) The sequel to "Gone With the Wind."
11
15
2
TRIAL BY FIRE, by Harold Coyle. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) The United States Army in a war against Mexico, a conflict marked by revolutionary forces, drug lords and bungled intelligence.
12 *
9
4
TREASURES, by Belva Plain. (Delacorte, $21.) The loyalties of a brother and two sisters are tested by the changing values of the past two decades.
13
11
4
THE CAT WHO MOVED A MOUNTAIN, by Lilian Jackson Braun. (Putnam, $18.95.) Jim Qwilleran tracks down the murderer of a millionaire.
14
6
GRIFFIN &amp; SABINE, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $16.95.) The romance of an artist and a secret admirer, told through illustrated cards and letters.
15
14
102
OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr. Seuss. (Random House, $12.95.) Verse and pictures.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
10
REVOLUTION FROM WITHIN, by Gloria Steinem. (Little, Brown, $22.95.) The reflections of a feminist on the struggle to achieve self-esteem.
2
2
5
DOUBLE CROSS, by Sam Giancana and Chuck Giancana. (Warner, $22.95.) Two relatives of the late Sam Giancana recall his life in the Mafia.
3
3
20
BACKLASH, by Susan Faludi. (Crown, $24.) A journalist contends that the media and political groups are staging a war against women's rights.
4
4
3
ROGUE WARRIOR, by Richard Marcinko with John Weisman. (Pocket, $22.) The autobiography of the retired commander of a Navy counterterrorist unit.
5
5
25
DEN OF THIEVES, by James B. Stewart. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) How four men plundered and created havoc on Wall Street.
6
7
18
MEMORIES, by Ralph Emery with Tom Carter. (Macmillan, $19.95.) The autobiography of a country-music broadcaster.
7
10
14
BROTHER EAGLE, SISTER SKY: A Message From Chief Seattle, illustrated by Susan Jeffers. (Dial, $14.95.) An environmental warning.
8
2
EARTH IN THE BALANCE, by Al Gore. (Houghton Mifflin, $22.95.) The Tennessee Senator discusses factors affecting the environment.
9 *
6
6
UNTO THE SONS, by Gay Talese. (Knopf, $25.) A journalist traces his Italian heritage.
10
1
THE DISUNITING OF AMERICA, by Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr. (Norton, $14.95.) A historian considers the effects that the current emphasis on ethnicity is having on our society.
11 *
9
5
THE OVERWORKED AMERICAN, by Juliet B. Schor. (Basic, $21.) An economist argues that in the past 20 years Americans' leisure time has greatly diminished, with foreboding consequences.
12
8
6
THE TEXAS CONNECTION, by Craig I. Zirbel. (Texas Connection/Ingram, $21.95.) An attorney says L.B.J. was involved in the death of J.F.K.
13 *
11
20
MOLLY IVINS CAN'T SAY THAT, CAN SHE? by Molly Ivins. (Random House, $23.) Essays about the current political and cultural scene.
14
12
12
PLAUSIBLE DENIAL, by Mark Lane. (Thunder's Mouth/Publishers Group West, $22.95.) The case for C.I.A. involvement in the death of J.F.K.
15
22
TOUJOURS PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Knopf, $20.) The charms of rustic France.
16 *
15
8
SEIZE THE MOMENT, by Richard Nixon. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) The former President defines the challenges America now faces.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
7
A RETURN TO LOVE, by Marianne Williamson. (HarperCollins, $20.) Inspirational advice about ways to replace feelings of fear with feelings of love in daily life.
2
2
18
MORE WEALTH WITHOUT RISK, by Charles J. Givens. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) An updated and expanded volume of financial advice.
3
3
13
AWAKEN THE GIANT WITHIN, by Anthony Robbins. (Summit, $20.) Ways to take control of your emotional, physical and financial destiny.
4
4
18
HOW TO SATISFY A WOMAN EVERY TIME, by Naura Hayden. (Bibli O'Phile/Dutton, $14.95.) Sexual counsel for married couples.
5
1
THE ART OF WORLDLY WISDOM, by Baltasar Gracian. (Currency/Doubleday, $15.) Advice on how to live and labor; the work of a 17th-century Spanish Jesuit scholar.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,050 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
And Bear in Mind
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
REGENERATION, by Pat Barker. (William Abrahams/Dutton, $20.) Ms.
Barker takes brilliantly to semihistorical fiction with a polemic-free tale of war, manhood and madness, about the rebellion, the psychiatric treatment and the return to the front of the poet Siegfried Sassoon in World War I.
WAKE UP LITTLE SUSIE: Single Pregnancy and Race Before Roe v.
Wade, by Rickie Solinger. (Routledge, $25.) A scholar's grim analysis of the treatment -- and the difference in treatment -- accorded women and girls who became extramaritally pregnant.
I AM ZOE HANDKE, by Eric Larsen. (Algonquin Books of Chapel Hill, $16.95.) In highly mannered but precisely controlled prose, this novel pursues a daughter's struggle with the most destructive and terrifying of childhood emotions: abandonment and loss.
THE MISMEASURE OF WOMAN, by Carol Tavris. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) A social psychologist examines the scientific study of fundamental differences between men and women; she finds much of it just plain wrong, even when its agenda is feminist.
LETTERS OF GUSTAVE COURBET, edited by Petra ten-Doesschate Chu. (University of Chicago, $55.) Wonderful, intense stuff by the great painter, who was a raving democrat when looking above him in society, a solid bourgeois when looking down.
THE LOVE QUEEN OF THE AMAZON, by Cecile Pineda. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) A droll novel about sex and stuffy society on the upper Amazon, full of well-handled incongruities and characters who insist on making theatrical fools of themselves and others.
POSTCARDS, by E. Annie Proulx. (Scribners, $22.95.) This lovely novel of the 1940's-80's era turns on a murderer's exile and the decline of the family and the landscape he left behind in Vermont.


When Hollywood Is a Killer
Robert Altman is one of the most inventive and unpredictable directors in American film, a movie maker who inspires loyalty among actors and anger among studio chiefs.
His newest film, "The Player," a scabrous look at the movie business, opens on Friday but has already been hailed as Mr.
Altman's revenge on Hollywood.
Whatever the movie's reception, the zigzag career of the 67-year-old director has taken another abrupt turn.
"I'm making my fourth comeback now," said Mr.
Altman, grinning.
"I had some misgivings toward the end of editing this film. I thought, suppose this film is a real bomb, suppose it doesn't work and it's an embarrassment, suppose it's 'Bonfire of the Vanities.' That would have been the end."


Ellsworth Kelly, an American in Paris
One of the more spectacular reversals in the history of postwar art is being celebrated at the Galerie National du Jeu de Paume in Paris, where the current exhibition is called "Ellsworth Kelly: The French Years, 1948-54." It is safe to say that during the years in question virtually nobody, either in Paris or in the United States, would have foreseen this particular apotheosis.
For that matter, it still comes as a shock to Parisians and to foreign visitors alike that any living artist, let alone an American, should take over the Jeu de Paume.
Its very name is still sacrosanct.
When it was the national museum of French Impressionism it had, inch for inch, as high a concentration of great paintings by the Impressionists as could be found anywhere in the world.
When it opened in 1947, it was as if a lost paradise had been regained.


June Wedding For Ms. Coulson
Mr. and Mrs.
Colin Coulson of London have announced June wedding plans for their daughter, Jacqueline Sara Coulson, and Frederick H. Frank, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lloyd Frank of New York.
Ms.
Coulson, 27 years old, was until recently the marketing manager of Kleinwort Benson, a private bank in London.
She graduated from University College of the University of London.
Her father is chairman of the board of L. G. Mouchel &amp; Partners, an engineering consulting firm in Weybridge, Surrey, England.
Her mother, Heather Coulson, is a professional photographer in London.


Roger Dickes to Wed Ms. Cornman
Mr. and Mrs.
Michael A. Cornman of Irvington, N.Y., have announced the engagement of Mr.
Cornman's daughter Madeleine Cornman to Roger M. Dickes, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Richard A. Dickes of Morristown, N.J.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Cornman, 22 years old, is a student at Barnard College and an actress known as Maddie Corman.
She appears in "My New Gun," a film to be released this summer.
Her father is a senior partner in the New York law firm of Schweitzer Cornman &amp; Gross.
Her late mother, Irene Kerman Cornman, was a learning-disability specialist.


Mutual Funds; Tax Formulas for Steady Investors
With the income tax deadline looming, many mutual fund investors are struggling to figure the profits from the sales of their fund shares.
For some investors, the struggle is not as difficult as in the past, because more and more funds are giving investors data to help them calculate their gains and losses.
A proposal to require all funds to provide tax information was killed last month when President Bush vetoed the Congressional tax package.
But Oppenheimer and Putnam began to provide data last year.
This year, Keystone, Colonial and Pioneer joined them.
American Capital and Franklin have programs in the works.


Citing Rise in Frustration, Dozens of Lawmakers Quit
Redistricting, frustration with legislative gridlock and worries over scandals both real and imagined are causing more members of the House of Representatives to choose to leave than at any time within memory.
So far, 44 members have said they will not seek re-election, with 32 retiring from politics outright and 12 leaving to seek other offices.
And more are expected to follow in the next few weeks as new districting maps become final and filing deadlines approach.


Reputed Mobster Shot; Power Struggle Suspected
A reputed captain of the Lucchese crime family was shot and critically wounded Friday night by a gunman who fired a shotgun through the window of a crowded Long Island restaurant where the victim was celebrating a 4-year-old girl's birthday party, the police said.
Investigators yesterday were looking into the possibility that the shooting was the latest in a series of recent attacks stemming from power struggles within the crime families, said Inspector Mel Kenny, commanding officer of detective squads for the Nassau County police.


Bright Ideas
Being British, Andy Summers likes houses with many levels and lots of rooms.
Being imaginative, he called on the California architect Mark Mack to help translate these traditional, European notions into the modern Southern California idiom for a new home for his family in Santa Monica.
The two spent six months on the plans: "We'd mentally walk around the house visualizing every detail," he recalls.
Bringing the outside in was an important part of the scheme.
Large windows, sliding glass doors and terraces afford views of the courtyard and plantings.
Color and layout give the house its personality.
Built on different levels, it allows for communal areas and smaller private spaces for family members.
The palette, inside and out, is a rainbow of hues reminiscent of the work of the Mexican architect Luis Barragan.
Says Summers: "The feeling of the house is in fact more Mexican than Southwest."


Adventure Fitness
To the Editor: I was fascinated by your article on the importance of identifying potential participants who might create havoc on an adventure-travel tour.
As the director of tours and talks for the 92d St.
Y, I initiate and expedite tours throughout the United States and Europe, Asia, Africa and South America.
Recognizing the impact on the group of just one person's inability to adjust to the rigors of the tour, I have established a policy of personally interviewing every participant.
Not only does this insure that the interested party will be able to partake successfully of the more strenuous aspects of the tour, but this also insures appropriate arrangements for roommates and social adjustments.
In addition, my interview lets the traveler understand all phases of the trip, including any hiking or climbing involved; the nature of the terrain; the type of food and lodging as well as a description of the other participants.


Knicks Come Down With Tunnel Vision
The Knicks have spoken, and the feeling is unanimous.
This afternoon's game against the Cleveland Cavaliers will be one of the most important of the season.
"I'm approaching it like a playoff game," said Knicks forward Xavier McDaniel.
"There's a good chance we'll be seeing them in the second round of the playoffs.


Sorting Out Vines, Annual and Perennial
THERE is something rewarding about having a vine growing in the garden.
When put in the right place, a vine can do wonders to screen out something unsightly or provide a dramatic upright statement.
The best part, most vines grow easily without much tending.
Annual vines are the easiest to start with.
They last for one year and are then killed off by fall frosts.
These vines can be temporary solutions.
If the look is not right for the place in the garden, then the experiment lasted for only a year, and another planting scheme can be tried.


Q and A
Show Tapings in Los Angeles
Q.
I will be in Los Angeles in June.
How do I get tickets to see any of the various television game shows or the "Tonight" show?
Also, how can I get to be a contestant on "Wheel of Fortune"? -- C. Donello, Bronx


New Move To Combat Sex Bias in Classroom
THE Lawrenceville School is suspending classes on Thursday and Friday so that students and faculty members can attend a conference dealing with the role of sex bias in education.
Teachers in the Princeton public schools have begun to monitor one another's classes, in part to insure that girls are being called upon as often as boys.
At Douglass College in New Brunswick, a summer- school program offers girls entering the 11th grade special classes in mathematics, science and engineering.


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
Albertson 335,000
70 Croyden Court  5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 35-year-old splanch; family room, fireplace, finished basement, 2-car garage; taxes $7,500.
Commack 162,500
6 Romeo Lane  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 31- year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den; taxes $4,300.
Massapequa 330,000
149 Harbor View Drive  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 31-year-old colonial; dining room, den, c/a, patio; taxes $7,700.
Mineola 225,000
25 Weybridge Road  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 55-year-old Tudor; eat-in kitchen, fireplace, 1-car garage; taxes $3,300.
New Hyde Park 262,000
106 Sycamore Road  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 39-year-old ranch; eat-in kitchen, basement, attached 1-car garage; taxes $4,500.
Seaford 160,000
3917 Barns Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 37-year-old split level; dining room, eat-in kitchen, basement, 1- car garage; taxes $5,000.
OTHER AREAS South Salem, N.Y. 530,000
Autumn Ridge Road
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 2-year-old colonial; 2 fireplaces, porch, eat-in kitchen, family room, Jacuzzi; taxes $3,290.
Madison, Conn. 100,000
6 Signal Hill Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 42-year-old colonial; large family room, needs work, 0.75 acre; taxes $3.197.
Toms River, N.J. 164,900
887 Yellowbank Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 5 year-old colonial; 2-car garage, c/a, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $2,941.


This Week
Finally: Dirty Hands
Last call for pruning of deciduous trees, shrubs and roses before new growth begins.
Hold off on trimming any maples and birches until they are fully leafed out, and don't prune spring-flowering shrubs until after they finish blooming.


Tracing A Heritage By Jukebox
ALEX Haley sparked Americans' curiosity in their past through his book and the television mini-series "Roots." Now Alan Lomax, author of 12 books on American music and producer of "The American Patchwork" series on the subject for the Public Broadcasting System, has made it possible for those same Americans to trace their heritage through music.
Mr.
Lomax has developed the Global Jukebox, an audiovisual computer system, that contains more than 4,000 songs from more than 400 countries.
The jukebox -- actually a personal computer hooked up to a television screen and two speakers -- contains statistical data, charts, graphs, dance videos and a sizable portion of the world's music.
This year, Mr.
Lomax and his staff at Hunter College's Association for Cultural Equity in New York City, where he is director, received a $1 million grant from the National Science Foundation to improve the prototype.
Mr.
Lomax says that by next year, Global Jukeboxes will be manufactured for sale to libraries, schools and museums.


Offenses Sputter As Knights Fall Again
This is what happens in the World League when both quarterbacks are sent to the sidelines with injuries: three field goals win the game.
Tom Gallery, a kicker who rose through the ranks to join the San Antonio Riders, booted the three tonight for San Antonio's 9-3 victory, spoiling the season's home debut of the New York/New Jersey Knights.


In Florida, Testing Road to the Future
IT used to be that automotive technology had to do with . . . well, with
cars.
Ultimately, if you were a manufacturer, you went with Cadillac's electric starter.
Or with Ford's inexpensive V8.
Or with Plymouth's hydraulic brakes.
These days, though, the innards are pretty much alike.
To be sure, some cars lack air bags and antilock brakes, but those things will come, dictated by the marketplace.
And so, more and more, the technology has to do not with rods and levers and multiple-valve engines, but with the periphery.


Picking Up Pointers for a Self-Help Clearinghouse in Poland
A GROUP of community leaders from Poland received a primer here recently on the care and feeding of volunteers and the steps needed to establish an effective self-help network.
Eight representatives of the newly formed Ochota Self-Help Association, from the Ochota district of Warsaw, completed a two-week study tour of the United States with a morning session at the Westchester Self-Help Clearinghouse, a division of Westchester Jewish Community Services.
The Polish leaders, their translators and members of the Delphi International Group, a Washington-based organization that arranged the tour, heard Leslie Borck Jameson describe how a successful self-help association works.
Dr.
Jameson is a psychologist and director of the clearinghouse and is the assistant executive director of special programs for Westchester Jewish Community Services.


A NIGERIAN RACKET LURES FOREIGNERS
A foreign business executive, lured by promises of huge and easy profits, arrives in Nigeria.
Although he does not have a visa, he is whisked through customs and taken to a secret location.
There, his would-be Nigerian business partners let him know that he cannot leave unless he pays a large cash ransom or joins them in crooked dealings like money-laundering.
What has become known as the "visa scam" is just the latest in what the authorities in this West African nation say is a growing number of fraudulent schemes by Nigerian criminal syndicates and con artists intended to entice, entrap and intimidate American and British business people.


Mets Must Stay Focused Under Daily Magnifying Glass
For the Mets, the spring has had its shroud of silence, its shroud of scandal and its shroud of mystery.
As of tomorrow, though, the curtain will be up and the great, relentless process of exposure wrought by the regular baseball season will be under way.
The Mets could be very good or very average, with the real chance that very average will be good enough to win the National League East.
The Pirates have the best defense, the best player, the best manager and probably enough pitching to be in it to the end.
The Cubs have an arresting bullpen, a couple of quality starters, a load of lumber.


Sunday Menu; Mangoes Update the Fajita
Here's a recipe for a fajita on the cutting edge.
No more beef, red salsa and sour cream.
Instead, use vegetables, mango salsa and yogurt rolled in the tortilla.


New Age Retreat In New Mexico
FIVE years ago you couldn't have paid me to spend three days in the high lonesomeness of New Mexico, let alone at a "health retreat" with heavy New Age accents and 1,200 measly calories a day.
Growing up in the lunar landscape of the Southwest with coyotes for company is what turned me into a die-hard New Yorker with a healthy appetite for stress and crowds and craziness.
If I had gone home again, I might have been able to mellow out for a New Mexico minute, but only if I got to eat tamales and enchiladas.
Empanadas were actually on the menu at Vista Clara, but that was the smallest surprise of my 68-hour retreat to the spa outside Santa Fe last month.
What was far stranger is how a forbiddingly beautiful setting, lots of mindless luxury and a caring crew of body therapists very nearly converted me into an astrology-quoting, crystal-carrying, aquatic-aerobicizing new person.


Gotti and Good Humor Hone Campaign Focus
The Democratic Presidential candidates have seemed a little more likable on television the past few days, and it's possible that most of the credit belongs to John Gotti.
His conviction not only distracted the press corps from exploring the candidates' flaws, it also provided perspective: While the background pieces on the candidates' records may not be flattering, at least there's no footage of bullet-riddled bodies.
But the candidates deserve credit, too.
They have occasionally lapsed from their programmed promises and invective into moments of spontaneous charm.
Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas did his Elvis imitation and called himself a control freak.
Edmund G. Brown Jr. said he was studying Mr.
Clinton's smile in an effort to improve his own, and the former California Governor stopped assailing the corrupt elite long enough to talk about a sense of humor.


After Granola, What? Lichtwer's Little Garlic Pills?
Garlic is good for you, unless you're a vampire.
Ask anyone in Transylvania.
And so the health food industry has a new quest: To make garlic tablets as big a sensation as granola.
The pills already have quite a following in Europe, so why not the United States?
Selling the presumed disease-prevention benefits of a food product in the United States is tricky.
Marketers cannot plug medicinal merits directly in their advertising, unless they go through long, painstaking testing procedures that meet Food and Drug Administration approval.
But health food retailers and makers of garlic pills say sales have soared between 50 percent and 100 percent in the last year.
And the pills, once available only at health food stores, are starting to find their way onto the shelves of mass merchandisers and supermarkets like Wal-Mart Stores, A.&amp; P. and Walgreen's.


A Private-Dwelling Glossary
To many New Yorkers, any attached dwelling built to house a single family is a "brownstone," but that term and others are part of a shifting vernacular of real estate brokerese, popular usage and foggy nostalgia.
Here is a working glossary of house describers:
Brownstone -- A chocolate-colored sandstone of limited durability, but easily quarried and carved, and, by extension, the houses it often covered.
Most pre-1880 mansions had brownstone facades, but the term is now loosely associated with more modest houses of any material.
Brownstone has been corrupted to mean any small urban dwelling, and sometimes even tenements or commercial buildings.
In the 1860's, brownstone was at the height of fashion; by 1900, it was universally despised; by the 1960's, the term connoted the unusual and the charming.


Nestle's Move Symbolizes A Competitive Climate
THE announcement that Nestle is moving its headquarters to California, coming on the heels of General Motors's decision to close its North Tarrytown assembly plant in 1995, may raise the specter of an exodus from Westchester.
But corporate and government leaders say the county is resilient enough to recover from the loss of two major employers.
The Nestle Food Company, in fact, can be viewed as a window into a changing economic future.
Long the beneficiary of major corporate relocations, Westchester is now experiencing the effect of corporate downsizing, mergers and restructuring.
Yet it expects growth in other economic areas.


Sunday Outing; Where All of New York City Spreads Out Before Visitors
You can get a bird's-eye view of New York City inside the Queens Museum of Art in Flushing Meadows-Corona Park.
Housed in the New York City Pavilion for the 1939 and 1964 World's Fairs, the museum has as its centerpiece the Panorama of New York City, a precise scale model of the five boroughs.
The whole city -- more than 835,000 buildings, along with streets, parks and bridges -- is recreated in wood, plastic and foam with brass bridges.
Miniature planes periodically land and take off from the model of La Guardia Airport.


Networking; It May Be 3 A.M., but Somewhere a C.N.E. Is Awake
Few computer users appreciate it when the network administrator decides to make changes in things at the height of the business day.
It's no surprise then that most administrators perform maintenance -- part of the growing support function that last year, at $6.89 billion, outstripped network sales as a revenue generating industry -- in the wee hours of the night when most people have gone home.
But what if the administrator encounters a problem and wants to telephone an expert for advice?
Most experts are at home asleep, too.
Well, for $3 a minute, billed to the caller's telephone number, 900 Support in Lake Oswego, Ore., will put an expert on Novell Inc.'s Netware operating system on the phone to dispense advice in the middle of the night.


Dollar Edges Up Against the Yen
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
133.40
132.97
136.65
per Dollar
German Mark
1.6260
1.6405
1.6855
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.1885
1.1888
1.1543
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.7421
1.7445
1.7655
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$340.70
$342.20
$359.00
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


CAMPUS LIFE: SUNY, Buffalo; Amid Competition, College to Expand Its Food Offerings
The State University of New York at Buffalo has expanded its mealtime repertory, offering fast-food counters on campus to win back some patrons who were lost to a new mini-mall and making meal plans compulsory for many students to insure that they buy food sold by the university.
Until last spring, the university had the monopoly on selling meals through the dining halls on campus.
That changed when a privately owned mini-mall was opened on the north campus, drawing students and faculty members with restaurants including Burger King and Pizza Hut and snacks like bagels, cookies and frozen yogurt.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: New York; Despite Their Differences, Cuomo Gives Clinton Praise
Putting aside years of personal and political enmity, Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas and Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo of New York made a public show of mutual respect today at a news conference four days before the critical New York primary.
Most important for Mr.
Clinton, who is engaged in a fierce and negative campaign with former Gov.
Edmund G. Brown Jr. of California, Mr.
Cuomo asserted that "as a package Bill Clinton would make in my opinion a superb President." While Mr.
Cuomo said he would remain neutral, he followed his praise of Mr.
Clinton with a comment about Mr.
Brown that, deliberately or not, was considerably less effusive.


CAMPUS LIFE: California, Davis; Harassment Case Puts Student Band Under Probation
The 140-member student-run marching band at the University of California at Davis has been placed on administrative probation after a former band member filed a complaint of sexual harassment against the band and the band's leader.
The student activities director, Ted Adams, read the band members a letter in February that said the university was told that "members of the band have engaged in illegal behavior including sexual harassment, hazing and serving alcohol to minors."


Trips to View America's Cup
The San Diego Spectator Fleet, a consortium of three passenger boat companies in San Diego, offers spectator cruises to watch the America's Cup racing.
Tickets cost $50 a person and rise to $90 on April 17 and again to $125 on May 9, the start of the final best-of-seven series.
The preliminary races, to select the defender and challenger, continue through May 1.
The fleet is made up of motor vessels from 65 to 120 feet long.
Accommodations aboard include lounges and sun decks and galley service for meals and snacks.
Cruises depart at 10 A.M. and, depending on wind conditions, return between 4 and 5 P.M.


Corrections
A report on the Evening Hours page on March 22 about a salute to Barbara Walters by the American Museum of the Moving Image in Queens misstated the museum's purpose.
It explores the art, history, technique and technology of film, television and video through exhibitions, screenings and collections of memorabilia.
It does not preserve old movies and television shows.


Street Fashion; On a Sunday, A Flea Market Splurge
Anything goes in the way of getting dressed for the Sunday flea market when the weather is right.
Odd jackets, every conceivable shape of trousers and a mixture of headgear from millinery to caps can all be seen.
The so-called deconstructed look camouflages the depth of your wallet.
Young people are jamming the market in search of furnishings and special pieces for their apartments, studios and lofts.
One of their favorite flea markets is the Sunday Antiques Fair on the Avenue of the Americas, which now stretches from the sidewalks of 23d Street through the parking lots of 26th Street.


Milton R. Rackmil, 86, Is Dead: Led Decca Records and Universal
Milton R. Rackmil, a co-founder of Decca Records and head of Universal Pictures for two decades, died on Thursday at the DeWitt Nursing Home in Manhattan.
He was 86 years old.
He died of a stroke, his family said.


Art and the Oldest Profession
PAINTED LOVE
Prostitution in French Art of the Impressionist Era.
By Hollis Clayson.
Illustrated. 202 pp.
New Haven: Yale University Press. $45.


A Hero Celebrated
"What a view of life a 14-year-old must get when he has to write to his father and godfather in prison for months on end!" wrote the Protestant theologian Dietrich Bonhoeffer from Tegel prison in Berlin in 1943.
He was referring to his nephew and godson, Christoph von Dohnanyi, now the music director of the Cleveland Orchestra.
The Bonhoeffer and Dohnanyi families played central roles in the German wartime resistance to Hitler.
By some accounts, it was Mr.
Dohnanyi's father, Hans, a member of the German supreme court, who delivered the bomb to be placed on Hitler's private plane in 1943. (The bomb failed to explode.) Shortly before the German collapse, in 1945, Hans von Dohnanyi, Bonhoeffer and two other members of the Bonhoeffer family were executed after long imprisonment.


The Executive Life; Silicon Egalitarians Scoff at a Private Club
A few years back, a profile by Tom Wolfe in Esquire of Silicon Valley pioneer Robert Noyce described how, in the early 60's, the employees of Fairchild Semiconductor, one of several companies he founded, gathered at the windows to gawk at a limousine and driver.
Limos are no longer an oddity in Silicon Valley, but in this down-to-earth culture any symbol of social stratification still causes squeamishness.
That is evident in the periodic failed attempts to establish here that bastion of East Coast urban life, the private club.
"The high-tech community doesn't have much use for things like this," said Paul Franson of the public relations firm of Hagerty &amp; Associates in San Jose.
"They don't go out to fancy lunches. You're lucky to have a sandwich at your desk."


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: April 5, 1992
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
10
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
2
10
FRIED GREEN TOMATOES AT THE WHISTLE STOP CAFE, by Fannie Flagg. (McGraw-Hill, $6.95.) Life in rural Alabama.
3
2
LONGSHOT, by Dick Francis. (Fawcett, $5.99.) An author of survival guides attempts to write about the world of horse racing.
4
7
LOVES MUSIC, LOVES TO DANCE, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Pocket, $5.99.) Two women get caught in the snare of a serial killer.
5
48
THE PRINCE OF TIDES, by Pat Conroy. (Bantam, $5.99.) Complex family relationships in South Carolina's low country and New York City.
6
7
HEARTBEAT, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $6.50.) A chance meeting of a man and a woman, both successful in television, brings them happiness.
7
3
THE SHERBROOKE BRIDE, by Catherine Coulter. (Jove, $5.99.) A tangled romance in which a man marries the sister of his intended bride.
8
1
PASTIME, by Robert B. Parker. (Berkley, $5.99.) The private eye Spenser helps a young man rescue his mother from the toils of a shady boyfriend.
9
2
CHAINS OF COMMAND, by W. A. McCay and E. L. Flood. (Pocket, $4.99.) "Star Trek" 's Enterprise is caught in a conflict between extraterrestrial humans and a birdlike race.
10 *
1
BODY OF EVIDENCE, by Patricia D. Cornwell. (Avon, $5.99.) As a Virginia medical examiner probes the grisly death of a reclusive woman writer, her own life is menaced in terrifying ways.
11
20
JURASSIC PARK, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A biotechnician clones dinosaurs for use in a theme park.
12 *
5
DAMAGE, by Josephine Hart. (Ivy, $5.99.) A British gentleman is mesmerized when he meets the woman his son plans to marry.
13
2
PERFECT PARTNERS, by Jayne Ann Krentz. (Pocket, $5.50.) The romance of a woman who inherits a giant business and the man who runs it.
14
6
THE OLD CONTEMPTIBLES, by Martha Grimes. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A Scotland Yardsman finds himself a suspect in the death of a widow.
15 *
5
EYES OF PREY, by John Sandford. (Berkley, $5.99.) A serial killer in the Twin Cities.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,050 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
1
4
YOU'LL NEVER EAT LUNCH IN THIS TOWN AGAIN, by Julia Phillips. (Signet, $6.99.) Life in Hollywood as experienced by an Academy Award-winning producer.
2
46
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
3
3
IF YOU REALLY LOVED ME, by Ann Rule. (Pocket, $5.99.) The bizarre family relationships behind the murder of the wife of an entrepreneur.
4
38
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France, as described by an Englishman.
5
7
IRON JOHN, by Robert Bly. (Vintage, $11.) The passage of the male from boyhood into manhood, as practiced in various cultures.
6
4
PREDATOR, by Jack Olsen. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) The story of a serial rapist in Washington State.
7
439
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist. (LP)
8
10
AND THE SEA WILL TELL, by Vincent Bugliosi with Bruce B. Henderson. (Ivy, $5.99.) An enigmatic 1974 murder case involving two American couples on a Pacific atoll.
9
123
ALL I REALLY NEED TO KNOW I LEARNED IN KINDERGARTEN, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspirational essays.
10
15
ON THE TRAIL OF THE ASSASSINS, by Jim Garrison. (Warner, $5.99.) A Louisiana judge contends that President John F. Kennedy's assassination was the result of a conspiracy.
11 *
19
A NATURAL HISTORY OF THE SENSES, by Diane Ackerman. (Vintage, $11.) How the ability to taste, feel, smell, hear and see affects our lives.
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
3
ATTACK OF THE DERANGED MUTANT KILLER MONSTER SNOW GOONS, by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $8.95.) "Calvin and Hobbes" cartoons.
2
34
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
3
82
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.50.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
4
63
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles for success.
5
31
THE T-FACTOR DIET, by Martin Katahn. (Bantam, $4.95.) A regimen for weight loss.


Canada's Mighty Banks on a March to the South
A new group has joined the cross-border shopping spree: Canadian banks.
Prodded by the drive for free trade between America and Canada and the recent wave of bank mergers in the United States that has threatened their North American standing, Canada's banks are jockeying to acquire American assets.
*
Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce, the country's second-largest bank, bought $750 million of secured loans from the failed Bank of New England in 1990 and now has its line out for a full-scale bank.


Duke Holds Off Indiana to Set Up a Fab Final
Just when the defense of their national championship seemed in jeopardy for the second straight game, the Duke Blue Devils used an overwhelming defensive effort to create just enough of a second-half surge to carry them past Indiana, 81-78, in an N.C.A.A. semifinal tonight.
The Blue Devils (33-2), in advancing to a championship game Monday night against Michigan, gave the Hoosiers their first Final Four defeat under Coach Bob Knight since 1973.
That loss by Indiana, also in the semifinals, put the U.C.L.A.
Bruins in position to win a seventh consecutive championship.
Duke can become the first team to repeat since then with a victory over the Wolverines at the Metrodome.


Jordan Doesn't Deserve Scolding
To the Sports Editor:
Gambling, no matter the amount, is a disease that reveals an obsessive-compulsive side that can lead to financial ruin, even for multimillionaires.
So Dave Anderson's concern for Michael Jordan's psychological, as well as financial, well-being ("Jordan Can't Slam Dunk Golf Balls," The Times, March 24), is duly noted.
But is it part of the sportswriter's job, to pass judgment on whether Jordan is foolish in his financial dealings and personal associations?
A sports analyst should tell us why Jordan is the game's best player and how, if possible, he can be contained, not whether he's lacking in moral stature (if that be the case).


Revenge of the Lefties
To the Editor:
Last year the newspapers ran articles on Stanley Coren's claim that left-handers die young.
As a lefty, I might have been alarmed.
Fortunately, a brief look at these articles revealed that Mr.
Coren is innumerate and his conclusions need not be taken seriously.


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Freehold 235,000
230 Stonehurst Boulevard  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 23-year-old colonial; 2-car garage, fireplace, family room; taxes $3,705.
Howell 106,000
22 Wilson Drive  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 12-year-old ranch; alarm system, ceiling fans, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $2,112.
Jackson 127,000
19 West Virginia Avenue  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 28-year-old split level; 1-car garage, family room, w/w carpeting, patio; taxes $2,600.
Lakewood 127,000
699 Cypress Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 15-year-old bilevel; family room, 1-car garage, patio, fenced yard; taxes $2,300.
Toms River 164,900
887 Yellowbank Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 5 year-old colonial; 2-car garage, c/a, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $2,941.
Wayne 239,900
101 Magnolia Place  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 35-year-old ranch; cathedral ceilings, h/w floors, fireplace, patio; taxes $4,418.
OTHER AREAS South Salem, N.Y. 530,000
Autumn Ridge Road
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 2-year-old colonial; 2 fireplaces, porch, eat-in kitchen, family room, Jacuzzi; taxes $3,290.
Madison, Conn. 100,000
6 Signal Hill Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 42-year-old colonial; large family room, needs work, 0.75 acre; taxes $3.197.
Mineola, L.I. 225,000
25 Weybridge Road  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 55-year-old Tudor; eat-in kitchen, 1-car garage; taxes $3,300.


How Tapes and a Turncoat Helped Win the War Against Gotti
Whisked out of jail on a pretext, smuggled to a rendezvous with prosecutors in the dead of night, Salvatore Gravano, the mob underboss who became the Government's ultimate weapon in its war against John Gotti, was such an astonishing defector that some in the F.B.I. worried he might be a double agent.
But Mr.
Gravano, the stocky 46-year-old career criminal and murderer, after some tough bargaining, came in from the cold of the Gambino crime family to confirm Mr.
Gotti's wiretapped admissions and provide what even defense lawyers conceded was devastatingly effective testimony that seemed to all but end the reign of the long-untouchable Mr.
Gotti last week.


Michigan Defeats Cincinnati, 76-72, and Makes the Final Two


Rio Addressing Tourism Falloff With Cleanup
Federal, state and municipal authorities in Rio de Janeiro are trying to reverse a fall in the number of foreign tourists who visit the city and to preserve its position as Brazil's leading visitor center.
The fact that Rio will be the host of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, known as the Earth Summit, from June 3 to 15, has also encouraged various projects to improve the city's tourism infrastructure.


Anne E. Pryor Has Wedding
Anne Elizabeth Pryor, the daughter of Martha Duvall Jones of Cheraw, S.C., was married there yesterday to Michele Colocci, the son of Marcello Colocci of Impruneta, Italy, and Angelica B. Marracino of New York.
The Rev.
Theodore Duvall performed the ceremony at Old St.
David's Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Colocci, 28 years old, is a management consultant with McKinsey &amp; Company in London.
She graduated from Harvard University and its business school.
Her late father, Edwin G. Pryor, was the managing director of Merrill Lynch Australia in Sydney.


N.H.L. Executives Take Shots at Union
The two leaders of hockey's management team issued strong public statements yesterday as the National Hockey League strike went through its fourth day.
John Ziegler, the president of the league, said the players should agree to financial restrictions that would keep the team owners from spending themselves out of business.


A Composer, First and Foremost
To the Editor:
In his emphasis on William Schuman's influence as a music administrator, Edward Rothstein unfortunately dismisses the importance of Schuman the composer  [ "A Composer With Many Public Faces," March 8 ] .


Nets Find 2 Centers A Blessing
In boxing, one of the first things taught is the one-two punch.
But with only nine more games left in the regular season and his team shooting for its first National Basketball Association playoff appearance since 1986, Nets Coach Bill Fitch is still relying on a two-one punch.
That is why Chris Dudley, the 6-foot-11-inch second-string center, is likely to get another start over the 7-foot-1-inch Sam Bowie when the Nets (34-39) meet the Pacers (37-38) in Indianapolis this afternoon, even though Bowie's sore right leg is feeling much better.


Donald Bloom Weds Ms. Haft
Emily Susan Haft and Donald Stuart Bloom were married last evening at the Metropolitan Club in New York.
Rabbi Norman Kahan officiated.
Mrs.
Bloom, 28 years old, is a corporate bond trader at CS First Boston, a New York investment bank.
She graduated from Union College.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert A. Haft of Old Westbury, L.I.
Her father is the president of Schacker Real Estate in Melville, L.I.
Her mother, Marilyn Haft, is the librarian at the Guggenheim School in Port Washington, L.I.


Cyd Charisse's Dance Card Is Full Once More
Do you remember when Felia Sidorova (or was it Maria Istomina?) blew smoke in Gene Kelly's face in "Singin' in the Rain"?
Cyd Charisse, born Tula Ellice Finklea but alias Istomina and Sidorova in her teen-aged Ballet Russe days, is the only dancer who could make a pirouette look sexy.
Little girls who saw Miss Charisse at her dancing peak in the film musicals of the 1940's and 50's dreamed of becoming ballerinas.
Little boys and big ones too simply dreamed of her.
What man did not envy Mr.
Kelly when he hung his hat on an instep that the camera purringly revealed to be part of a fabulously extended Charisse leg?
Censors were omnipresent on movie lots, but "we got away with murder in those days because it was dance," Miss Charisse said on a recent day off from performing in "Grand Hotel."


California on 600 Calories a Day
THE Ashram, a health spa in the Santa Monica hills above Malibu, has a formidable reputation.
To spa cognoscenti, who trade tales of sybaritic stays at the Canyon Ranch in Tucson or Rancho La Puerta in Baja, the Ashram is Everest, the New Age boot camp that's built around extremes -- maximum exercise and minimal food, with none of the classic spa amenities like saunas, pedicures and mudpacks.
The format is alarmingly simple.
You consume 600 calories a day.
You spend the rest of your waking hours hiking (five hours a day), lifting weights and doing calisthenics, water aerobics and yoga.
A daily massage, an isolated indulgence, is also included, but that's so you'll be able to walk the next day.
Triathletes come to the place to shape up before competitions.
"You poor thing," shrieked an Ashram alum when I told her I'd signed up for a weeklong stay, the shortest allowed.
"I want to be wrapped in lettuce leaves, not eat them." She had a point.
So it was with mild trepidation -- and an emergency stash of raisins and M &amp; M's -- that I flew to California.
My concerns about survival were hardly allayed by the stern-sounding Ashram official who, over the telephone, inquired about my exercise habits, height, weight and age before signing me up. (I wasn't much overweight, but two weekly aerobics classes suddenly sounded like paltry preparation for daily 15-mile hikes.)


A May Wedding For Susan Solie
May wedding plans have been announced for Susan Lori Solie, the daughter of O. B. and Lorraine Solie of Rockford, Ill., and Brian Francis Mullaney, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph E. Mullaney of Westport, Mass.
Ms.
Solie, 32 years old, is a freelance advertising art director in New York.
She graduated from the University of Wisconsin, from which she also received a master's degree in graphic design.
Her father owns and runs O. B. Ltd., a furniture and housewares design concern in Rockford.


Norway's Fjords
To the Editor: I have just read with nostalgia Barbara Freedman's account of her trip through the Norwegian fjords on the Vesteraalen, the ship I also sailed on.
I would like to point out that, time permitting, it is ideal to make the round trip.
The stops are for the convenience of the ship's schedule and not that of the passengers, and a round trip assures at least one daylight stop at each port.
ELIZABETH S. COLIE  South Orange, N.J.
A spokesman for Bergen Lines replies:
We are pleased that the readers enjoyed the voyage and that the Pences were sensitive to recent history there.
The Norwegians do indeed have long memories but by nature tend to be subdued and discreet; they do not, however, believe that justice is served by holding today's Germans accountable for past war crimes.
There is no company policy forbidding or discouraging mention of the wartime occupation.


A Piece of Art In the South Bronx
JERMAINE Dawson's attitude was, in his own words, "bad, terrible, horrible," when he first entered the hulking gray stone schoolhouse on Franklin Avenue in the South Bronx last fall.
"I didn't like nobody," said Jermaine, who is 13 years old and admits he was headed in the wrong direction.


Data Bank/April 5, 1992


Lean and Mean Is Foreign to Schools
THE DEBATE over education spending in the United States is often a hostage to ideology.
Liberals see rundown schools, tattered textbooks and beleaguered teachers -- a system starved for resources.
Conser- vatives see rising education budgets and international comparisons showing that America is a big spender yet its students are underachievers -- a system bloated with waste and inefficiency.
But the two sides do find common ground in the view that how the nation's education dollars are spent may be as important as how much is spent.
President Bush has declared that "dollar bills don't educate students." Yet even Chester E. Finn Jr., a professor at Vanderbilt University and a chief architect of the Bush Administration's education strategy, conceded: "We're going to spend more on education in this country -- there's no doubt about that. But people like me want to make sure the dollars are spent where it counts, so that kids learn more."


Rightists Try to Loosen Christian Democrats' Grip in State Election
A small far-right party is threatening to upset the balance of power in the key state of Baden-Wurttemberg in an election there Sunday.
Chancellor Helmut Kohl's Christian Democratic Union has governed Baden-Wurttemberg alone for 20 years, but polls suggest that it may be forced into a coalition.
Small but significant numbers of Christian Democrats are abandoning the party in favor of the rightist Republicans, who favor tight restrictions on immigration.


Another Opening, Another Show
The curtain may have rung down on commercial touring classical acting troupes in America, but the Acting Company is keeping the tradition alive.
The nonprofit group based in New York is a bridge between conservatory training for actors and the profession.
For the last six months the 16-member ensemble has been on the road with Shakespeare's "Midsummer Night's Dream," directed by Joe Dowling, and Athol Fugard's "Blood Knot," directed by Tazewell Thompson.
After stops in 23 states, the company begins performances at the John Jay Theater in Manhattan on Monday for a 10-day run of both plays in repertory ending April 15.


A June Bridal For Miss Marsh
Mr. and Mrs.
James L. Marsh of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter, Allison DuBron Marsh, to Dwight David Deur, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harold Deur of Fremont, Mich.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Marsh, 26 years old, is a medical assistant in Washington.
She graduated from Johns Hopkins University.
Her father is a vice president and financial consultant at Shearson Lehman Brothers in New York.
Her mother, Carol Marsh, teaches communications and theater at Hunter College High School in New York and is the founding director of the summer program for the gifted at the Hunter College Campus Schools.


Corrections
A front-page article in the Arts and Leisure section today about Leonard Bernstein misidentifies Humphrey Burton.
He is a television and film producer and director, not a record producer.


Growing Pains
WHEN THE University of California at Los Angeles dedicated its first buildings 62 years ago the campus sat on a barren alluvial slope covered with grass, chaparral, citrus farms and little else.
Today the 419-acre campus lies on the west side of what is now the nation's second-largest city, surrounded by some of the most expensive and lushly opulent residential areas in the United States, where traffic, congestion, smog, parking problems and excessive growth fan the fires of local civic outrage.
So it was little wonder that the community rebelled two years ago when the university proposed a 15-year development plan that included, among other things, an addition of 4.5 million square feet to its current plant of 13.4 million square feet and an expansion of 9 percent in students and staff.
The main goal, Chancellor Charles E. Young said, was not to grow but to modernize research and academic facilities and improve the quality of campus life.


The Answers
1. Birds of a feather flock together. -- George Wither in "Abuses" (1613).
2. All work and no play makes Jack a dull boy. -- Proverb.


In the Region: Westchester and Connecticut; Recent Sales
Armonk, N.Y. 855,000
17 Meadow Hill Lane  5-bedroom, 4 1/2-bath, 18-year-old contemporary; 2 fireplaces, 2 family rooms, solarium, tennis court, pool, patio; taxes $16,223.
Pleasantville, N.Y. 485,000
Oak Hill Circle
3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 32-year-old ranch; family room, fireplace, solarium, pool, cabana, 1.8 acres; taxes $11,624.
South Salem, N.Y. 530,000
Autumn Ridge Road
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 2-year-old colonial; 2 fireplaces, porch, eat-in kitchen, family room, Jacuzzi; taxes $3,290.
East Hartford, Conn. 129,000
297 Oak Street  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 40-year-old Cape Cod; family room w/pool table, 1-car garage, 0.50 acre; taxes $1,913.
Madison, Conn. 100,000
6 Signal Hill Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 42-year-old colonial; large family room, needs work, 0.75 acre; taxes $3.197.
North Guilford, Conn. 170.000
1605 Hoop Pole Road  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 72-year-old farmhouse; mud room, kitchen w/center island, 2 acres; taxes $2,420.
OTHER AREAS Commack, L.I. 162,500
6 Romeo Lane  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 31- year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den; taxes $4,300.
Massapequa, L.I. 330,000
149 Harbor View Drive  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 31-year-old colonial; dining room, den, c/a, patio; taxes $7,700.
Toms River, N.J. 164,900
887 Yellowbank Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 5 year-old colonial; 2-car garage, c/a, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $2,941.


Paper Says Fitzwater Threatened To Quit Over 'Gridlock' at the Top
The Bush Administration sought today to play down a report that Marlin Fitzwater, dismayed by "gridlock" at top levels of the White House and Mr.
Bush's campaign, had threatened to resign as the President's press secretary.
The report, in The Washington Post today, said Mr.
Fitzwater had left abruptly for Bermuda last week after complaining at a meeting that he had "just about had enough" of top officials' inability to execute the President's political agenda.


An American With a Jolly Good Toe
Ask John Harkes to tell what it's like to be the first American to make it big in First Division English soccer, and he doesn't stop at the goals he's scored and the games he's helped to win.
There was, for example, that moment earlier this season when Harkes, a second-year midfielder for England's Sheffield Wednesday, was invited to tea with John Barnes, an all-England striker who plays for Liverpool.


Maya Ruins Offer Glimpse of Royalty
Archeologists digging in the ruins of the ancient Mayan city of Copan, in Honduras, have found what appears to be a sixth-century royal tomb, with a skeleton recumbent on a stone slab and surrounded by pottery and jewels.
The discovery, announced yesterday at a symposium at the University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia, could give scholars a rare glimpse into one of the least known periods of life in Copan, the largest and most prosperous city-state at the southern frontier of the Maya Indians' empire in its heyday.


Read a Book, Win a Pizza
PURISTS would probably argue that reading should be its own reward.
But increasingly, to compete with distractions like Nintendo and television, more and more schools offer incentives to make reading an attractive activity for children.
In some schools, it can be as simple as giving children bookmarks or special buttons for reading a certain number of books or participating in activities like writing reports or creating a diorama.
At the Juniper Hill school in the Greenburgh Central 7 school district, a special read-aloud program that runs in October and November encourages parents to become involved in their children's reading activities.
There is also a yearlong reading marathon for all students, which continues through summer vacation.


Miss Arscott to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
John G. Arscott of Wyckoff, N.J., have announced June wedding plans for their daughter, Jennifer Ann Arscott, and Donald Seth Williams, the son of the Rev. and Mrs.
Alan Williams of Phoenixville, Pa.


Paros in Season
To the Editor: I sincerely hope that no one gets the idea that Anne Whitehouse's rendering of a halcyonic Paros in October holds true for summer ("Aegean Sea's Island of Marble, Jan. 19). Paros is not always the "peaceful island in an untroubled sea," as described. .
The most popular reason to visit Paros is the night life.
Paros's tourist industry growth has been matched by only a few other Greek islands, and now rivals Ios as the Daytona Beach of Europe.
Bustling Parikia harbor's function as a ferry thoroughfare adds to the congestion.
Almost all boats out of, and on route to, Piraeus stop here.
When I was there early last September, there was not a room to be found anywhere on the island. .


A Magical Vision in 'Triumph of Love'
SOMETHING exhilarating is going on at the McCarter Theater.
A 260-year-old play is having a fulfilling production, but it's not a revival.
Call it a discovery.
Even though "The Triumph of Love" by Pierre Carlet de Marivaux is unheard of by most theatergoers -- this is the American premiere -- it's easy to sense that Stephen Wadsworth's direction imbues the play with a magical vision.


Review/Theater; A Childhood Spent Amid Soapbox Orators
Josh Kornbluth begins his one-man show "Red Diaper Baby" by announcing that his father was a Communist who believed in the overthrow of the United States Government and assumed that his son would lead the revolution.
This means that the author was the reddest of the children of the leftist brigade.
But seeing him onstage at Second Stage, one knows that he would be one of the last people to lead any march.
Mild-mannered and self-effacing, he quickly learned how to duck for cover and avoid his father's wrath.
Now, as an adult, he has become nostalgic about his family's political past: about the fact, for example, that his father would awaken him in the morning by singing "Arise, ye prisoners of starvation" at the top of his voice.
What defines the storyteller is his upbringing amid soapbox orators and folk singers who vied for the floor at every party.
The milieu is akin to that in Michael Weller's "Spoils of War." As the earthy father bullies everyone in sight, one realizes that there is material here for a play as well as a monodrama, about an impossible parent as seen by a forgiving son.
From the first, Mr.
Kornbluth seems to have an intuitive sense that his father and his friends cannot help themselves, whether they are liberating a Paul Robeson record from the public library or playing a Marxist dialectic version of Monopoly (in which everyone wants to go to jail).


Made By Hand
Tom Penn designed his first pieces of furniture at the age of 11, fashioning chairs and tables out of cardboard and papier mache.
"They actually weren't bad," he recalls.
"They were quite naive and simple. Simplicity is still important to me." Since 1975, Penn has been creating furniture and objects in steel, bronze and silver.
His test laboratory is his Manhattan apartment.
"I make everything myself, then I live with it to see how it works," he explains.
"Since for most people space is limited, I like things that are dual purpose: a table that can be used at different heights; a tray that doubles for entertaining and office use." The designer also gravitates toward neutral colors.
He chose gray carpeting and white walls to create a calm environment.
"I guess I'm my father's son," he says, referring to Irving Penn, the photographer.
"I grew up in the world of black-and-white photography." Still, a limited palette has its challenges: "The shapes must stand on their own."


At Yale, a Photographer's Images of Pain
SEBASTIAO SALGADO'S fame began in the 1980's with his photographs that showed the effects of starvation sweeping across Africa.
Then came the shots of the Serra Pelada gold mine in his native Brazil.
These were taken for The New York Times Magazine, as was a scene of a Kuwaiti oil field, one of a series published in the issue of June 9, 1991.
Though the photographer has not focused exclusively on human anguish, it would seem that during his 19-year career he has been on hand for just about every major disaster, except for Bhopal, Chernobyl and the Challenger explosion.
Hence, there are those who regard him as something of global ambulance chaser.
Otherwise, the response to his images has been widespread admiration together with honors on the order of the W. Eugene Smith Memorial Award in 1982 and citation as Photojournalist of the Year by the International Center for Photography in 1986.


Voices Lift in the Hosannas of Easter
EASTER music, prepared by choirmasters and organists throughout the state, traditionally hews to the classic and predominantly solemn repertory, as befits the significance of the holiday in the Christian calendar.
This year, the supply is plentiful as usual, and some music directors have dug deep to find works that are less frequently played but nonetheless inspiring.
Among them is the so-called "Dettingen Te Deum and Anthem" by Handel, to be performed at St.
Luke's Roman Catholic Church in Westport under the direction of the Rev.
Pierre Botton.
The work, composed to celebrate the victory of English and German armies over the French at Dettingen, near Frankfurt, in June 1743, was first sung at the Chapel Royal of St.
James in London in November of that year; the text begins, "The King shall rejoice."


CAMPUS LIFE: Georgia; Judge Lets Paper See Hazing Files, But It Seeks More
The student newspaper at the University of Georgia has appealed a decision by a Fulton County Superior Court judge in February that opened up some records but not the meetings of the campus disciplinary body.
Last month, the student-run newspaper, The Red and Black, appealed the ruling from the judge, Frank M. Hull, that had let it see records arising out of two fraternity hazing incidents on campus last spring.
The newspaper contends that the ruling opens the records of all future disciplinary cases that come before the student court; the university's lawyers contend that the ruling only applies to those two incidents.


Ms. Bateman to Wed L. C. Oliphant
August wedding plans have been announced for Anne-Louise Cochran Bateman and Leonard Carmichael Oliphant.
Ms.
Bateman, 26 years old, is a special-projects assistant in Washington to Senator Frank R. Lautenberg, Democrat of New Jersey.
She graduated from Yale University and is studying for a master's degree in public policy at Georgetown University.
She is a daughter of Ellen Mulhern Bateman and Anthony G. Bateman, both of Philadelphia.
Her mother is the assistant dean for academic affairs at the University of Pennsylvania School of Dental Medicine.
Her father is a lawyer in Philadelphia.


Holliston Hill Wed in South
Holliston Hill, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John R. Hill of Hendersonville, N.C., was married there yesterday to Christopher Hurd, a son of Peter K. Hurd of Huntington Bay, L.I., and Imogene Hurd of West Islip, L.I.
The Rev.
Paul Stricklin performed the Episcopal service at the Chapel of the Transfiguration.
Mrs.
Hurd manages the New York office of Hill Financial Corporation, a money-management firm with headquarters in Hendersonville of which her father is chairman.
She graduated from Simmons College.


Pilgrims at the Luau
PARADISE NEWS
By David Lodge. 294 pp. New York: Viking. $21.


Keiko Yamaguchi, Engineer, to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Susumu Yamaguchi of Thornwood, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Keiko Yamaguchi, to Pierre-Yves Chevray, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Rene Chevray of New York.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Yamaguchi, 25 years old, graduated from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, as did her fiance.
She has a master's degree in aerospace engineering from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
She is a research and development engineer at Space Systems/Loral in Palo Alto, Calif.
Her father is the president and chief executive of Star Micronics America Inc., a manufacturer of printers in New York.


Jennifer Miller, E.M. Kraft Wed
Jennifer Karen Miller, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John A. Miller of Armonk, N.Y., was married last night in New York to Evan Michael Kraft, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Melvin Kraft of Livingston, N.J.
Rabbi Ronald Sobel performed the ceremony at the Harmonie Club.
Mrs.
Kraft, 29 years old, is a special events coordinator at Christie's.
She graduated from Ithaca College.
Her father is a senior vice president of Fahnestock &amp; Company, a securities brokerage in New York.
Her mother, Barbara K. Miller, is the archivist at the Council on Foreign Relations in New York.


Kingdom Makes Return
ROGER KINGDOM, faced with the obstacles of age and reconstructive knee surgery, made it clear yesterday that he wants to extend his reign in the Olympic 110-meter hurdles.
After an absence of a year and a half, the 29-year-old Kingdom, the 1984 and 1988 gold medalist, returned to competition at the Miami Track and Field Classic, where he finished second to ELBERT ELLIS.


From Brunch With Dvorak To Afternoon With 'Faust'
SEVERAL recitals, a choral concert and grand opera are vying for attention in the state today.
First up is the final Chamber Music Brunch at Zenny's in Storrs; the meal is served at 11:30 A.M., and the music follows at 1:15 P.M.
Dvorak and Franck Quintets will be performed by the violinists Theodore Arm and Carmit Zori, the violist Robert Rinehart, the cellist (and artistic director) Warren Lash and the pianist Joseph Villa. (For information call 429-7510.)
At 2 P.M. today the cellist Claudio Jaffe, an alumnus of the Yale School of Music, returns to New Haven to give a free recital in Sprague Hall with the pianist Elizabeth Sawyer-Parisot, a faculty member who is also the wife of Mr.
Jaffe's former teacher, Aldo Parisot.
The program includes the Debussy and Franck Sonatas, Ezra Laderman's Partita for Solo Cello, and shorter works of Cassado, Martinu, Villa-Lobos and Davidoff (432-4157).


What Japan Knew of Plan On Aid to Russia Is Debated
Senior Administration officials vigorously asserted today, despite Tokyo's denials, that Japan had agreed with the size and timing of the $24 billion aid package for Russia announced by President Bush on Wednesday.
The officials said Japanese finance ministry officials attended a meeting last weekend in Paris where the Group of Seven industrial nations, according to the Americans, agreed to a vast package to help Russia.


Brown's Record as Governor
In California, Edmund G. Brown Jr. left a mark of far-sighted achievement when he could realize his own vision but failure in matters requiring cooperation with government's other branches.
Page 26.


Used Indoors or Out, Ladders Can Be Crucial
LADDERS are indispensable for a variety of home improvement tasks.
Indoors, a stepladder works best, because it does not have to lean against walls for support.
A five- or six-foot stepladder is adequate for reaching most ceilings.
But avoid shorter models, as standing any higher on a stepladder than the second rung from the top is dangerous.
Outdoors, where greater heights are encountered, use an extension ladder.
They consist of two straight sliding sections that hook together to form a single long length.
Extension ladders that go as high as 35 feet are available.
Choose a length that will enable the ladder to be extended at least three feet higher than the level at which you plan to stand.


Sports Fans In Connecticut
I was distressed at the comments of a Danbury High School teacher, Catherine Richard, in a letter published on March 22.
She chastised me for allegedly saying that I would rather watch a University of Connecticut basketball game than a high school one.
She misinterpreted me; what I told the reporter was that I perceived those were the sentiments of many sports fans in Connecticut today.


Sudan Offensive Casts Shadow on Aid Parleys
A Sudanese Army offensive against rebels in the southern Sudan has cast a shadow of doubt on meetings in the Ethiopian capital next week aimed at producing a pledge by governments and rebels not to interfere with relief efforts anywhere in the Horn of Africa.
The offensive against the Sudanese Popular Liberation Army appears to be aimed at cutting overland supply routes from Kenya and Uganda that supply the southern Sudan with food and outside assistance.
The United Nations and volunteer aid organizations are using these routes for a major relief program in the south known as Operation Lifeline Sudan.


Q and A
Refinancing Requirements Question: I am in the process of refinancing my co-op.
I am going from a 30-year to a 15-year fixed-rate mortgage.
My payments will increase by about $10 a month.
My co-op board is demanding a list of refinancing requirements, including a net-worth statement, credit report, tax returns for two years and verification of employment, and they are charging me a $200 processing fee.
This is more than the lender asked for.
I have never been late with my maintenance or my mortgage.
Do they have the right to do this? . . .
Judith A. Willinger, Manhattan Answer: Yes.
Mary Ann Rothman, executive director of the Council of New York Cooperatives, said that not only does the board have the right, it also has the responsibility to verify the financial status of shareholders who renegotiate their mortgages.
"Whenever a co-op board approves a shareholder's loan," she said, "it is agreeing to recognize the bank's lien if the shareholder defaults. In many cases the shareholder is taking on more financial responsiblity."
Some boards, Ms.
Rothman said, feel they must make the same level of inquiry they do when people first buy apartments.
"Policies are important," she said, "but boards should be flexible enough so as not to discourage people from making the best of their circumstances."
As far as the $200 fee is concerned, it is also an accepted practice since any application would involve administrative work for the management agent.
A Sponsor's Default Question: I own a condominium in New Jersey.
The sponsor has not been paying maintenance on the 12 apartments he owns in our 43-unit building.
The 12 units, which are free and clear of any mortgage, are rented.
We have considered possible courses of action, including putting liens on each unit, prohibiting the occupants from using the common elements, disconnecting electric and water lines to the sponsor's units.
Are there actions we can take to resolve the matter?
Gary Otterpohl, Hoboken, N.J.
Answer: Yes.
But depriving tenants in the sponsor's apartments of services or privileges allowed in their leases is not among them, according to Richard R. Kahn, an attorney who practices in Hackensack.
"There are no aspects of New Jersey law," he said, "that would entitle the condominium to take such action."
However, there are laws that do protect condominium owners under these circumstances.
Section 46:8 b-21 of the state statutes, for example, allows the association to put a lien on each unit for unpaid assessments.
It should be filed with the county clerk's office.
In order for it to remain in effect, a new lien must be filed each month with respect to each nonpayment claim.
Mr.
Kahn said that in general these liens are subordinate to others, such as real estate tax liens.
"In cases where sponsors have mortgages on apartments they own," said Mr.
Kahn, "and liens have been filed for nonpayment of maintenance, the bank holding the mortgage would probably consider the sponsor to be in default because a requirement of most mortgages is that the maintenance be paid."  Improvements by Tenant Question: We are rent-stabilized tenants in a building that is now a co-op.
We have lived here for more than 14 years and during that time we have made some improvements to the apartment at our own expense.
Now we want to replace some sagging kitchen cabinets and decaying windows.
We are being denied permission by the sponsor.
Since none of these changes is structural, are these denials legal or do they constitute harassment? . . .
Evelyn Kraus, Manhattan Answer: It is not harassment for the unit owner to deny you the right to make improvements.
As rent- regulated tenants, you are entitled to habitable apartment.
But there is nothing in the rules covering rent- stabilized tenants that says fixtures must be new.


Sorting Out Vines, Annual and Perennial
THERE is something rewarding about having a vine growing in the garden.
When put in the right place, a vine can do wonders to screen out something unsightly or provide a dramatic upright statement.
The best part, most vines grow easily without much tending.
Annual vines are the easiest to start with.
They last for one year and are then killed off by fall frosts.
These vines can be temporary solutions.
If the look is not right for the place in the garden, then the experiment lasted for only a year, and another planting scheme can be tried.


In Short/Baseball
GREAT MOMENTS IN BASEBALL By Tom Seaver with Marty Appel. Birch Lane/Carol, $19.95.


Sound Options
Picking a music system is a form of self-expression -- a meeting of technology and individual taste.
We make a definite statement with the kind of sound system we put in our homes.
So the question arises: What's your style in stereo?
Consider the range of possibilities.
They extend from compact tabletop systems, modest in sound and cost, to massive installations with towering speakers that radiate undiminished symphonic grandeur.


Jays Add Morris and Winfield to a Potent Mix
This preview was prepared and written by Murray Chass.
Teams are presented in alphabetical order and the starting lineups are his projections.
His probable starters for the Yankees appear on page 3.
Relief pitchers listed are the closers.
Staff predictions for the teams' order of finish in each division appears on page 6.


New &amp; Noteworthy
WHITE PEOPLE, by Allan Gurganus. (Ivy, $4.99.) The author of "Oldest Living Confederate Widow Tells All" turns to short fiction with this collection of 10 stories and a novella.
"It is very hard to be ample and accessible these days and to sound smart at the same time," our reviewer, George Garrett, said last year.
"Mr. Gurganus manages to do that gracefully and skillfully."
LETTERS HOME: Correspondence 1950-1963, by Sylvia Plath.
Edited with commentary by Aurelia Schober Plath. (Harper Perennial, $15.) Sylvia Plath was a prolific writer, not only of poetry but of letters.
Although she committed suicide at 30, she left almost 700 letters to her family and to her friend and literary adviser, the novelist Olive Higgins Prouty.
This collection, beginning with her college days and concluding with her death, has become testimony to the conflicts in her life -- conflicts our reviewer, Maureen Howard, felt that her mother, the book's editor, never comprehended.
" 'Letters Home' is heartwrenching," Ms.
Howard said in 1975, "but the major tragic effect is not the overpublicized suicide; rather it's the misunderstanding between mother and daughter, set forever, irrevocable."


Stamps
Unraveling Yugoslavia
The political tangle in Eastern Europe has yielded another group of new stamps, this time from three republics of what used to be Yugoslavia: Croatia, Slovenia and Macedonia.


Taking Back the Weekends
Hourly workers at the Xerox Corporation's factories in the Rochester region overwhelmingly approved a new three-year contract last Thursday.
In doing so, they put the finishing touch on an effort by Joseph W. Laymon, Xerox's director of industrial relations, to demonstrate the difference between working hard and working smart.
Xerox has enjoyed a good relationship for most of the last 50 years with the Amalgamated Clothing and Textile Workers Union, the workers' representative, but until this year, that had not prevented contract negotiations from turning into grueling affairs.
Each side would bring more than 40 representatives to meetings, which would drag on until early-morning hours and wipe out weekends for most of the winter every third year.


Guests Had Big Names; So Did the Hired Help
It was the kind of evening non-New Yorkers visualize when they think of a Manhattan party -- a duplex apartment high above the East River shimmering with reflected light, celebrity guests, jeroboams of wine and champagne and tables with yellow roses.
In fact, it was the kind of evening that almost never happens any longer, even in New York.
But it did on Wednesday.
First of all, there was the question of the host or hosts.
Who was it, he, she, they?


Public &amp; Private; At the Clinics
Last fall a 30-year-old woman named Eileen Moran pulled into the parking lot of the Aware Woman clinic in the space coast town of Melbourne, Fla.
Ms.
Moran was not surprised to see demonstrators; that is commonplace.
The surprise came the next day, in a manila envelope full of color photographs of bloody fetuses, anti-abortion tracts and a letter warning her about procedures performed at the clinic.
"I felt very violated," says Ms.
Moran, who is now five months pregnant and had gone to the clinic only for a check-up.
"The idea that they could trace my name and address through my license plate and have something in the mail that day was pretty terrifying."


Sunny Echoes


Fall Preview -- New York
Geoffrey Beene is quite emphatic: "There are no long daytime dresses, and there are not going to be." "Long? It's a given," declares Donna Karan.
"I like short, but I have tons of long," says Louis Dell'Olio.
"None of my customers want long," states Bill Blass.
"They think it's just for tall, leggy models." Clearly, the hemline will continue to be a moving target this week when Seventh Avenue designers show their fall collections.
On these pages, seven of the biggest names in American fashion offer a sneak peek into the long and the short of what's shaping up for next season.


Tech Notes; Tiny Disks for Tiny Computers
A new generation of palm-sized computers will require hard disks the size of a credit card.
The first of these "subminiature" disks is from the Ministor Peripherals Corporation, a start-up venture in San Jose, Calif., that last month introduced a 1.8-inch drive that is capable of storing up to 64 million bytes of information -- the equivalent of 32,000 pages of double-spaced typed pages.
The smallest previous drive measured 2.5 inches.
A host of smaller-than-notebook computers are now being designed.
Some of them will have full desktop computer functions while others will be single-purposes appliances like calendars, date books, note takers and other single-purpose devices.


When Desire Becomes a World of Its Own
"Let's fill the whole world with desire," Sophie B. Hawkins vows on her debut album, "Tongues and Tails" (Columbia).
She does her part: at least 9 of the 10 songs she wrote for the album revolve around affection, love, lust and more open-ended longing, while the 11th track is Bob Dylan's "I Want You." "Tongues and Tails" has one thing on its mind.
But over the length of the album, that one thing, desire, becomes a world of its own.
"Nobody really understands sexuality and the power of it," Ms.
Hawkins said over a breakfast interview while shredding a paper napkin.
"People try, and the yogis try, and the politicians try and control it, and it never works. If you get to that level where you really feel sexual, the ego will not be involved, and all society's constraints fall away."


Correction
An article on March 15 about the composer Alan Menken misstated the reason Alan Jay Lerner began collaborating with other composers.
It was because of Frederick Loewe's retirement.


Where Princes Took the Waters
DURING the last century the crowned and uncrowned heads of Europe couldn't seem to get enough of Bad Kissingen, a tiny gem of a spa town tucked into the rolling hills of northern Bavaria's Rhon Mountains and about 50 miles east of Frankfurt.
Czar Alexander II of Russia used to take his family there, Emperor Franz Josef of Austria went with Empress Elisabeth, and Bavaria's mad king, Ludwig II, took the waters 15 times.
Tolstoy visited (indeed, so many Russian notables stayed there in the second half of the 1800's that a Russian Orthodox church was built to accommodate their religious needs), as did Rossini and Richard Strauss.
Germany's Iron Chancellor, Prince Otto von Bismarck, shrugged off the assassination attempt that marred his first visit in July 1874, and returned to take another 14 cures.
"I have Bad Kissingen to thank for the second half of my life," he is reported to have said.


New Yorkers, etc.
There's a price to be paid for familiarity.
It's not contempt, as the Aesop fable would have it, or at least it isn't usually.
It is a realization that all is not as it seems, that the facade presented to the world is somewhat more polished and perfect than is actually the case.
It applies to those we know best and hold in the highest regard.
They, in turn and with equal reason, think that it applies to us.
The feeling of familiarity, of almost extension of self, is why people are rarely on their best behavior with their families or intimate friends.
It's why that small extra effort is most often expended on strangers and acquaintances.


Sports of The Times; Michigan's 'Quick Fix' From Bench
THE coaches bristle when they hear the phrase "quick fix." It sounds illegal, like something purchased around the corner, away from the streetlights and the unmarked police cars.
But let's face it, neither Michigan nor Cincinnati would have been playing in the Final Four last evening without sudden energy from new players who have not been on campus very many months.
Michigan's freshmen ultimately wore down Cincinnati's transfers, 76-72, having little to do with tradition.
In college hoops, every year is a quick fix.


Revenge of the Lefties
To the Editor:
Before I go gently into the left-handers' night, I want to take issue with some of Stanley Coren's conclusions.
It is dangerous business to draw normative conclusions about what nature wanted us to be from longevity statistics.
Women live longer than men, but that does not mean nature intended all of us to be female.
I am also sure that a proper sampling of the population would turn up a healthy number of octogenarian southpaws.


In Short/Baseball
THE DODGERS READER Edited by Dan Riley. Houghton Mifflin, Paper, $9.95.


Richard W. Eaddy Married to Carolene Skeeter
Carolene Yvette Skeeter, a daughter of Blanche and Marlin Skeeter of Hollis, Queens, was married yesterday to Richard Waymer Eaddy, a son of Irene Eaddy of Burkeville, Va., and the late James Eaddy.
Msgr.
James Spengler officiated at the Shrine Church of St.
Gerard Majella in Hollis.


Note With Pleasure
Rich in Time
The basic difference between our acquisitive societies and those of hunter-gatherers isn't a matter of sophistication, Juliet B. Schor suggests, but of desires.
This is from "The Overworked American: The Unexpected Decline of Leisure" (Basic Books).


Mellowed by Age, but Still a Tough Boss
MINNETONKA, Minn.
When Marilyn Nelson describes her father, 77-year-old Curtis L. Carlson, the founder and sole stockholder of the Carlson Companies, she says this: "If Curt were riding a bicycle, he'd peddle downhill."
The remark helps explain why Mr.
Carlson, who started at the height of the Depression what would grow into a hotel, travel and marketing company, became impatient last year when the recession seemed to be taking its toll.
"The margins evaporated," Mr.
Carlson said, sending profits down substantially.
He wanted more from his company, even though the war in the Persian Gulf and the recession had sent the travel industry reeling.


Galette as a Finishing Touch
A SIMPLE round of pastry topped with fruit makes for a quick yet impressive dessert.
These galettes, as they are usually known, can be made as individual pastries or as one large pizza-like dessert to be cut in wedges.
Sometimes the fruit is baked on the pastry.
And the ones with baked fruit can be served warm or at room temperature.


In New Ukraine, Bad Old Ways
MIDWAY through a three-week tour of independent Ukraine -- at about the time I had adapted to the new ways that make it politically incorrect to say "
the
Ukraine" -- I found myself comforted by the appearance of a relic of the bad old days.
I was checking in at a particularly grim hotel in the grimy coal-mining town of Donetsk.
Suddenly there was Tatiana.
She stood at the reception desk, her warm, if somewhat synthetic smile scoring over the prison-warden scowl of the oafish reception clerk.
Recognition was instantaneous.
Tatiana knew I was the American who had booked a room by telegram from Kiev; I knew she was the Intourist lady ready to take charge of the traveler's needs.


C.I.A. on Campus, Sans Trench Coat
"Trench coat not required," reads the color brochure of helpful hints for college students in preparation for their employment at the Central Intelligence Agency.
The brochure does advise, however, bringing linens and kitchen utensils to the minimally furnished C.I.A. apartments, saving receipts for reimbursement, making advance contact with roommates and being prepared to pay the first month's rent and groceries until the first paychecks arrive.
Subsidizing Students
Since 1961, when the first C.I.A. student aid program was created, the agency has employed students for a few months at a time and subsidized their tuition and fees -- 500 students this year with a budget of $1.6 million.
While some colleges and universities ban all C.I.A. activities on campus -- from research projects and recruiting to C.I.A. officials teaching during their sabbaticals -- others encourage their students to take advantage of these little-known activities, especially in an environment of soaring tuitions and shrinking financial aid.


A New Twist on Lost Youth: The Mall Rats
It was Friday night at the mall.
Christine Tako, 18 years old, with her straight brown hair falling down over her shoulders, was not sure whether to let the boy with the blue eyes know how much she liked him.
The teen-agers were gathering in little groups in the food court near Time-Out, the video arcade that serves as headquarters for what regulars at the Danbury Fair Mall -- and malls everywhere -- call mall rats, adolescents who seem to live to go to the mall.


Marian Wachtel Engaged to J.M. Orr
Dr. and Mrs.
Daniel L. Wachtel of Martinsville, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Marian Ruth Wachtel to John Michael Orr, a son of Thelma Hodson Orr and Prof.
John Berk Orr of Los Alamitos, Calif.
A July wedding is planned.
Ms.
Wachtel, 26 years old, graduated cum laude from the University of Delaware and is a doctoral candidate in microbiology and molecular genetics at the University of California at Los Angeles.
Her father is an ophthalmologist in Bound Brook, N.J.


The Campaign On Television
Where voters can find the candidates and coverage of the Presidential campaign on television and radio today.
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo will discuss the New York primary on the NBC News program "Meet the Press," on WNBC-TV, Channel 4, from 9:30 A.M. to 10 A.M. and at various times on NBC affiliates.


Miss Zimmer Is Affianced
Mr. and Mrs.
David A. Zimmer of Livingston, N.J., have announced December wedding plans for their daughter, Stephanie Lynn Zimmer, and Alan Mitchel Bonder, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Bonder of White Meadow Lake, N.J.
Miss Zimmer, 26 years old, is an elementary-school teacher in Chatham, N.J.
She graduated from the State University at Albany and received a master's degree in education from Rutgers University.


ENVIRONMENTAL AID FOR POOR NATIONS APPROVED AT U.N.
Representatives from more than 160 nations agreed early today on a document that commits the industrial nations of the Northern Hemisphere to help the poorer countries of the South develop in a way that will not damage the environment.
The document, in draft form, was the only full accord to come out of five weeks of negotiations here in preparation for a major international environmental conference in Rio de Janeiro in June.


The Burnishing of the Bernstein Legend
It might seem only natural that the death of a prominent musician should spur fresh curiosity about the life's work.
And to some extent it may, though usually not for long.
The musical public's prevailing reaction to death is forgetfulness.
Typically, when classical performers die, sales of their recordings drop sharply.
It happened to Vladimir Horowitz.
It happened to Herbert von Karajan, with a twist: the decline set in even before his death, when ill health forced him to curtail his personal appearances.
Then there is Leonard Bernstein.
By now, 18 months after his death, some plunge was to be expected in sales of his recordings as well, but none has occurred.
In fact, interest in almost every area of Bernstein's work and character has held up remarkably well.
Now that the distractions of his big, boisterous personality are gone and the preliminary winnowing of history has begun, Bernstein seems to stand no less tall as a musician and a man; in some senses he stands taller.


P.L.O. Is Facing Growing Discontent
The Palestine Liberation Organization and its leader, Yasir Arafat, are facing a growing wave of discontent, as several other Palestinian leaders have begun to question Mr.
Arafat's style, his political judgment and his financial management.
Discontent with Mr.
Arafat has been raised not only by members of the movement's leadership but also by growing numbers of Palestinian intellectuals, rank-and-file P.L.O. members and ordinary Palestinians in the Israeli-occupied territories and elsewhere.


Plainly and Simply Put, Martinez Gains on Upset
Conchita Martinez is not one of those tennis players who relies on trickery or flamboyance to outwit her adversaries.
Her glitter is confined to the diamonds in her ear lobes and the silver sheen of the orthodontics that frame her grin.
In a Family Circle Magazine Cup semifinal today against Arantxa Sanchez Vicario, Spain's leading lady of tennis, Martinez did the expected and created the unexpected: a 6-4, 7-5 upset of her compatriot and Olympic doubles partner.


Bambinos
LITTLE LEAGUE CONFIDENTIAL
One Coach's Completely Unauthorized Tale of Survival.
By Bill Geist. 217 pp.
New York: Macmillan Publishing Company. $17.


Corrections
The "All About" column last Sunday, about home sewing products, misstated the American market share in patterns, as reported by the National Purchase Diary, a market research group.
The group said that in 1991, McCall's held 32.4 percent of the market, Simplicity had 32 percent and Butterick's share was 27.7 percent.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Trail; Out of Race, Tsongas Gets New Support
The Tsongas candidacy will not go away.
In its Sunday issue, Newsday endorses Paul E. Tsongas in Tuesday's New York primary, the first time in memory that any major New York newspaper has backed a candidate who is no longer officially seeking the Presidency.
For more than a week, Mr.
Tsongas, who "suspended" his campaign after losses in Illinois and Michigan, has waged a non-campaign campaign.
He has told supporters that if he does well in New York, where he remains on the ballot, he will consider returning to the race.
This week he had lunch with Newsday's editorial board, as well as with editors of The New York Times.


Data Update
*4*VALUE OF CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTS
(Residential in millions of dollars)
Feb. 92
Feb. 91
Change
New York
206.7
193.1
+ 7%
New Jersey
84.1
62.8
+34%
Connecticut
56.0
35.4
+58%
*4*Source: F.W. Dodge Division, McGraw-Hill Information
MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
9.18
9.20
9.81
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.30
6.26
7.48
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
9.03
9.03
9.62
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.13
6.13
7.39
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
9.12
9.12
9.63
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.09
6.13
7.27
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
9.29
9.30
9.99
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.67
6.54
7.80
Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
4.64
4.73
6.34
National Mortgage Contract Rate
8.15
8.02
9.49
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes.  (Source: HSH Associates)


Woman Gets Prix Post
BARBARA PERRY, an executive with the International Management Group, has been named to head the committee organizing New York City's first Grand Prix Indy car race, the 1993 Marlboro Grand Prix of New York.
Perry, who has promoted more than 100 sporting events, including the Kentucky Derby and the World Championship of Women's Golf, will be the first woman ever to organize a Grand Prix race.


A's Like the Historical Perspective
The season after their seemingly unstoppable streak was stopped, the Oakland Athletics feel good about themselves.
They should.
Besides Rickey Henderson, Jose Canseco, Harold Baines, Mark McGwire and Dennis Eckersley, they have history on their side.
The last teams that won three consecutive division championships were the Yankees and the Philadelphia Phillies of 1976-78.
In 1979, each fell to fourth.
The Phillies even had the same record -- 84-78 -- that the Athletics had last season when they finished, of course, fourth.


A Man for All Seasonings
IT IS 10:45 ON A SATURDAY MORNING, and Daniel Boulud, the 37-year-old chef of Le Cirque, strides into the kitchen.
Trim and diminutive under a starched chef's jacket and white apron, he wears pin-striped trousers, precisely cuffed, perfectly pleated, and spit-polished shoes.
Half of Boulud is a big-city executive; the other half is a shy, fastidious Frenchman who cooked his way off his family's farm to the apex of his craft.
Le Cirque's kitchen is backstage to the most glamorous dining room in Manhattan.
Serving both the passing fancies and inflexible tastes of the rich and the urbane, the kitchen has been a major way station on the road from Escoffier's dictums to exotic cuisine.
With his instinct for the chemistry of food and a cautious Gallic originality, Boulud turns trends into new classics.


Presbyterians Dispute Lesbian Pastor
The selection here of the first openly lesbian pastor of a local Presbyterian church in the United States has touched off a battle that may go as far as the church's highest governing body.
The minister, the Rev.
Jane A. Spahr, was to start work this month as co-pastor of the Downtown United Presbyterian Church.
But opponents have filed a protest over her appointment or "calling," maintaining that it contradicts church doctrine.
Under church rules, Ms.
Spahr cannot begin work until the dispute is resolved.


Amy C. Tsui Is Engaged
Mr. and Mrs.
John K. Tsui of Honolulu have announced the engagement of their daughter, Amy Crawford Tsui, to Thomas C. T. Luke, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Koon-Hung Luke of Ottawa.
An August wedding is planned.
Miss Tsui, 23 years old, graduated from Wellesley College.
She is an analyst in New York at the First Boston Corporation.
Her father is the vice chairman of the Bank of Hawaii.


Sorting Out Vines, Annual and Perennial
THERE is something rewarding about having a vine growing in the garden.
When put in the right place, a vine can do wonders to screen out something unsightly or provide a dramatic upright statement.
The best part, most vines grow easily without much tending.
Annual vines are the easiest to start with.
They last for one year and are then killed off by fall frosts.
These vines can be temporary solutions.
If the look is not right for the place in the garden, then the experiment lasted for only a year, and another planting scheme can be tried.


CRACKDOWN KEEPS HAITI RADIO SILENT
Moving through the streets to cut down opponents and scatter would-be demonstrators with random gunfire, soldiers who overthrew Haiti's first elected Government last September chose as one of their top priorities quickly stifling the capital's many radio stations.
Dutifully applying lessons learned from other recent coups where control of the airwaves has often proven crucial, rampaging soldiers left behind bullet-riddled studios, smashed transmitters and once-upright antennas bent into grotesque forms.


Mrs. Astor's Birthday (Again)
WEDNESDAY -- The American Friends of the Israel Philharmonic Orchestra raised more than $600,000 at a Carnegie Hall concert featuring Yo-Yo Ma, Itzhak Perlman and Peter Schickele.
A supper dance honoring Isaac Stern followed at the Pierre.
At the Plaza hotel ballroom, guests at the French-American Foundation danced around a 15-foot-tall Eiffel Tower.
The event raised money for the foundation's programs.


Growing Black Debate on Racism: When Is It Real, When an Excuse?
At church meetings, at social gatherings and in informal conversations across the country, more and more blacks, many for the first time, have become openly critical of apologists for certain members of their race.
They contend that the actions of national figures like Mike Tyson, Marion S. Barry Jr. and Dr.
Leonard Jeffries Jr. are disgraceful and cannot be excused and that, as role models, their behavior can bring shame to the race.


Home Movies
His Upper East side apartment was spun out of romantic images and a vivid imagination: The decor suggests scenes of 1930's Parisian salons and vintage Hollywood.
"Hollywood is in my blood," confesses the owner, Jennifer Dumas.
"I'm a Californian." But rather than create a 30's set piece, she gathered objects from different places and periods.
"Nothing here was deliberate," she explains.


Paros in Season
To the Editor: Anne Whitehouse's interesting article about Paros neglected to mention the island's most famous native son: the satirical poet Archilochus of the seventh century B.C., who was called "scorpion-tongued" in antiquity, and whose skill in personal invective was such that it was reported to have driven several of his targets to commit suicide.
J.
KEVIN BRANIGAN Rochester, N.Y.


Haugen Proves All the Boom Has Left Mancini
In his prime, Ray (Boom Boom) Mancini broke opponents down with relentless pursuit and voluminous punches.
But against Greg Haugen on Friday night, the 31-year-old Mancini was a fighter past his peak.
His timing was off, and his punches lacked the snap of a man who had once been World Boxing Association lightweight champion.


L.I. Sings the Songs of Walt Whitman
WHEN Walt Whitman published his poetic masterpiece "Leaves of Grass" in 1855, his voice was a shot heard round the world, a voice whose echoes resonate to this day.
But the narrow literary landscape of the 19th century could not contain Whitman's raucous songs and wild faith, and he was as unaccepted and unappreciated on his native Long Island as he was in Manhattan and the rest of the country.
The wages, no doubt, of being at least 60 years ahead of his time, rather than any rude, rural or grumpy disposition peculiar to Long Islanders.


Baseball's Fall From Grace
"I've really had it," a guy I know was saying the other day, a guy, by the way, who used to edit a sports magazine.
"I just don't give a damn anymore. This is the year I'm gonna stop following baseball."
We've heard a lot of this kind of thing in recent years, of course, and generally it's been easy to discount.
For lifelong box score junkies, the habit ain't a matter of Just Say No.


Used Indoors or Out, Ladders Can Be Crucial
LADDERS are indispensable for a variety of home improvement tasks.
Indoors, a stepladder works best, because it does not have to lean against walls for support.
A five- or six-foot stepladder is adequate for reaching most ceilings.
But avoid shorter models, as standing any higher on a stepladder than the second rung from the top is dangerous.
Outdoors, where greater heights are encountered, use an extension ladder.
They consist of two straight sliding sections that hook together to form a single long length.
Extension ladders that go as high as 35 feet are available.
Choose a length that will enable the ladder to be extended at least three feet higher than the level at which you plan to stand.


Political Talk
A Line in the Sand
The strife over the New York State budget, which was completed last week, grew so intense that even traditional allies were left skirmishing with each other, a point amply illustrated by the unusual feud between Dennis Rivera and members of the Legislature's Black and Puerto Rican Caucus.


Reults Plus
GOLF Trevino Takes Lead Lee Trevino took charge yesterday with a four-under-par 68 at the Tradition in Scottsdale, Ariz.
Trevino finished three rounds at 204, a 54-hole record on the 6,864-yard Cochise Course at Desert Mountain, for a two-shot lead over Jack Nicklaus and Chi Chi Rodriguez in the PGA Senior Tour event.
Rodriguez was the halfway leader but just broke par with a 71 after finishing with eight consecutive pars.
Nicklaus, the two-time defending champion and the course designer, had a 69 yesterday, rebounding from a 72 on Friday.
Homero Blancas and J. C. Snead were three shots back at 207.
Tommy Aaron and Dick Stockton were at 208, and Bruce Devlin and Jim Albus at 209.


TODAY'S SECTIONS
Special Today: Home Design/Magazine Part 2 Special Today: Education Life/Section 4A


Nancy Zweng Is Wed in California
Nancy Ann Zweng, a senior vice president at Kidder Peabody, and Bruce Cameron Bruckmann, a vice president at Citicorp Venture Capital Ltd., both in New York, were married yesterday in Pebble Beach, Calif.
The Rev.
Glen Fish, a Presbyterian minister, officiated, assisted by the Rev.
Robert B. O'Connor, a Roman Catholic priest, at the Church-in-the-Forest.
Ms.
Zweng, who is keeping her name, graduated from Harvard University, where she earned a master's degree in public policy, and has an M.B.A. from Stanford University.
She is the daughter of Mary Nelson Berry of Carmel, Calif., and the late Dr.
Harold Christian Zweng, an ophthalmologist in Palo Alto, Calif.
She is the stepdaughter of F. Langwith Berry, an investor in Carmel.


Hiking a Valley of Marvels in France
A CLUSTER of ominous place names in a wholly uninhabited, desolate region is a sure sign that something must have happened there.
Why else would a mountain be named the peak of the devil (la Cime du Diable)?
Why lakes of the devil (les Lacs du Diable) or a vale of hell (le Vallon d'Enfer)?
In the Middle Ages these were signals to keep away; today, in the Vallee des Merveilles in southeastern France, they beckon to us to come and look.
When we do, we find no pools of sulfur or heaps of black slag but a wild, beautiful valley with a clear, swift stream and a carpet of wildflowers in early summer.
Then, something else appears: the image of a dagger, scratched on a rock.
Near it, the head of an animal with great, twisting horns.
Whole slabs of rock are imprinted with dozens of pictures and strange signs.
Over 100,000 of these images, dating from the neolithic period and the Bronze Age, have been found on rocks and boulders scattered along this high, remote valley.
About 4,000 years ago, Celtic tribes made special journeys here, evidently to practice religious rites.
They left a record in the form of rock engravings made over a period of more than 1,000 years.
The site is now part of the Mercantour National Park, which can be visited June through October, depending on when the winter snow melts.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN


Gillian Panczyk, a Banker, Marries
Gillian Leigh Panczyk, a daughter of Raymond K. Panczyk of Bethesda, Md., and Audrey Maurer of New York, was married in New York yesterday to James Robert Van Schaick, the son of Dorcas S. Van Schaick of Center Valley, Pa., and the late Robert I. Van Schaick.
The Rev.
Stephen P. Baumann performed the Methodist ceremony at Christ Church.
Mrs.
Van Schaick, 29 years old, is a vice president at the Chase Manhattan Bank in New York.
She graduated from Georgetown University and received an M.B.A. from Columbia University.
Her father is the director of program support for the Peace Corps in Washington.
Her mother teaches French and Russian at Hunter College High School in New York.


The Executive Computer; Where Does the 600-Pound Gorilla Write Data Bases?
The Microsoft Corporation has grown to be a billion-dollar company without any significant success in the data-base market.
That could change suddenly now that this largest and most fearsome of software companies has proposed to acquire Fox Software Inc., maker of the highly regarded Foxpro data base manager for DOS, Macintosh and Unix computers.
Foxpro is a fast and flashy "clone" of dBASE, the most popular data base management program among business users.
Businesses use data base programs to store and retrieve information from employee records to sales reports to customer lists.
More important, they use dBASE and Foxpro as a programming language to develop custom business applications.
American companies have invested literally billions of dollars in developing dBASE applications for their data since dBASE appeared in 1981.


Building a Relationship
I REMEMBER WITH PARTICULAR fondness a cartoon by William Hamilton in The New Yorker that seemed to sum up a whole way of making architecture.
An eager couple, seeing the first sketches of their house, are hanging on every word of their architect, who addresses them in what are undoubtedly solemn tones: "In eight months, you two will have the strongest architectural statement in the Hamptons."
The architect dictates, the clients accept.
I'm not sure it ever really was that simple, but for a long time it did seem that clients interested in getting a serious work of architecture were expected to take what their architects gave them.
In exchange, they got to feel that they had made possible something Major and Important: a Michael Graves house, for example, or a Robert A. M. Stern or a Charles Gwathmey -- in each case, a building that embodied a complete look, much more the architect's signature than the client's.
This ethos flourished in the 1980's, when the upwardly mobile newly rich wanted nothing so much as the validation that big-name architects could provide.
They were happy to sign the checks as long as the architects gave them the total package.


Managed Care Aims to Trim Health Costs
JAMES E. MULVIHILL recently became senior vice president for health policy of the Travelers Companies and chairman of a subsidiary called Travelers Health Company.
Dr.
Mulvihill, 51 years old, a graduate of the Harvard School of Dental Medicine, became an associate dean there in 1968.
He went on to become president of Long Island Jewish Medical Center before joining the University of Connecticut, where he was executive director of its Health Center in Farmington.


Michigan Fancies Itself As Rebels With a Cause
In two of the last three years, Duke's path to the national championship has been blocked by the same obstacle: Nevada-Las Vegas.
In 1990 Duke failed to clear it, losing by 30 points in the national championship game.
Last season the Blue Devils prevailed, upsetting Nevada-Las Vegas to reach the national championship game, which they won.
On Monday, Duke will defend its title against the University of Michigan.
A number of writers have characterized the contest as a game of similarities.
Duke, after all, is Duke, Michigan is Michigan and not at all like Nevada-Las Vegas.


The Campaign On Television
Where voters can find the candidates and coverage of the Presidential campaign on television today.
Former Gov.
Edmund G. Brown Jr. of California and Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas will be interviewed by Bryant Gumbel on NBC's "Today" program, Channel 4, from 7 A.M. to 7:30 A.M.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Uneasy New York -- Assessment; Fiery Primary Could Propel Clinton Toward the Nomination, or Burn Him
Almost no one expected this to be an ordinary election year.
There was too much anger in the public opinion polls, too much cynicism toward the Government, too much discontent with the way things are.
Now, on the eve of the New York primary, the Democrats are taking the full measure of the rough, conflicted and unpredictable politics of 1992.
The unrest can be heard in the voices of New Yorkers who talk in the same breath of their disgust with the politicians and their yearning for a brokered convention, in which politicians would negotiate to choose a nominee.
It is there in the re-emergence of a Jesse Jackson, an Edmund G. Brown Jr. and a Patrick J. Caddell, impresarios of discontent sensing the energies of the time.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: On the Sidelines; Tsongas to Announce Plans On Campaign This Week
Paul E. Tsongas said today that he would announce on Wednesday whether he would re-enter the race for the Democratic Presidential nomination after he sees the results of the New York primary.
"I'm going to make that announcement on Wednesday," the former Massachusetts Senator said on the ABC News program "This Week."


Chattem Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Agency Rent-A-Car Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Strober Organization Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Thelma S. B. Ingersoll; Artist, 81
Thelma Saks Bradford Ingersoll, an artist and the widow of the editor and publisher Ralph A. Ingersoll, died on Saturday at her home in West Cornwall, Conn.
She was 81 years old and died of kidney failure, a family spokesman said.
Mrs.
Ingersoll, who was born in Manhattan, taught crafts at the Henry Street Settlement House and the City and Country School in Manhattan.
In her own work, she specialized in ceramic pots, vases, bowls and plates in an Art Deco style.


Don't Let the Campaign Stop You From Voting; Lippman's Iron Law
To the Editor:
You stated in "The Year No One Became President" (editorial, Feb. 22): "Under Lippman's Law, however, only one of the five Democrats could be regarded as a likely nominee -- Jerry Brown." That law says that a person seldom gets nominated and almost never gets elected the first time around.
Edmund G. Brown Jr. qualifies, having run for President in 1976 and 1980.
You pooh-poohed Mr.
Brown's chances and my law in February.
How do you like us now, after his Connecticut primary victory (front page, March 25)?
By the way, that is actually my semi-iron law.
My iron law is: "No one from a single-digit electoral-vote state can be elected President." Not since Franklin Pierce of New Hampshire (5) in 1852, before the advent of the present two-party system, has that law been broken.
The last four major party nominees from such states were George McGovern of South Dakota (4); Barry Goldwater of Arizona (5); Alf Landon of Kansas (9) and John W. Davis of West Virginia (8).
They got, respectively, 37.5 percent of the popular vote, 38.5 percent, 36.5 percent and 28.8 percent.
Arkansas has 6 electoral votes.
THEO LIPPMAN JR.
Baltimore, March 25, 1992


Iranian Jets Bomb a Rebel Base Inside Iraq


Review/Television; Exploring Madness's Face And the Computer's Birth
It's an ambitious night for PBS, the start of two five-part series on the mysteries of mental activity: "Madness by Jonathan Miller," at 10, and "The Machine That Changed the World," at 9, on Channel 13.
"Madness" is the exploration by Mr.
Miller, who is a doctor as well as a director, of a concept that has been much disputed over the centuries and remains unsettled even in this know-it-all era.
Is there such an illness as madness, or does society merely impose its own diagnosis on behavior that a majority deems peculiar?
If madness is an illness, then is it physical or psychological, or a bit of both?
And how can it best be treated?


Equity Issues Scheduled for This Week
The following equity offerings are expected this week:
Adaptec Inc., three million common shares. Bear, Stearns.


Don't Let the Campaign Stop You From Voting; Governor and AIDS
To the Editor:
As one who attended the New York Lawyers for Clinton event March 26 at which an AIDS protester confronted Gov.
Bill Clinton, I was troubled by your March 27 account.
You portrayed the event as one in which Governor Clinton principally "vented his frustration" about personal attacks on his character.
However, after the protester began shouting, Governor Clinton provided him an opportunity to speak calmly about his concerns.
Governor Clinton responded to those concerns, offering a detailed description of his efforts in Arkansas to confront the AIDS crisis, including, before any other governor, active support of preventive measures such as effective education programs and distribution of condoms in schools.
He then described in detail what he would do as President to combat the crisis.


Dr Holdings Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Getting Help for U.S. Decathlon Team
A team that hasn't won a single Olympic medal in the decathlon since 1976 could probably benefit from a couple of days of intense training and high-level coaching.
It was precisely with an eye to breaking that 16-year medal drought that the 11 members of the USA/Visa Decathlon team gathered in New Orleans yesterday to begin a joint training effort under five prominent coaches at the site of the Olympic trials in June.


M. S. Topping, 49, Foundation Executive
Melissa Stutsman Topping, an executive of the Henry Luce Foundation, died on Friday at the New York University Medical Center in Manhattan.
She was 49 years old and lived in Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y.
She died of complications from cancer, a family spokeswoman said.


Accounts
*
Sun Line Cruises Inc., New York, which had placed its account into review last month, announced that it would continue at AC&amp;R Advertising, New York.
A new campaign is expected in June, the agency said.


Licon International reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Top University Taps Rare Well of Talent At Decaying School
Ysleta High School is decaying and its students are mostly poor, but it has produced the largest single contingent of Hispanic students ever to gain admission to the Massachusetts Institute of Technology from a general-attendance public high school.
M.I.T. rarely accepts more than two students from the same public high school in one year, but this year five Hispanic students from Ysleta won admission, said Joe Jasso, assistant director of admissions at the university.


Prime Time's Growing Hit? That's News
JUST how much news can television use?
As the network news divisions add programs from early morning through the entire night and continue to seek the financial advantages of using news programs instead of increasingly costly entertainment shows, the limit to the air time available to these programs appears to be nowhere in sight.


Williams Sisters Join the Family Circle
The Family Circle Magazine Cup at Hilton Head, S.C., has made a habit of serving as a coming-out party for the tennis stars of the future: the 1991 and 1992 champion, GABRIELA SABATINI, made her debut as a 14-year-old runner-up, STEFFI GRAF won her first tournament here, and a teen-age CHRIS EVERT commenced a tear that delivered a record eight Family Circle titles.
But this year, JACK JONES, a co-founder, didn't just rob one cradle to make a splash, he robbed two.
In an exhibition doubles match anchored by legends BILLIE JEAN KING and ROSIE CASALS, winner of the 1973 first Family Circle Cup, he introduced a pair of legends-before-their-time, 10-year-old SERENA WILLIAMS and 11-year-old VENUS WILLIAMS.


Market Place; Banks Still Face Loan Problems
THE rally in bank stocks, with the share price of many companies doubling last year, has stalled in the last month, as investors wait for first-quarter earnings reports to be issued this week.
They hope to see evidence that banks' losses from commercial real estate loans are abating.
But the problems of Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd., the giant Canadian real estate developer negotiating new terms for $12 billion it owes banks, are a reminder that the commercial real estate market remains depressed and is still claiming victims.


Lineup May Omit Tartabull, Gallego
With Roger Clemens and the official start of their 1992 season just a day away, the Yankees are hoping that Danny Tartabull and Mike Gallego will be penciled into their opening-day lineup.
Both Tartabull, a power-hitting outfielder who is nursing a sprained right wrist, and Gallego, a scrappy infielder who is hampered by a bruised right heel, did not play in the Yankees' 6-5 exhibition victory over the Mets yesterday at Shea Stadium.


Metropolitan Realty reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Italians Voting, With Focus on Protest Sentiment
Italians voted today in a general election that has become a referendum on the politicians who dominated the country during the cold war and now face chillier assertions that they are often corrupt and usually ineffective.
No results are expected from the two days of polling until Monday night, but it is already clear that the key statistics to emerge from the reportedly brisk voting will be the size of the protest vote and the scale of probable opposition to the dominant Christian Democrats.


Nynex Trial Set to Open In Capital
In a case important more for political than practical implications, the Nynex Corporation goes on trial here Monday on criminal charges that it intentionally violated terms of the antitrust consent decree that broke up A.T.&amp; T. in 1984.
The Justice Department charges that Nynex knowingly broke a crucial tenet of that decree by illegally providing information services through a small software company that it bought in 1986.
As the breakup decree was promulgated, the regional Bell companies were prohibited from owning information services, as well as from manufacturing equipment or entering the long-distance business.


Robert Shepard Wed to Julie Black
Julie Adrienne Black, a Congressional press officer, and Dr.
Robert Benjamin Shepard, a foreign policy analyst for the Labor Department in Washington, were married yesterday in Closter, N.J.
Rabbi Fredric S. Pomerantz performed the ceremony at Temple Beth El.
The bride is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Black of Closter.
The bridegroom is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard F. Shepard of Fresh Meadows, Queens.
Ms.
Black, who is 36 years old and is retaining her name, is on the staff of the House Banking Committee.
She graduated from Brandeis University and received a master's degree in journalism from the University of Missouri.
Her first marriage ended in divorce.
Her father, who is retired, was an engineering manager for Hubbell Inc., an electrical products maker in Bridgeport, Conn.
Her mother, Bernice Black, retired as a reading specialist in the New York public schools.


A Seminar on Mozart
The Mannes College of Music and the Conductors' Guild will sponsor a three-day seminar, "18th-Century Mozart on 20th-Century Instruments," from Sunday through April 14 at the college, 150 West 85th Street.
The seminar will focus on Mozart's Symphony No. 32 in G, and will feature lecture-demonstrations by Neal Zaslaw, a musicologist and consultant to Lincoln Center's Mozart Bicentennial, and the violinist Elizabeth Field of the Orpheus Chamber Orchestra and the Classical Band.
The Mannes Orchestra will be conducted by Michael Charry.
The seminar is $90, or $75 for Guild members.
Information: (212) 580-0210 or (212) 496-8524.


Congressional Redistricting to Change Face of Delegation
The unveiling of New Jersey's new Congressional district lines has opened the door to pent-up political ambitions around the state and nudged at least two veteran representatives into retirement, even before court challenges to the new district map have been resolved.
The political picture will not clear completely until Thursday, the deadline for filing a candidacy for the June 2 primary and the Nov. 3 general election.
But the retirements are likely to diminish the clout of a Congressional delegation already weakened by its reduction to 13 members from 14 by the redistricting process.


Joy Technologies Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Electrosound Group reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Brown and Clinton And Their Pursuit Of the Arts World
The manner in which Edmund G. Brown Jr. and Gov.
Bill Clinton courted New York's arts world is hardly likely to be the deciding issue in tomorrow's turbulent and vitriolic Democratic Presidential primary here, but it does provide an illuminating contrast between the two major candidates and their views of the arts.
Last Tuesday night, Mr.
Brown, whose impromptu campaign has itself become an issue, visited a group of artists at a Brooklyn loft.
The meeting might as well have been clandestine.
No one at Brown headquarters, in New York or in California, seemed to know who the artists were or what had been discussed.
No "Artists for Brown" committee was announced, and no one connected with him seemed to know whether anything so formal was even contemplated.


Music Today Ensemble
The Music Today Ensemble will offer works by Sebastian Currier, Andrezej Panufnik, Busoni/Schoenberg and Lukas Foss tomorrow at 7:30 P.M. at the Walter Reade Theater at Lincoln Center, 165 West 65th Street.
Christopher Kendall will conduct; the soprano Carmen Pelton will be the soloist.
Tickets are $15.
Information: (212) 721-6500.


Investigators Study Reports On Patients
Federal prosecutors, New York City hospital authorities and industry regulators are examining allegations that some local hospitals altered important documents about how they handle patient care in an effort to dupe regulators and qualify for millions of dollars in Medicaid reimbursement.
The prosecutors, from the United States Attorney's Office in Brooklyn, have interviewed a former doctor at Kings County Hospital who objected to the practice of altering the documents and was dismissed.
They have also subpoenaed documents and interviewed numerous other hospital and health industry officials, according to many of those who were queried by prosecutors or who work for institutions that were.


INSIDE
Levy Returns to Party Fold
Foreign Minister David Levy is not going to quit the Israeli Government after all.
In exchange, he has a handful of political promises.
Page A9.
Deadline at Caterpillar
After a five-month strike, the construction equipment company has told workers to report to work this morning or be replaced.
Page D1.
New Crop in the West: Water
Farmers are loosening their historic grip on water in the West, transferring some of their supplies to cities and industries -- for a price.
Page B9.
Peru's Congress Dissolved
President Alberto Fujimori, struggling with recession and a guerrilla insurgency, dissolved Congress and suspended the constitution.
Page A8.
Violence Engulfs Sarajevo
Bloodshed marks the day before Bosnia and Herzegovina is to be recognized by Europe.
Page A12.


Highway Cleanup Plan Is Stuck in Political Mud
FEW things in Brooklyn are more irritating than traffic and more inscrutable than politics.
But no one at the city's Department of Transportation could have foreseen the angry ambush awaiting its plans to close the entire Prospect Expressway on Sunday, May 3 for an all-volunteer, Earth Day-style prettification project.


Rixi Markus, 81, Bridge Grandmaster and Author
Rixi Markus, the first woman to be named a grandmaster of bridge, died on Saturday in London.
She was 81 years old.
Mrs. Markus had suffered a heart attack.


Starrett Housing Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Alteon Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Brown: Symbols Over Specifics


A Rally Against Racism and Anti-Semitism Is Held at City Hall


Killer Asteroids: The Perfect Peril
Just when the world thought it could breathe easier about nuclear war, along comes an even more fearsome menace -- doomsday asteroids and killer comets that might hurtle into Earth with enough force to wipe out much if not all human life.
What was once a science-fiction fantasy is now being treated as a serious threat by astronomers and Government officials.
And no wonder.
For this is a peril that offers a lot of advantages.
Astronomers might get to build new telescopes to find and track the deadly space invaders.
Frustrated Star Warriors, deprived of a Soviet adversary, might get to build awesome nuclear megaweapons to blow any threatening asteroids off course.


New Deadline for Monitor Channel
Apparently unable to sell the cable television network that has drained its finances and provoked upheaval in its leadership, the board of the Christian Science Church said yesterday that it would close its Monitor Channel by April 15 if no last-minute buyer emerged.
On March 9, the Church of Christ, Scientist, announced the resignation of its longtime chairman, Harvey W. Wood, and set June 15 as the date by which the Monitor Channel would have to be sold.
But yesterday, the new board chairman, Virginia S. Harris, moved the timetable forward by two months.


Barringer Laboratories reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Bethlehem reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Frederick's of Hollywood Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Aaron Bohrod, 84, Realist Artist Whose Paintings Could Deceive
Aaron Bohrod, a noted realist painter, died on Friday at his home in Madison, Wis.
He was 84 years old.
He died of liver cancer, his family said.


Ethnic Clashes Increase in Bosnia As Europe Recognition Vote Nears
Ethnic clashes intensified across Bosnia and Herzegovina Sunday and continued this morning.
The European Community is expected to recognize the republic's independence today.
In Sarajevo, Bosnia's capital, fighting began Sunday morning when Serbian police officers attacked police stations and then an Interior Ministry training school, leaving two officers and a civilian dead.
Later, Serbs fired into a crowd of peace marchers, and by late Sunday night violence was intensifying in and around Sarajevo.


Sidari Corp.  reports earnings for Year to Nov 30


Iran Strafes Rebels in Iraq; Jet Downed
Iranian jets bombed an Iranian rebel base in Iraq today in the most serious attack by Iran since a cease-fire ended fighting between the two countries in 1988.
Iraq said that its artillery had shot down one of eight Iranian F-4 Phantom fighter-bombers and that the pilot and navigator had been captured.
A senior Pentagon official monitoring intelligence reports confirmed the Iranian attack and the loss of one plane, but could not confirm any other details.


Food Lion Inc. reports earnings for 12wks to March 21


Mets Defense: Armed and Precarious
The question was direct, and the Mets, perhaps out of relief, perhaps out of belief, couldn't answer quickly enough.
Who's going to win the National League East.


More Marketers Seeking A Partner for Promotions
AS marketers become increasingly enamored of promotional programs to reach consumers, a particularly alluring tactic is cross promotion.
If two companies become partners in making a pitch, the theory goes, they amplify the force of their efforts.
Yet as one example indicates, sometimes 1 and 1 struggle just to equal 2.


DMI Furniture reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


U.S. Has Much to Answer For in Iraq
To the Editor:
Anthony Lewis provides, in "Who Fed This Caesar?" (column, March 15), substantial evidence that the Reagan and Bush Administrations were instrumental in building Saddam Hussein's military machine since 1982, when Iraq began to show signs of defeat in its war with Iran.
Almost right up to the invasion of Kuwait on Aug. 2, 1990, Iraq had received secret intelligence, high-technology exports, weapons and economic aid from the United States, despite overwhelming evidence during the last decade of President Hussein's international aggressiveness and atrocious human rights record.
Although it is clear that United States policy toward Iraq was flawed with respect to military and economic aid, it is also important to note that the White House displayed irresponsible behavior on the diplomatic front as well, especially during the months directly preceding Iraq's invasion of Kuwait.


CSM Environmental Systems reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Metatec Corp.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Cone Continues to Speak Up
Met pitcher David Cone, who plans to request that the baseball commissioner's office investigate the team's charges of questionable behavior by members of the news media this spring, yesterday clarified and expanded on his claims.
Cone, the team's player representative, said that he had direct knowledge of players' cellular telephone calls having been monitored and added that one freelance cameraman had said that one or more houses rented by the Mets in Port St.
Lucie, Fla., had microphones placed inside them.
Cone also said he was prepared to complain formally to Commissioner Fay Vincent's office about the behavior of a reporter for one of New York's tabloid newspapers.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Plastic Containers Inc., Syosset, L.I., is offering $110 million in 10.75 percent senior secured notes due in 2001 through Citicorp Securities.
Noncallable for five years, the notes are rated Ba-3 by Moody's Investors Service and B+ by Standard &amp; Poor's.
Common  *
First Union Corp., Charlotte, N.C., is making an initial public offering of 8.5 million common shares at $34.75 a share through Goldman, Sachs.


Burson-Marsteller Leads in Net Fees
Burson-Marsteller has risen to first place among public relations firms ranked by net fees, according to listings compiled by O'Dwyer's Directory of Public Relations Firms.


LVI Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Small Travel Magazine Finds World of Readers
It may be published in a building that once housed a nursery, standing close to Chuck's Steak and the First Interstate Bank and across from a shopping mall, but Islands magazine takes its readers to the infinitely more alluring locales of the world's exotic and remote islands.
And the magazine's goals are no less romantic.
Islands eschews service pieces that counsel readers on where to stay or what airline to fly, instead providing writers' impressions of islands that "give you the sense of being there," said Joan Tapper, the magazine's editor in chief.
A recent issue carried features on Prince Edward Island, Canada's smallest province, and islands in the Russian Arctic.


'Not Inhaling' At Barneys
It does not take long for a good line to move from popular culture into advertising.
In the latest example, it took less than a week.
A print advertisement for Barneys New York, the national retail clothing chain, included "Not inhaling" on a list of "Some of our favorite things." The reference is to the recent admission by Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas that while he tried marijuana as a college student, he did not inhale.


Kent Financial Services Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Sabatini Controls Her Fear and Finishes Off Martinez
Gabriela Sabatini, the young woman who kick-starts her motorcycle with the aplomb of a motocross veteran, has ceased to be intimidated by stardom, by tennis, by her high-profile self.
And all of that boldness was reflected on a sunbaked stadium court today as she successfully defended her Family Circle Magazine Cup title by riding roughshod over Conchita Martinez in their largely one-sided 6-1, 6-4 final.
"If you're afraid, you're not going to win," said Sabatini, who no longer feels fear when she takes to the tennis court and only rarely feels the wrong kind of tension once the competition starts.


Healthtrust reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Don't Let the Campaign Stop You From Voting; Clinton and Race
To the Editor:
The problem of racism in this country, and solutions to it, is more complicated than "Bill Clinton, in Black and White" (editorial, March 11) suggests.
In my view, Gov.
Bill Clinton's ability to win 75 percent of the black vote in Florida reflects massive outreach by him and his supporters through networks of black churches and community organizations -- shrewd traditional organizing, more than innovative approaches.
I agree with Mr.
Clinton's observation that, in harsh times, the reactionary right wing preys on the fears of "the most economically insecure white people." I also agree that Americans "want to be part of a nation that's coming together, not coming apart." This untapped yearning for a leader who will make racial unity a priority has existed for a long time.
But to state that dream is not to achieve it.
A leader does more.


Hadson Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Don't Let the Campaign Stop You From Voting; Brown's Moral Fervor
To the Editor:
"The Iceman Cometh," Anthony Lewis's March 22 column on Edmund G. Brown Jr., gives an oversimplified reading of Jerry Brown's political persona.
Mr.
Lewis sees him simply as a man driven by a lust for power, but Governor Brown is a far more complicated character.
I have known him, though not intimately, since we served together on a small steering committee for Senator Eugene McCarthy's California primary race in 1968; as a California resident in those years, I observed him for two terms as Governor.


Far Right Gains Sharply in German State Elections
Far-right parties scored surprising gains in two important local elections in Germany today, and politicians from established parties deplored the results as shocking and dangerous.
In the industrial state of Baden-Wurttemburg, the rightist Republican party surpassed all expectations by winning about 11 percent of the vote, and Chancellor Helmut Kohl's Christian Democratic Union lost its 20-year hold on the southern state.


Faraday Resources reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Personal Finances; Brown Supporter Spurring Questions
Milan Panic's supporters call him a Horatio Alger hero: a Yugoslav who battled both the Nazis and the Communists, who then came to the United States nearly penniless and rose to become the head of a California pharmaceutical empire and a major financial backer of Democratic politicians.
But now Mr.
Panic's constant conflicts with regulatory agencies are raising questions about his relationship with one of those politicians: Edmund G. Brown Jr.


Ackerley Communications reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Review/Dance; Royal Winnipeg Ballet in the Familiar and the New
The Royal Winnipeg Ballet succeeds to an impressive extent in proving it can dance in just about any style.
The Canadian troupe, 53 years old this year, is not a starry sort of troupe, although it has an internationally known ballerina in Evelyn Hart.
Instead, it concentrates on good classical dancing and a solid ballet repertory that seems to have broadened even further since John Meehan, an Australian danseur noble and former member of American Ballet Theater, took over directorship of the company in 1990.
The high point of the company's program on Saturday night at the Brooklyn Center for the Performing Arts at Brooklyn College was not the showpieces by George Balanchine, Antony Tudor and Jiri Kylian, but a New York City premiere by Mark Godden, a soloist with the troupe and its resident choreographer.
At first glance, Mr.
Godden's "Symphony No. 1" and its score by the Canadian composer Christopher Rouse looked like familiar stuff.
Mr.
Rouse's music has a dark and turbulent way with anxiety.
The ballet's dark set and the long, sleek lines of the costumes have a European-modern look, and certainly Mr.
Godden has been influenced by the choreography of Mr.
Kylian, a proponent of that school, with whom Mr.
Godden worked.


Knicks Go 0 for 4 Against Cavaliers
Another close game against Cleveland became another kick in the stomach for the Knicks today.
Perhaps the Knicks will prevail should they meet the Cavaliers in the playoffs.
Perhaps the Knicks will break through next season.
But in four games this season, the Cavaliers (52-22) have owned New York.


Eshed Robotec Ltd.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Wisconsin; In Land of Underdogs, Brown Advantage Slips
In this land of angry dairy farmers, hard-bitten union backers and voters who love an underdog, Edmund G. Brown Jr. would seem to have found the perfect soil for his "we the people" campaign.
The former California Governor arrived here last month on the night of the Michigan primaries with his outrage and union jackets and overtook Bill Clinton in the polls as the Arkansas Governor fought off new character questions in New York.


S2 Golf Inc.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Iran Rebels Hit Missions in 10 Nations
Opponents of Teheran's Islamic Government invaded Iranian diplomatic missions in New York, Ottawa and eight Western European countries yesterday, seizing hostages and wrecking offices in a wave of coordinated attacks in retaliation for predawn Iranian air strikes on a rebel base in Iraq.
In New York, five men armed with knives invaded the Iranian Mission to the United Nations, took three hostages, smashed furniture and computers and spray-painted slogans on walls in a two-hour rampage behind chained doors.
Two of the hostages escaped when the police broke through a back door, and the third was released unharmed when the intruders surrendered to police negotiators.


Florida Expected to Ban Referrals by Doctors to Clinics They Own
Over vigorous objections of many physicians, the Governor of Florida is expected to sign a bill this week prohibiting doctors from referring patients to clinics in which the doctors have a financial interest.
The new restrictions, intended to curb conflicts of interest and control health costs, are likely to cause upheaval in the state's health-care industry, forcing at least 40 percent of the state's doctors to sell their interests in clinics or send their patients elsewhere.


March Reflects the Growing Political Clout of a Movement
The march on Washington yesterday reflected how much the political world has changed since the Supreme Court began restricting abortion rights.
It is a change that many political professionals refer to simply as, "Post-Webster."
The 1989 Supreme Court decision in Webster v.
Reproductive Health Services, which gave states new latitude to restrict abortion, reopened the political struggle over the issue.
The opponents of legalized abortion were organized and active in politics for many years.
"Post-Webster," the supporters of abortion rights began to mobilize and join their opposition on the field, no longer counting on the courts to protect their cause.
A Political Message
Yesterday's march, its organizers hoped, was a powerful show of strength for the abortion-rights movement as the nation heads into the 1992 elections.
"There is a message, and it's a political one," said Kate Michelman, the head of the National Abortion Rights Action League.
"We're not talking to the Court; we don't trust the Court. We're talking to George Bush and every officeholder and every office seeker."


U.S. Plans To Sell HomeFed
Federal regulators have decided to sell Home Fed Bank of San Diego, one of the nation's largest troubled savings and loan institutions, after determining that the company stands little chance of regaining its financial health.
Regulators said they were stopping short of formally seizing HomeFed from its parent, the HomeFed Corporation.
But in a statement issued late on Friday, the company said the regulators would sell the institution, probably with Federal financial assistance, and that shareholders and bondholders would probably lose their entire investments, as they would if the institution were seized.


9 Cities Will Share 2 Words: Play Ball!
The champion Minnesota Twins open the season in Milwaukee today, but their World Series hero will be in Detroit, pitching for the Toronto Blue Jays against the team that made him its opening-day pitcher for 11 successive seasons.
Jack Morris, playing the baseball version of "Have Gun, Will Travel," finished his assignment in Minneapolis and moved on to Toronto, putting him in position to start season openers for three different teams in three seasons.
Of course, Morris lost to Roger Clemens and Boston in 1990 and Dave Stewart and Oakland a year ago, but that shouldn't detract from the anticipation of opening day.


Okata Journal; A Whale: Food for Deep Thought, or Just Food?
Weather permitting, fishing boats cast off from the tiny harbors here with tourists to see herds of humpback whales surge majestically through the choppy waters of the Pacific Ocean.
Some people rhapsodize that sighting a whale can be a quasi-religious experience.
"I was so moved by it," said Tomoe Miyazaki, a 22-year-old agriculture student from Tokyo, describing a recent expedition with a colleague.
"My friend couldn't speak. She just kept saying: 'Fantastic! Fantastic!' The experience completely transformed my sense of values."


CHRONICLE
Simone de Beauvoir and Jean-Paul Sartre were a singular couple in 20th-century intellectual life.
Tonight, FRANCINE DU PLESSIX GRAY, the writer of novels and nonfiction, and RICHARD HOWARD, the poet and poetry editor of The Paris Review, will read excerpts of the couple's letters in an evening sponsored by La Maison Francaise of New York University in conjunction with Arcade Publishing and Charles Scribner's Sons, the publishers of two new anthologies of their correspondence.
The reading will be at D'Agostino Hall, 110 West Third Street.
Reading letters aloud requires a particular form of subtlety, Ms.
Gray said.
"They shouldn't be hammed up with dramatic reading. I don't think letters are ever suited to that. They should be read with attention to the emotional nuance. They should be made as personal, with intimacy of voice, as possible."


A Press Lord From Canada Is Building a Global Empire
Over the last six years, Conrad M. Black, the chairman and controlling shareholder of Hollinger Inc., has used his talent for sharp deal-making to assemble a newspaper empire spanning four continents.
His Canadian-based company's holdings include The Daily Telegraph, one of Britain's largest and most profitable papers, The Jerusalem Post, The Sydney Morning Herald, The Financial Post in Toronto and more than 200 very small -- but highly profitable -- dailies and weeklies in the United States, the largest being The Port Arthur News in Texas, with a circulation of 22,000.


A Killing Underlines Graft in China
The only fact that everyone agrees on is that some gangsters visited Tang Rimei's home in the southern Chinese city of Shenzhen one day last year and beat her brother to death in front of her.
Miss Tang, a slender 23-year-old woman, says the reason is simple: she was a whistle-blower, calling attention to a web of corruption involving senior officials at the company she worked for.
The easiest way to silence her, after threats failed, she said, was to murder her and her brother, adding that the killers became frightened and ran away before they got to her.


Review/Theater: 'Tis Puty She's A Whore; Jacobean Tale of Lust and Revenge Updated to the Fascist 1930's
If you were trying to assemble the most invigorating production of a classic to be seen in New York City this season, would you mix the following elements?
An infrequently produced Jacobean revenge tragedy that ends with its hero ripping out the heroine's heart and carrying it aloft on a skewer. ("Enter Giovanni with a heart upon his dagger," reads the Grand Guignol stage direction.) A pair of young lead actors better known for their Hollywood roles in lubricious movies like "The Doors" and "Basic Instinct" than for their experience in speaking verse.
A severely intellectual director whose previous encounters with another 17th-century author, Shakespeare, have been her least successful projects.
A set designer, most recently of the Metropolitan Opera's "Ghosts of Versailles," who regards a classical text as an occasion for practicing the modern arts of deconstruction and collage.


In Informal Vote, The Sighs Have It
On the eve of Election Day, cries of "Yes!" for Gov.
Bill Clinton rose in Brooklyn, and praise for former Gov.
Edmund G. Brown Jr. sounded in Harlem.
But in some 250 conversations in the New York region this weekend, few voters showed fire-in-the-soul feelings for either of the Democrats seeking the Presidential nomination.
Voicing doubts about character, the voters spoke not in a shout but in a giant collective sigh.


CHRONICLE
The name of SYLVIA FINE KAYE is remembered at Brooklyn College because she was the composer and lyricist of the school's alma mater.
Now it will be further perpetuated through the Sylvia Fine Kaye Chair in Musical Theater.
Mrs.
Kaye, the composer and producer who wrote music and lyrics for many of the films made by her husband, DANNY KAYE, endowed the chair at the College, from which she graduated in 1933, before she died in October.
In celebration of its establishment, JOEL GREY will speak there tomorrow, and ADOLPH GREEN and BETTY COMDEN on May 5.


Hovnanian Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Intek Diversified Corp. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Environmental Technologies International reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


International Remote Imaging Systems reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Quotation of the Day
"I'm not at all here for myself because I will always have the money to do what I want. But there are a lot of young women who don't. I'm married, I have two children and in a couple of years I won't have to worry about this anyway. But there are 150 employees at our restaurants and many young women among them. They said, 'Go and march for me.' That's why I'm here." -- STACY DALGLEISH, co-owner of three restaurants in Los Angeles, at the abortion rights march in Washington.  [ B8:3. ]


James C. Olson, 85, Consultant In Management Efficiency, Dies
James C. Olson, an early leader in the field of management consulting, died last Tuesday at Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 85 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of congestive heart failure, his family said.


3 SENATORS ASKING ACTION ON BURMESE
Two liberal Democrats and a conservative Republican on the Senate Foreign Relations Committee are joining forces to press for stronger Administration action against the Burmese military junta, charging it with "horrifying abuses of human rights, the trafficking of illicit drugs and the mass buildup of arms for domestic repression."
The Senators -- Daniel Patrick Moynihan of New York and Paul Simon of Illinois, the two Democrats, and Jesse Helms, Republican of North Carolina -- will introduce a Congressional resolution this week calling for an international arms embargo and the end of American trade with Myanmar, formerly Burma.
The Senators say United States trade with the country is four times higher than the Bush Administration acknowledges.


Johanna Coletta Wed
Johanna Viola Coletta, a daughter of Mrs.
John B. Simon Jr. of San Diego and the late Omerino Coletta, was married yesterday to Alan David Fallert, the son of Mrs.
Carlton Fallert of Hinsdale, Ill., and the late Mr.
Fallert.
The Rev.
Shannon Bernard performed the Unitarian ceremony at the Bird and Bottle Inn in Garrison, N.Y.
The bride is the director of planning and development at Goldberg Fossa Seid Advertising, and her husband is a group vice president at New York Life, both in New York.
His previous marriage ended in divorce.


It's Up to You, New York, New York (to Draw)
"New York" -- just the name inspires an assortment of feelings among baseball fans, many of whom go to ball parks to boo the players who have it stitched on their uniforms, to cheer for any team that is taking on its traditions and to hope that one day their own favorite franchises can emulate what is represented by the embroidered "NY."
In major league baseball, such emotional responses are no accidents, any more than the 33 pennants and 22 World Series banners that ring Yankee Stadium or the championships won by the Dodgers, the Giants and the Mets are mirages.


Petrominerals Corp.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Review/Music; Duo's Thoughtful Interplay
Given a music world in which the song recital is a shrinking market, we should be grateful for a week of German lieder that began with Elly Ameling singing Schubert and ended with Mitsuko Shirai singing almost everyone else.
Miss Shirai's program with Hartmut Holl at Weill Recital Hall on Friday night moved from Brahms to Schumann to Strauss and ended with Schoenberg's "Jane Grey" and five items by Hugo Wolf.
When we talk of collaboration between singer and accompanist there is often more lip service than substance behind the words, but in the case of these two musicians, collaboration is the only correct term.
Schumann's "Frauenliebe und Leben" was indeed the work of foils: Miss Shirai's elegant conception of phrase and Romantic intensity played against the piano's dry, clear textures.
This was piano playing that measured the music's inherent sentiment and added no more to it when no more was needed.
Perhaps the exception was in the "Nun hast du mir den ersten Schmerz getan," in which the singer's exceedingly slow tempos and Mr.
Holl's space-age interpretation created shock-attack chords, unexpected pauses and skeletal timbres.


Environmental Diagnostics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Essay; Protesting Too Much
One American voter in three thinks that he or she has figured out a way to beat the primary system: pick out a candidate who cannot win nomination, no matter how much you distrust or even detest him, and cast a protest vote for that "anti" candidate.
That is intended (1) to "send a message" to the most electable candidate of your party to move closer to your position, or (2) to abdicate the choice to party bosses at the convention, allowing the protester to profess shock at their selection of a safe establishmentarian.


Alps Caught in Vise Between Tourism and Trucks
The people of the Alps have always reshaped their breathtaking and dangerous landscapes.
But in recent years they have become more than ever the masters of the mountains, taming rivers behind dams, razing forests for roads and ski runs and covering slopes with tourist resorts.
Yet in the scramble to accommodate 100 million visitors a year in a region that ranges from southern France to Slovenia, a debate is raging over how much further man can go in extracting pleasure and profit before nature strikes back.


Allies in Anger Pack a Train to Washington
As its contribution to the march for abortion rights in Washington, Planned Parenthood of New York City packed an Amtrak train full of middle-class outrage and ferried it down to the capital today, a ride that ended in a faint shadow of more bellicose days, with dozens of women taking over the men's rooms in Union Station.
About 1,100 people -- almost all women, almost all white and almost all over 30 -- paid $70 to ride to the rally in relative comfort and comfortable solidarity.
Along the way the commitment to abortion rights was well and passionately articulated, the Sunday newspaper was devoured and so were many bagels from Zabar's bags.


Union Cuts Demand on Contract
On the fifth day of a potentially destructive strike, the National Hockey League's civil war of words changed battlegrounds yesterday, from Toronto to New York, as team owners gathered for today's critical board of governors meeting at the Plaza Hotel and the union offered another proposal for settlement of a deadlock that threatens the Stanley Cup playoffs.
The N.H.L.'s president, John A. Ziegler Jr., and the executive director of the Players Association, Bob Goodenow, met into the evening.
Goodenow said afterward that he had offered the owners a contract that would meet one of their major demands.


Raytech Corp.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Independent Entertainment reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Berlitz International reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Flowers Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 7


Report Shows Poor Families Going Hungry
Twenty percent of low-income families in Queens with at least one child under 12 years old have at times gone hungry, in some cases because they were not aware that they qualified for Government food assistance, according to a report that will be released today on the extent of hunger in the borough.
The report, the Queens Community Childhood Hunger Identification Project, was one of several studies on hunger commissioned across the country by the Food Research and Action Center, a nonprofit advocacy group in Washington.
The Queens study, which was sponsored in part by the New York City Human Resources Administration, was based on a survey conducted of 389 low-income families in the borough last spring.


BASEBALL: Sports of The Times; Time to Greet New York's New Managers
IT doesn't happen every spring.
Even when Yankee managers were being recycled or renounced, the Mets usually maintained a sense of stability.
Over the two decades of the George Steinbrenner era, only in 1984 have both the Mets and the Yankees opened the same season with new managers.
Davey Johnson endured for more than six seasons, Yogi Berra for one season and 14 games.
This time, Jeff Torborg and Buck Showalter are the new New York names.
And as the season opens, all is rosy, all is sweet.


ICC Technologies Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


The Voters Aren't Voting
The turnout for Connecticut's Presidential primary was that state's lowest ever -- 10.5 percent of the voting-age population.
Jerry Brown won with fewer votes than Jesse Jackson got by coming in second in the 1988 primary.
The message is clear: Token turnouts are picking this year's nominees.
Whatever the reason, every stay-at-home is a vote for un-representative government.
Voting in primaries is always smaller than in the general election.
In 1988, the average turnout for primaries was 22.5 percent, compared with 50.2 percent in November.


Hillenbrand Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Delegates; How New York Voters Determine Who Fills Seats at Democratic Convention
If anything underlines the difference between the two contenders for the Democratic nomination for President, it is this: In the New York primary tomorrow, Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas will field 186 candidates for delegate and alternate to the Democratic National Convention, while former Gov.
Edmund G. Brown Jr. of California will have 19.
Mr.
Clinton's candidates, a veritable who's who of New York Democrats, include Carol Bellamy, the former City Council president; Sandra Feldman, head of the United Federation of Teachers in New York City, and Representative Gary L. Ackerman of Queens.


Grasso reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


American National Petroleum reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


3 Men Shot to Death In a Brooklyn Club
Three men were shot to death Saturday night and a fourth seriously wounded after they were forced to lie on the floor of an unlicensed Brooklyn social club, apparently during a robbery, the police said.
It was unclear yesterday why the robbers opened fire on the victims, said Lieut.
Charles F. Dowd, commander of the 79th Precinct Detective Squad.
Detectives were not immediately able to interview the survivor of the attack, who was in critical condition with a shoulder wound at Brooklyn Hospital, he said.


HUGE CROWD BACKS RIGHT TO ABORTION IN CAPITAL MARCH
At least half a million people marched from the White House to the Mall near the Capitol today in support of abortion rights, hoping to impress lawmakers and the public with their political influence as the Supreme Court considers a Pennsylvania case that could sharply limit women's access to abortions.
The crowd, perhaps the largest ever to march on Washington, was estimated by the police at 500,000 and by the organizers at 700,000.
By either count, it was around twice the size of the huge abortion-rights demonstration that filled the grassy Mall three years ago this week.
Marchers From All Over
The marchers came from all over the nation, by plane and bus and train and car.
They included mothers and daughters, Hollywood stars, teachers, preachers and doctors, Republicans for Choice, Catholics for Choice and two Presidential candidates, Bill Clinton and Edmund G. Brown Jr.
Paul E. Tsongas, who has suspended his campaign but says he may re-enter the race, was there with his oldest daughter, Ashley.
President Bush, who has made telephone speeches to anti-abortion rallies, was at the Presidential retreat in Camp David, Md.


PLM International reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


It Isn't Dollars, the Players Maintain
Top-ranking members of the striking Players Association, gathered in New York to monitor today's pivotal meeting of the National Hockey League board of governors, told reporters yesterday that they felt their strike was no longer about dollars, but about dignity.
"All the economic issues have been agreed to," was the assessment of Mike Gartner, the Ranger forward and a member of the union's negotiating committee.
"We want to have a wedding. We just don't want it to be a shotgun wedding."


Car-Insurance Reform Bill Steers Claims Out of Court
A campaign to revise Connecticut's auto-insurance system is provoking debate across the state, especially in this city where insurance is king and its palaces line the roads to the statehouse.
Automobile-insurance reform is difficult at best, as other states have found.
In New Jersey, sweeping changes enacted in 1990 by Gov.
Jim Florio have had mixed results.
The Governor says he has cut rates for good drivers, but insurers complain that the state has imposed unreasonable restrictions that make it hardly worthwhile to do business.


Lisa M. Marcus Weds Steven Abramowitz
Lisa Marlene Marcus, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Marlowe Marcus of Haworth, N.J., was married yesterday in Tarrytown, N.Y., to Steven Mark Abramowitz, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jack Abramowitz of Plainview, L.I.
Rabbi Ephraim Buchwald officiated at Tappan Hill.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Krickstein Prevails  Aaron Krickstein overcame a foot injury to defeat top-seeded Aleksandr Volkov of Russia, 6-4, 6-4, and win the South African Open in Johannesburg.
Krickstein, the fourth-seeded player, won his first singles title since 1989 in a ragged match that lasted 77 minutes.
An injured tendon in the arch of his right foot Tuesday almost forced Krickstein out of the tournament.
But he said his baseline play and service return remained strong, and he went on to win the title without dropping a set despite playing with a heavily bandaged foot. (AP) Costa Pulls an Upset: Unseeded Carlos Costa upset defending champion Sergio Bruguera, 4-6, 6-2, 6-2, in the final of the Estoril Open in Lisbon. (AP) COLLEGE BASEBALL  Quite an Inning  Princeton swept past Columbia, 23-1 and 7-3, in a doubleheader at Clarke Field in Princeton, N.J., yesterday.
The first game featured a 17-run second inning as the Tigers, 8-6 over all and 2-2 in the the Eastern Intercollegiate Baseball League, set National Collegiate Athletic Association records for most runs batted in for one inning, with 16, and most runs scored in a second inning.
Columbia fell to 6-12 and 3-3.
GOLF  Beck Pulls Out Victory  Chip Beck blasted out of a bunker on the 18th hole and sank a 6-foot putt yesterday to win the Freeport McMoran tournament in New Orleans by one stroke over Greg Norman and Mike Standly.
Beck blew a three-stroke lead with a round of 74 on Saturday and went into yesterday's final 18 holes trailing Jeff Maggert by two shots.
But Maggert carded a seven-bogey 75, slipping to a tie for fourth. (AP) Lofland Wins First Tournament: Dana Lofland took advantage of a closing birdie and a late collapse by Beth Daniel to take her first professional victory by two strokes in the Las Vegas L.P.G.A.
International. (AP) YACHT RACING  2 Teams Tied for First  With three days of semifinal racing to go, New Zealand and Italy tied for first place in the America's Cup challengers' trials yesterday off San Diego.
New Zealand defeated France's Ville de Paris by 3 minutes 11 seconds in a race that the Kiwi team dominated from the start.
In the other challengers match, the Japanese team lost to Italy by 1:53.
In the defenders' semifinals, Bill Koch's America3 defeated Kanza by 34 seconds in a 9-knot breeze.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
A bitter labor dispute reaches a crossroads today.
Caterpillar set a 7:30 A.M. deadline for 12,600 striking U.A.W. workers to either return to work or be permanently replaced.  [ Page D1. ]
Sam Walton, who founded Wal-Mart Stores, died at age 74 in Little Rock, Ark.
Mr.
Walton, the most successful merchant of his time, had long struggled against two types of cancer.  [ A1. ]  The founder assembled and tested a respected management team that will carry on at the nation's largest retailer.
And with largely untapped territories in the West and Northeast for expansion, Wal-Mart still has excellent prospects for growth, analysts say.  [ B11. ]


Placated by Shamir, Israeli Foreign Minister Retracts Threat to Quit
Foreign Minister David Levy pulled back at the last minute today, withdrawing the resignation he had announced a week ago in exchange for promises of a larger slice of power if his party leads Israel's next government.
Eleventh-hour concessions to Mr.
Levy by Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir put an end, for the moment, to a crisis that had threatened to split the governing Likud Party at the start of the campaign for the June election.


Dr. Ilene Wilets Has Wedding
Dr.
Ilene Frances Wilets, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edwin Wilets of Parsippany, N.J., was married yesterday in New York to Dominick Joseph Balletta, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Louis Balletta of Manalapan, N.J.
Rabbi Judith Lewis performed the ceremony at the Pratt Mansions.


Michigan's Fab Five: Ready, Steady, Go
It's not as if there has never been a group of outstanding freshman basketball players assembled in one class.
In 1966, U.C.L.A. landed Lew Alcindor and three other blue-chip recruits.
A rule prohibiting freshmen from varsity competition kept them from national view until 1967, when a team of four sophomores and a junior won the first of seven consecutive national championships for U.C.L.A.


Stocks in Tokyo
Stock prices dropped in Tokyo today.
The Nikkei index of 225 issues was down 123.34 points, or less than 1 percent, to 18,436.37.
At midday, the index was down 104.27 points, on 90 million shares.
On Friday, the Nikkei rose 273.68 points.


End of Minnesota's Fat of the Land
WE are all grateful to the Twin Cities for serving as the sports capital of the United States for the last year, but is it too gauche to ask what this pleasant part of the world can do for an encore?
There's no point requesting the basketball game of the year, because we have already had that, Kentucky-Duke, a week ago Saturday in Philadelphia.


Treasury to Auction Only Bills and Notes
Treasury financings this week are confined to bills and notes, beginning with today's regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills, followed on Wednesday by a seven-year note auction.
By late in the day Friday, the three-month bills were offered at a rate of 3.95 percent and the six-month bills at 4.02 percent.
In when-issued trading, the seven-year note was offered at a price to yield 7.10 percent.


Duke Plots an Antidote To Youthful Enthusiasm
For the Duke Blue Devils to win their second consecutive national basketball title, they will have to find a way to solve matchup problems aggravated by their own injuries and Michigan's superior overall height.
But just as important, the Blue Devils need to demonstrate consistently that they know how to do the one thing that Michigan's five freshman starters have never done: play at a championship level on the night that a championship is at stake.


Signs of Low Inflation May Give Bonds a Lift
After three months of less-than-stellar performance, fixed-income investments promise brighter returns for the spring quarter, especially for Treasury securities, credit market analysts and economists say.
The sharp rise in interest rates, which began in mid-January and continued until late last month, took place as a flood of new corporate and Treasury debt securities came to market.
In addition, speculation that the economy would quickly improve raised fears of inflation and higher interest rates among fixed-income investors.


Media Giants Pressed To Limit Tobacco Ads
A group of Franciscan brothers that for years has led efforts to restrict or ban the sales and marketing of "sin products" like cigarettes and liquor is broadening its crusade, taking aim at the media companies that sell advertising time and space to manufacturers of those products.
At the annual meeting of the Gannett Company in Arlington, Va., on April 28, shareholders will vote on a proposal concerning tobacco advertising, which will be presented by the Province of St.
Joseph of the Capuchin Order in Milwaukee.
The order has previously confronted consumer-product companies like Philip Morris at their annual meetings.


Bringing the Babe to the Screen Again
He is no William Bendix, but JOHN GOODMAN isn't worried about invidious comparisons when the movie "The Babe" opens April 17 with him in the title role.
For one thing, "The Babe Ruth Story," the 1948 movie in which Bendix portrayed Ruth, is widely regarded as the worst baseball movie ever made.
For another, Goodman, the heavyweight actor and blue-collar television husband of ROSEANNE ARNOLD, formerly Barr, has gone to considerable trouble to get Ruth down pat without consciously imitating him.


Leaving Robust Business in Hands of Tested Managers
Sam Walton, the founder and chairman of Wal-Mart Stores Inc., had assembled and tested a respected management team that will carry on at the nation's largest retailer.
Mr.
Walton died yesterday at age 74.
And with largely untapped territories in the West and Northeast for expanding its discount retailing empire, Wal-Mart has excellent prospects for continuing to grow, analysts and industry consultants said.


If You've Got the Cash, Here's the Race
Celebrity pro-am events have become familiar curtain raisers for major golf tournaments and the like, but the Toyota Pro/Celebrity Race on Saturday in Long Beach, Calif., a warmup for the Grand Prix Indy car race there the next day, has taken the format a step further, making it a race not simply for the famous, but for the rich
or
famous.
Rich enough, anyway, to shell out $28,000 for an opportunity to compete against such more or less bona-fide celebrities as the television actors CRAIG T. NELSON ("Coach") and LARRY DRAKE ("L.A. Law").


Bridge
An Australian goes to work today as the temporary chief executive of the American Contract Bridge League in Memphis, the fifth person to hold that post in a decade.
Denis Howard, a native of Sydney who resigned as president of the World Bridge Federation a year ago, will serve for a few months until a permanent appointment is made.
Howard replaces Stephen J. Signaigo, who held the office for nine months.
One of Howard's happiest memories is the diagramed deal from the 1968 World Team Olympiad, where he was a member of an Australian squad that made a strong challenge for the world title.
They were facing a formidable Dutch team, which eventually reached the semifinals.


Awaiting His '92 Debut, Take It Away, Arazi
The stage having been set in California and New York over the weekend, the next cue for the Kentucky Derby cast puts the star into the act, and it reads: Enter, Arazi.
Arazi makes his 1992 debut tomorrow in the Prix Omnium at the St.
Cloud race track near Paris.
It will not exactly be the test of tests for the international champion of last year, since the competition is short and undistinguished.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.


Quaker State Seeks Ruling Against Castrol on Its Ads
Federal Judge Charles S. Haight Jr. thought he was finished weighing the selling points of competing brands of motor oil when he ruled last month in Manhattan that virtually all were identical despite conflicting claims by rival companies.
He was wrong.


In British Campaign, Too, Many Voters Ask: Why Don't Things Get Better?
Mired in the second severe recession in nearly 13 years of Government by Prime Minister John Major's Conservatives, British voters seem to be in a mood to teach them a lesson in the general election on Thursday.
With the opposition Labor Party two to six points ahead of the Conservatives in the latest polls, the only question seems to be how many of the 368 seats that they now hold the Conservatives are going to lose to Labor or to the smaller Liberal Democrats.


Inquiries Are Growing on Payments to McDonnell Douglas
Congressional investigators and Pentagon auditors are stepping up inquiries into whether the military took actions in the last several years to bail out the McDonnell Douglas Corporation, the nation's largest weapons maker, when the company faced a severe financial crisis.
The investigators said the evidence they had assembled suggested that the Pentagon was trying to provide financial aid to McDonnell Douglas without public debate or notification.
The period they are studying encompasses the months immediately before the start of the war against Iraq, where McDonnell fighter planes, missiles and helicopters played an important role.


Don't Let the Campaign Stop You From Voting; A Political Insider
To the Editor:
Bravo! to Anthony Lewis for his insightful appraisal of Edmund G. Brown Jr. (column, March 22).
Jerry Brown, who has really been nothing more than a political insider since birth, and certainly since his first election more than 20 years ago, is well known to us in California.
But then, that is why he would not have been elected, or for that matter, even nominated by his party to run for the Senate.
After all, when he most recently ran for chairman of the California Democratic Party, he promised his backers that if elected, he would serve out his term and not run for political office.
He was elected.
He did not serve out his term.
He is running for public office.


Sam Walton Is Dead At 74; the Founder Of Wal-Mart Stores
Sam Walton, the founder of Wal-Mart Stores Inc. and the most successful merchant of his time, died yesterday at the University of Arkansas Medical Sciences Hospital in Little Rock.
He was 74 years old.
A spokeswoman at the hospital, where Mr.
Walton was admitted a week ago, said that the cause of death was being withheld at the request of the family.
Mr.
Walton had long struggled against two types of cancer, hairy-cell leukemia, which weakens the immune system by attacking white blood cells, and a bone-marrow cancer called multiple myeloma.


Fingerprints Used to Cut Welfare Fraud
When Matthew Dunlap walked into a Los Angeles County welfare office on Friday, he found that he had to give before he could get.
The price was an optical image of his fingerprints, which was sent to a central computer for matching against the fingerprints of everyone on the general welfare rolls.


Don't Let the Campaign Stop You From Voting; The Managers' Role
To the Editor:
I read with distaste and dismay "Let the Mud Fly" by Susan Estrich (Op-Ed, March 20), a defense of viciousness in Presidential (and Congressional) election campaigns.
Advising us that 1992 may see "the dirtiest campaign in American Presidential history," Professor Estrich suggests "you can't really blame the candidates for that. They're doing what works."
If we can't blame the candidates, whom do we blame?
Leaders are supposed to lead and inspire, and we have every right to expect that those seeking the Presidency will choose not to wallow in slime pits.
Everywhere we see the need for role models for the young; that a President is a role model for all generations seems to be of no concern to Ms.
Estrich, whose cavalier disregard of the moral stature of the Presidency is nothing less than appalling.


Review/Pop; A Female Band's Answer To Rock's Preoccupations
The four members of L7, the Los Angeles-based band that performed on Wednesday night at the Marquee, shook their long hair, blasted power chords and sang about sex and anger.
L7's difference from hard-rock norm is that its members are women, and that difference permeates their lyrics, their stage presence and the way they treat their audience.
Suzi Gardner, one of the band's two guitarists, hadn't arrived when L7 was supposed to begin, and band members announced from the stage that they were worried.
While the audience waited, the Lunachicks, a band of New York women, went onstage to play Bad Company's "Feel Like Makin' Love" with L7's equipment; Babes in Toyland, another band of women, was in the wings when Ms.
Gardner showed up.
Later, L7 dedicated a song to both bands; there's a bicoastal community spirit.


Geese So Nice in the Sky, but Oh, When They Land; Suburbanites Declare All-Out War on Messy Migratory Fowl That Won't Move On
For many suburbanites, Canada geese are nothing more than a magnificent pencil line of a V high in the sky.
But for those who contend with them on the ground, from western New Jersey to eastern Long Island, they are a noisy, exasperating nuisance, soiling everything they walk on, overgrazing lawns, competing with children for play space and hampering home sales near their encampments.
"They're just flying rats, that's what they are," said Frank Keegan, director of Parks and Recreation in Greenwich, Conn.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: New York; After Scanning Ballot, New York Rolls Its Eyes
Come, hear the voices of New York on the eve of Election Day:
They are cries of "Yes!" for Bill Clinton at a Brooklyn restaurant, thumbs down for him just a few tables away.
They are disappointment.
They are Jerry Brown the savior in Harlem, Jerry Brown the untrustworthy in Westchester.
They are shrugs.
They are jokes that while one candidate never inhaled, the other never exhaled.


Reporter's Notebook; Baton Is 'Star' in Police-Beating Trial
The unheralded star of the Rodney G. King beating trial has been a two-foot-long black metal tube with a shorter section attached at a right angle.
It was the instrument that two of the four defendants, Officers Laurence M. Powell and Timothy E. Wind, used on March 3, 1991, to strike Mr.
King more than 50 times.
The baton quickly became a favorite prop at the trial, second only to the famed videotape of the incident.
It has been used in dozens of courtroom re-enactments, with defendants playing themselves, witnesses playing defendants and lawyers in business suits kneeling on the floor, playing Mr.
King.


First Semismic Corp. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


CPI Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 1


Grey Consolidates Health-Care Units
Grey Advertising Inc. in New York has consolidated its international health-care agencies to form what the company is calling the fourth-largest worldwide network specializing in health-care advertising.
The network, called Grey Healthcare Group, has offices in 11 countries and billings of $223 million.
Gross Townsend Frank Hoffman Inc. in New York will serve as the network's lead agency; Alan Gross, president at Gross Townsend, has been named Grey Healthcare's managing director.


Books of The Times; Why No One Fixes What Doesn't Seem Broken
The Culture of Contentment By John Kenneth Galbraith  195 pages.
Houghton Mifflin. $22.95.


METRO DIGEST
METRO DIGEST  THE NEW YORK PRIMARY
VOICES ON THE EVE OF ELECTION DAY
On the eve of Election Day in New York, there are many voices.
There are cries of "Yes!" for Bill Clinton at a Brooklyn restaurant, thumbs down for him just a few tables away.
There are expressions of Jerry Brown the savior in Harlem, Jerry Brown the untrustworthy in Westchester.
There are shrugs and disappointments.
There are jokes that while one candidate never inhaled, the other never exhaled.
A20.


Nicole R. Adler, Student, Is Wed
Nicole Renee Adler, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Bernard Adler of White Plains, was married last night in Stamford, Conn., to Dr.
Mordecai Ari Dicker, the son of Rabbi and Mrs.
Henry Dicker of Forest Hills, Queens.
The groom's father performed the ceremony at Congregation Agudath Sholom.
Mrs.
Dicker, 21 years old, is a student at Barnard College.
Her father is a transportation planning consultant in White Plains.
Her mother, Lona T. Adler, is a reading specialist in the New York Public School System.


QUESTION BOX
Russell's Teammates
Q.
Besides Bill Russell and K. C. Jones, who were the other leading players on the University of San Francisco basketball teams that won consecutive N.C.A.A. championships in 1955 and 1956?


Paula Marcus Marries Andrew Shoyer on L.I.
Paula Marcus, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Reubin Marcus of Long Beach, L.I., was married yesterday in Jericho, L.I., to Andrew Shoyer, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur Shoyer of Rydal, Pa.
Rabbi Daniel Mehlman performed the ceremony at the Jericho Jewish Center.


For the Birds, and Everyone Else
Not all eyes will be on the ball today when the Baltimore Orioles open the 1992 baseball season in their new 48,000-seat stadium, Oriole Park at Camden Yards.
Many fans -- of architecture as well as baseball -- will be turning out to look at the stadium itself.
For Camden Yards is the first of what Baseball Weekly calls the "new classics," ball parks designed to recall such beloved landmarks as Fenway Park, Wrigley Field and Tiger Stadium.
Instead of indulging in colossal concrete doughnuts with plastic domes and Astroturf, architects of these new stadiums promise to take us back to the old ball game.
They offer irregularly shaped fields, real grass and real sky.


GENERAL OFFERED THAI PREMIER POST
Thailand's top military commander, who led a coup last year that toppled the nation's last democratically elected Government, was offered the post of Prime Minister today after the leading civilian candidate was linked by the United States to drug trafficking.
Gen.
Suchinda Kraprayoon, 58 years old, has said in the past that he would refuse the post, and it is not clear that he will accept the job now.


Intercan Leasing reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Watch Out, Scrawlers, You're on Graffiti Camera
On the monitor, an unchanging scene of a white wall. Suddenly, action.
A teen-ager, baseball cap perched backward on his head, steps into the picture.
He pulls a can from a pocket.
He spray-paints some letters on the wall.
He slides out of the scene.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  YELTSIN PLEDGES 'CORRECTIONS'
On the eve of an important session of the Russian Parliament, President Yeltsin demanded strong executive authority and promised measures to soften the immediate effects of his economic reforms.
A1  BIG VOTE FOR GERMAN RIGHTISTS
Far-right parties scored surprising gains in local elections in two German states.
Politicians from established parties said the results were shocking and dangerous.
A1  IRAN BOMBS A REBEL BASE IN IRAQ
Iranian jets bombed an Iranian rebel base in Iraq in the most serious attack by Iran since a truce ended their eight-year war in 1988.
A3  FOES PILLAGE IRAN'S MISSIONS
Opponents of Teheran's Islamic Government invaded Iranian missions in New York, Ottawa and eight Western European countries, seizing hostages and wrecking offices in retaliation for predawn Iranian air strikes on a rebel base in Iraq.
A3  WEB OF GRAFT IN SOUTHERN CHINA
A slaying case in Shenzhen offers a window onto the web of corruption in southern China, the most prosperous part of the country.
A8  MORE FIGHTING IN YUGOSLAVIA
Ethnic clashes intensified across breakaway Bosnia and Herzegovina, a day before the European Community is expected to recognize the republic's independence.
A12  BRITAIN'S TORIES UNDER SIEGE
Mired in the second severe recession in nearly 13 years of rule by the Conservatives, British voters seem to be in a mood to teach them a lesson on Thursday.
A13  ISRAELI RESCINDS RESIGNATION
Foreign Minister David Levy withdrew his resignation in exchange for promises of a larger slice of power if the Likud party leads the next Israeli Government.
A9  THAIS ASK GENERAL TO LEAD
The military commander who led a coup in Thailand last year was offered the post of Prime Minister.
The civilian nominee was linked to drug trafficking by Washington.
A8  NEW CONQUEROR IN THE ALPS
From southern France to Slovenia, a debate is raging over how much further man can go in extracting pleasure and profit from the Alpine habitat before nature strikes back.
A12  U.S. senators seek stronger pressure on the Burmese junta.
A9  Okata Journal: The issue of protecting whales resurfaces in Japan.
A4  National A14-17, A20, B8-9  LARGEST MARCH YET ON ABORTION
Half a million people marched in Washington in support of abortion rights, hoping to sway lawmakers as the Supreme Court considers a Pennsylvania case that could sharply limit abortions.
A1
Taking outrage and Zabar's bags to the march.  B8
A 1989 decision revitalized the abortion rights movement.
B8  CLINTON FACES NEW QUESTIONS
Even as he assured New Yorkers he could defeat the President in November, Governor Clinton fended off fresh questions about his forthrightness regarding a draft induction letter during the Vietnam War.
A1  BROWN PRESSES HIS CAMPAIGN
Mr.
Brown pressed his "take back America" message and confronted questions about his appointment of campaign supporters to judgeships in California 10 years ago.
A1  WHAT DID DONATIONS REAP?
As head of a California pharmaceutical empire, Milan Panic gave liberally to Democratic politicians.
But his conflicts with regulatory agencies raised questions about the actions of one of those politicians: former Governor Brown.
A17
Riding the rough, conflicted and unpredictable politics of 1992. A16
Listening to the passions, sighs and yearnings of New York.  A15
The Wisconsin campaign has been civil but inconclusive.  A17
Two telling numbers: Clinton, 186; Brown, 19.  A16  DEADLINE FOR STRIKERS
The nation's most bitter labor dispute -- between Caterpillar Inc., the world's largest manufacturer of construction equipment, and the United Automobile Workers, one of the country's strongest unions -- is reaching a crossroads.
D1  FINGERPRINTING THE NEEDY
Los Angeles County has installed a fingerprint-identification system for ferreting out welfare cheats.
The fingerprinting has saved the county $5 million, but raised a host of questions about individual rights and government intrusion.
A14  REGULATING DOCTOR REFERRALS
Florida's Governor is expected to sign a bill prohibiting doctors from referring patients to clinics in which the doctors have a financial interest.
Doctors say the bill will cause upheaval in the industry.
A20  A DIFFERENT KIND OF CROP: WATER
In a trend that could hasten the rapid urbanization of California, farmers are loosening their historic grip on water in the West, transferring some of their supplies to cities and industries -- for a price.
B9  WHEN BATONS CONDUCT VIOLENCE
Reporter's notebook: The star of the Rodney King beating trial has been a two-foot-long black metal tube, which police officers used to strike Mr.
King more than 50 times.
A14  Metropolitan Digest, B1 Business Digest, D1  Sports C1-10  Baseball: David Cone's intensely scrutinized universe.
C1
Baseball in New York is something different.  C2
Oriole Park at Camden Yards opens today in Baltimore.  C3
Mets open season against St. Louis tonight.  C4  Basketball: New Duke hurdle.  C1
Michigan's Fab Five in the spotlight.  C1
Stanford wins N.C.A.A. women's title.
C6  Columns: Anderson on Torborg and Showalter.
C3
Vecsey on the Final Four C7  Arts/Entertainment C11-18  Brown, Clinton and the arts.
C11  Theater: " 'Tis Pity She's a Whore," at the Public.
C11  Music: "Billy Budd." C11  Word and Image: "Madness by Jonathan Miller." C18  Obituaries B10-11  WAL-MART FOUNDER DIES
Sam Walton, the most successful merchant of his time, died at the University of Arkansas Medical Sciences Hospital in Little Rock.
He was 74 years old and had been ill with cancer for some time.
A1  Rixi Marcus, first female grandmaster of bridge.
B11  Gerald L. Klerman, expert on depression and schizophrenia.
B10  Editorials/Op-Ed A18-19  Editorials A18  Killer asteroids.
Democracy and hypocrisy.
The voters aren't voting.
Letters A18  Leslie H. Gelb: Clinton's promise.
A19  William Safire: Protesting too much.
A19  Roberto Gonzalez Echevarria: The Cuban baseball crisis.
A19  Theodore J. Lowi: Mr.
Perot, form a party.
A19


Review/Rock; Cowboy Junkies, Under Influences
The most important prop in Cowboy Junkies' concert at the Beacon Theater on Thursday night was the lead singer Margo Timmins's shawl.
A delicate, lacy black number that looked like something Stevie Nicks might drape over a lamp, the shawl seemed to function as a security blanket.
When Ms.
Timmins sang lines that were supposed to convey vulnerability, she wrapped it tightly around her shoulders and hugged her arms; during moments of abandon, as in the song " 'Cause Cheap Is How I Feel," from the Junkies' third album, "The Caution Horses," she let the shawl dangle seductively.
Doused in lavender lights, her head bowed, Ms.
Timmins looked something like a docile prairie wife waiting for her husband's return; her shawl was her talisman, flagging her as a female anachronism.
Since the Junkies' commercial breakthrough in 1988 with the album "The Trinity Session," a good deal of the band's appeal has depended on Ms.
Timmins's sexuality.
As the band rummaged through folk, blues and country influences, slowing down songs like Lou Reed's "Sweet Jane" to a death-knell tempo, Ms.
Timmins sang in a voice that rarely rose above a whisper; she sounds hushed, doomed and breathless, like a woman-child or a soiled innocent.
On subsequent releases, the Junkies have tried to flesh out their approach: the band's latest release, "Black-Eyed Man" (RCA), includes full-out rockers and brazen, electric psychedelia.


Peppier Stanford Wins Women's Title
They hugged and shouted and cried when the game was over, and then they cut down the nets to remember the moment.
What won that moment -- and the national championship -- for the Stanford women's team today was stamina.
The Cardinal had it. Western Kentucky did not.


Democracy and Hypocrisy
President Bush, seizing on the public's contempt for Congress, now casts himself as an ardent government reformer, committed to cleaning up a "broken" political system.
But that's a stretch, even for a politician caught with his polls down in the midst of a tough re-election fight.
Beyond the partisan posturing, Mr.
Bush shows little real interest in fixing things.
He rightly calls for streamlining the Congressional committee system and budget process.
But Congressional leaders are already pushing to create a bipartisan committee to examine such changes.
And on the central reform issue facing Congress -- its corrupt system of campaign financing -- Mr.
Bush is the main obstacle to fundamental change.


In Politics of Water, New Pioneers in West Are Vendors
Dana Fisher and Virgil Jones are pioneers in the new West.
The two gray-haired farmers will soon find out whether they can do better by selling some of their water to Los Angeles and other cities than by growing crops.
The Palo Verde Valley illustrates the odd economics and the law of water in the arid West.
The 300 farmers in the sparsely populated valley use about 400,000 acre-feet of water a year, roughly enough to supply a city of 250,000 people.


The Primary In New York
Only Democrats enrolled by March 13 can vote in New York's Presidential primary tomorrow.
There is no Republican primary.
Nominations for the United States Senate, House of Representatives, the Legislature and other offices will be decided by primaries in September.


New York Primary's Multiple Choices
JOHN MARINO'S mother can't bring herself to vote for Bill Clinton, which may mean that:
A: Mr.
Clinton, a southern Baptist, has yet to win over white Catholics, who constitute more than one in four Democratic voters in a New York Presidential primary and are vital to a Democratic victory in November.


Bamberger Polymers Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Britain's Labor Party Leading
After two recessions in nearly 13 years, voters seem to be in a mood to teach the Conservatives a lesson in the general elections.
Page A13.


Amid Fury, Lake Superior St. Prevails
The score was 5-3 in favor of Lake Superior State, and the penalty count was 15-10 in disfavor of Wisconsin.
When the college hockey national championship game ended Saturday night at Knickerbocker Arena, the Badgers were in a mean mood and their target was Referee Tim McConaghy.


Bronx Man Kills Daughters, Wounds His Wife and Shoots Himself


Dance in Review
Alvin Ailey Repertory Ensemble  Davis Hall


Inamed reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Barringer Technologies reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


First American Bankshares Reports Losses Doubled in '91
First American Bankshares Inc. says it lost $358 million last year, more than double its deficit of the previous year.
In addition, efforts of the big Washington bank holding company to raise capital and turn itself around have been made far more difficult by its former links to the Bank of Credit and Commerce International.
"There's no question that it's hurt," said George L. Davis, a former Citicorp executive who took over as First American's president three months ago.


Foreign Affairs; Clinton's Promise
New Yorkers have the power to destroy one of the most promising Presidential candidates in decades.
Or they can give Bill Clinton a chance to be heard fully and clearly for the remainder of this campaign.
More than anyone now on the national scene, the Governor from Arkansas could be what we most need: a Great Experimenter in foreign and domestic policy.


Biomechanics Corp. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


High-Tech Workers See Future on L.I.
"This is not a personal kind of cult, and I am not looking to be a cult figure," said Charles B. Wang, the hands-on chairman and founder of Computer Associates International, as he prepared to welcome 3,200 employees from 27 countries to a company meeting in a Long Island sports arena.
The weeklong event -- part grand-opening celebration, part sales kickoff, part inspirational retreat -- will bring together nearly half the company's work force in a huge gathering at and around its new high-tech blue-tinted corporate headquarters here in the middle of the Island, hard by the Long Island Expressway, so that Mr.
Wang can lay out next year's game plan.


Provigo Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 25


Cautious General on House Scandal's Front Lines
Recently, Matthew F. McHugh was known among colleagues on both sides of the aisle in the House of Representatives as a man without enemies.
"I often say Matt would have made a wonderful priest," laughs the Rev.
Robert Cornell, probably his closest friend since their years together in the House during the early 1970's.


Yeltsin Talks of Cushioning Effects of Economic Change
On the eve of an important session of the Russian Parliament, President Boris N. Yeltsin demanded strong executive authority in a new constitution today and promised to introduce measures to soften the immediate effects of his economic reforms.
Mr.
Yeltsin broke days of public silence, during which he has maneuvered to blunt expected criticism from the Parliament, the Congress of People's Deputies, by shifting some of his closest allies from their posts while defending the need for market reforms and for a strong hand at the top.


World Economies


Review/Opera: Billy Budd; By Britten, A Work To Justify Its Medium
Few works so lend themselves to the designs of grand opera as Benjamin Britten's "Billy Budd." Manichaean confrontations between good and evil, the relentlessness of destiny, the setting at sea and a battle scene all lift what are mere people into moral combatants on a scale that is larger than life.
The character of Budd has more than a passing acquaintanceship with another operatic hero, Parsifal.
Both are pure innocents with no past and little self-awareness.
Parsifal manifests the German's faith in great destinies and becomes a catalyst to their end; the other is crushed by rhythms of nature that deposit catastrophe or happiness on human heads according to unknowable laws.
John Dexter's 14-year-old production returned to the Metropolitan Opera on Saturday afternoon.
Its accommodation of simple clarity to size and grandeur exploits all that is positive in this much-criticized opera house.
In William Dudley's set, a ship's deck stands against a pitch-black background.
It is as if the rest of the world has been painted out, leaving the H.M.S.
Indomitable to sail in its own untouchable sea.
By means of stage elevators, our view of its inner life expands accordionlike to four levels.


One Hurdle Left in Duke's Endurance Test
The questions began a year ago, even before that bright day the morning after, when the Duke Blue Devils went home to Cameron Indoor Stadium in Durham, N.C., and a sign that read, "Welcome Home N.C.A.A. Champs."
There was plenty of room in the Cameron rafters for Duke's first national basketball championship banner; there would be room for another.
And the difficult 12-month journey the Blue Devils have taken, just to earn a chance of igniting another campus bonfire, has been both carefully planned and unpredictably painful to the end.


Who Is That Youngster in the Window?


Cenvest reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Farmers in West May Sell Something More Valuable Than Any Crop: Water
Even as six years of drought turned lawns brown and forced urban Californians to take shorter showers, the farmers in the Palo Verde Valley had plenty of water to go on irrigating such thirsty crops as alfalfa and cotton.
And they jealously guarded their rights to cheap Federal water from the Colorado River.
But some profound changes are about to come to this valley between the McCoy and the Dome Rock mountains along the rugged Arizona border.
If all goes as planned, nearly a quarter of the valley's acreage will go fallow starting Aug. 1, and, in a two-year experiment, the water saved will be sold to people in urban areas hundreds of miles away.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Clinton; Players in Familiar Roles as Vote Nears Clinton Faces Questions About His Past and Spars With Rival
Gov.
Bill Clinton is hoping to leap another hurdle tomorrow in his quest for the Democratic Presidential nomination, working to persuade skeptical, alienated New York voters that he has the most realistic chance of defeating President Bush in November.
The Arkansas Governor has been frustrated throughout his campaign by receiving more attention for defending himself against personal accusations than for discussions of issues he feels strongly about, like health-care policy, education or economic revival.


Japan Faces a Crisis of Confidence
While it has been clear for weeks that something momentous is happening in the Japanese economy, the world's second largest, the ultimate direction of its shift is far from certain.
Perhaps the only certainty is that the stakes are high, not only for Japan but for the global economy.
Some of the indicators seem contradictory.
The Japanese stock market is well into the third year of a kind of slow-motion crash, and the economy is cooling quickly.
But the trade surplus is rocketing to record levels and unemployment is declining.
The Government has hastily cut short-term interest rates in an as yet vain attempt to reinvigorate the markets, but interest rates on Government bonds have risen.


Don't Let the Campaign Stop You From Voting
To the Editor:
A contradiction at the end of "Let the Mud Fly" (Op-Ed, March 20) by Susan Estrich, manager for the 1988 Dukakis-Bentsen campaign, undoes her articulate plea for negative Presidential campaigning.
Professor Estrich writes: "No doubt there'll be plenty of disgusted voters, who, turned off by the whole thing, will stay home. But you can't really blame the candidates for that: They're doing what works."
Obviously, a Presidential campaign that swells the ranks of nonvoters does not "work." In Illinois, Carol Moseley Braun diligently avoided negative campaigning, and without big money.
She shunned the hardball consultants Ms.
Estrich approves of, but brought out the vote and won the primary for the Senate.
Ms.
Braun saw what a lot of voters wanted and ran a campaign devoid of mud.
She ignored Ms.
Estrich's admonition that a candidate "needs to fight first." Voters pointedly rejected Ms.
Braun's opponents, who did exactly what Ms.
Estrich advocates.


March Was Big. But How Big?
There was unusual agreement about one thing at today's march for abortion rights: It was the capital's largest abortion rally ever, and one of the largest rallies ever seen here.
The police assigned to monitor the rally estimated that 500,000 marched on the Capitol; rally organizers gave an estimate of 700,000.


Creative Technologies Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Men's Journal Debut Set
The first issue of Men's Journal, a magazine for men interested in adventure, fitness and participatory sports, will appear on newsstands on April 13.
It is the latest publication of Jann Wenner, chairman of Straight Arrow Publishers, who founded Rolling Stone magazine 25 years ago.
The 180-page issue of Men's Journal carries 83 pages of ads.
Straight Arrow will distribute 135,000 copies on newsstands with a $3 cover price to test reader interest.
A second issue will come out in the fall.


Don't Let the Campaign Stop You From Voting; Buchanan's Club
To the Editor:
Since Patrick J. Buchanan, when he's not trying to scare people, has a good sense of humor, he must he savoring the irony of an Irish-American Roman Catholic posing as the spokesman for the nativist tradition.
This tradition was born as a virulent anti-Irish and anti-Catholic movement, and so it remained for most of our history.
Mr.
Buchanan, having gained access to the club, seems to have appointed himself chairman of the membership committee.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Brown; Players in Familiar Roles as Vote Nears Brown Spreads Message That the People Must Retake the Nation
From the television studios of Manhattan to the Mall beyond the United States Capitol to a red brick public housing project here, Edmund G. Brown Jr. today spread his message of insurgency, promising voters that as President he would return the country to the people.
At every stop he repeated the theme he has sounded since announcing his candidacy last October: that the Government is in the hands of a corrupt elite that needs to be overtaken.


How Al Davis Took Adelphi by Storm
In 1950, a brash 21-year-old named AL DAVIS arrived on the Garden City, L.I., campus of Adelphi University in his 1947 De Soto convertible, looking for his first job after graduating from Syracuse University.
"I said I didn't have one," recalled BILL ALTENBURG, then Adelphi's athletic director.
"He went to president Paul Dawson Eddy and all of a sudden, I had a freshman football coach. He must have done a job on Dr. Eddy."


People
*
Nicholas Gisonde and Peter Murphy joined Young &amp; Rubicam New York as executive vice presidents and senior creative directors.
The creative team previously worked at Backer Spielvogel Bates, New York. *
Philip J. Balshi, an executive vice president at Lintas New York, was named group creative director of a new fourth creative group.


Man Slays 2 Daughters, Then Ambushes His Wife
Using pillows to muffle the sound, a 40-year-old father shot and killed his daughter and stepdaughter as they lay in bed in their apartment in the Bronx Saturday night, the police said.
Then he waited about 14 hours for his wife to come home.
Shortly after noon yesterday, investigators said, he ambushed her as she walked up a hallway, seriously wounding her with three shots.
Finally, he put a .25-caliber pistol to his head and killed himself.


Cone's World Is a Mix Of Talent and Tumult
The grandmother, more close friend than regal matriarch, got wind of the reports.
She heard the words "rape investigation" in the same sentence with the name of her grandchild.
Soon enough, the grandchild came to her and there was an embrace, full of humiliation and gratitude and fear.
The arbitration ruling came down quickly, barely 24 hours after the pitcher and the baseball club had argued for almost a full working day about talent and potential and worth.
The pitcher, who had listened to the club call him an underachiever, a performer who plainly hadn't won enough to justify his asking price, had prevailed.
The award was a 1992 salary of $4.25 million.
The emotional payoff was even greater, rich in validation and vindication.


Lassonde Industries reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


2 Big Banks Settle Suit
Two of the biggest Western banks, Wells Fargo &amp; Company and the First Interstate Bancorp, have agreed to settle a credit-card price-fixing lawsuit to avoid the cost of a trial.


MinVen Gold Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Gerald L. Klerman, 63, an Expert On Depression and Schizophrenia
Dr.
Gerald L. Klerman, a psychiatrist and expert on depression who was a former chief of the Federal mental health agency, died on Friday at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 63 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of kidney disease, his family said.


Who'll Get a Last Shot at the Masters?
The Masters, which always promises the first truly defining moments of the golf year, is being greeted with even more anticipation than usual as Thursday's opening round approaches.
Will the 56th edition of the tournament provide the seemingly overdue occasion for either Fred Couples or Jose Maria Olazabal to win his first major championship?
Or will Nick Faldo or Seve Ballesteros return to re-establish himself as the best at the biggest moments?
Will an American win for the first time since 1987?
And how many times will John Daly reach one of Augusta National's short par-5's with a drive and a wedge?


Clinton: Challenges on Taxes


One Liberty Properties reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


At Caterpillar, the Deadline Is Now
The na tion's most bitter labor dispute between Caterpillar Inc., the world's largest manufacturer of construction equipment, and the United Automobile Workers, one of the country's strongest unions -- reaches a crossroads at 7:30 A.M.
Monday, the deadline the company has set for the 12,600 striking workers to either return to work or be permanently replaced.
What the workers decide, after more than five months on strike, is certain to have a profound impact on the future of the U.A.W., which has 900,000 members, and the host of companies for whom its members work.


Corrections
An article on March 26 about a Federal court ruling that upheld the authority of the Joint Free Public Library of Morristown, N.J., to evict patrons it found offensive described a lawyer, Frank Askin, incorrectly.
He is a general counsel of the American Civil Liberties Union.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Owens-Corning Fiberglas Corp., has filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for a shelf offering of up to $300 million in debt securities.


Business Scene; Apprenticeships: Reluctant Choice
IT is called youth apprenticeship: enrolling high school juniors in four-year work-study programs that train them for skilled jobs.
Such programs in Europe, where they are often compulsory, make millions of young people into sophisticated entry-level workers.
And now youth apprenticeship in a voluntary form is becoming fashionable in the United States -- in theory, at least.
Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas, seeking the Democratic nomination for President, advocates youth apprenticeship.
Various bills in Congress and in state legislatures push the concept.
And the Labor Department, along with several private foundations, helps finance pilot projects.
But after two years of efforts to start programs, the results are still meager: fewer than 1,000 apprentices nationwide, the Labor Department reports.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Voters; Democrats' Efforts to Lure Gay Voters Are Persistent but Subtle
Edmund G. Brown Jr. campaigns everywhere wearing a red ribbon looped on his lapel as a show of concern for people with AIDS.
On Sunday Gov.
Bill Clinton answered a question on global warming by urging the creation of an international trust fund to preserve rain forests, in exchange for letting drug companies do research on their rich plant life.
"Who knows," Mr. Clinton said. "They might even find a cure for AIDS."


U.S. Says Iraq and Iran Violated U.N. Truce Terms
Iraq flew fighter jets from its air bases on Sunday to defend against Iranian planes that bombed a guerrilla base inside Iraq, Bush Administration officials said today.
An Iranian jet was shot down during the episode, but it remains unclear whether it was downed by an Iraqi jet or by ground-based anti-aircraft guns, as was initially reported.


Florio Vetoes Minimum-Pay Bill
Gov.
Jim Florio issued his first veto of the 205th Legislature today, rejecting a Republican-backed bill that would have phased in over two years an 80-cent-an-hour increase in the state's minimum wage.
The Republicans hold a two-thirds majority in both chambers of the Legislature, but they are not expected to try to override the Democratic Governor's veto.
The new minimum wage, $5.05 an hour, took effect on April 1, and Republicans are unlikely to risk political disfavor by trying to take the money back.


Isaac Asimov Dies


Two Fighters and Two Motivations
For Iran Barkley, a fighter raised in the South Bronx, the recent light-heavyweight title victory over Thomas Hearns was a shining moment in a career that was regarded as kaput after successive losses to Roberto Duran, Michael Nunn and Nigel Benn a few years back.
But Barkley isn't the only fighter from New York who has big success within his sights.
Consider Junior Jones, a 21-year-old bantamweight (22-0, 15 knockouts) from Brooklyn, and Kevin Kelley, a 24-year-old featherweight (27-0, 20 knockouts) from Queens.


The Primary In New York
Only Democrats enrolled by March 13 can vote in the New York Presidential primary today.
There is no Republican primary.
Nominations for the United States Senate, House of Representatives, the Legislature and other offices will be decided by primaries in September.


McGuire Is Hospitalized
FRANK McGUIRE, the Hall of Famer who coached South Carolina for 16 years, was in stable condition yesterday in a Columbia, S.C., hospital after suffering a stroke late last week.
The 78-year-old McGuire underwent tests and evaluation on Sunday after being admitted to Baptist Medical Center on Friday.
Three years ago, McGuire underwent an angioplasty procedure to clear his arteries, and last December, he had a pacemaker implanted.


Ford Motor Unit Offers 6 3/8% Notes
The Associates Corporation of North America is offering $300 million in 6 3/8 percent notes that are due to reach maturity in 1995, with the notes being sold through the underwriter First Boston Corporation.
The issue is being reoffered to the public at a price of 99.845, to yield 6.432 percent, or about 63 basis points more than Treasury securities with a similar maturity.


Shelling by Serbs in Bosnia Intensifies
Bombardment by Serbians of the historic Muslim quarter of Sarajevo and shootings of unarmed peace demonstrators cast a pall over the European Community's announcement today that it had recognized this multi-ethnic republic as an independent country.
Heavy machine-gun fire and sharp explosions resounded throughout the evening as residents abandoned the streets in fear the Serbs would attack in retaliation for the recognition.
Looters ransacked shops and the police declared a curfew tonight between 10 P.M. and 6 A.M.  15 Demonstrators Wounded
"This is barbarism at its worst," said Selim Hadzibajric, Mayor of Sarajevo's bazaar district, a honeycomb of cobblestoned streets with mosques, tiny workshops, restaurants and stores that was hit repeatedly by Serb mortar and artillery shells this morning.


Talented Board Tactician Wasn't Easy to Intimidate
Belligerence was Sammy Reshevsky's game.
Logical, patient, thorough and relentless when he had the opportunity to attack, he never gave an inch when attacked.
No matter how difficult the situation he faced on the chessboard, Reshevsky could not be intimidated.
Under attack, he still searched for ways to win.
Lesser players would compromise, try to play it safe; that was not for him.
In the mid-1930's, when he started playing regularly on the international tournament circuit, he began a career of beating back attackers by his stubborn, diligent, objective penetration into the secrets of the formations in which he found himself.


Baseball Cornucopia
FOR some baseball fans, the season, which began yesterday, lasts all year.
There may be dreary months in which no actual games are played, but there are old games to replay in memory and conversation, statistics to dredge out of the dwindling pool of brain cells and favorite players to rate, usually to the detriment of the other guy's favorite player.
If you are that kind of fan, the Franklin Big League Baseball Encylopedia is for you.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Primaries; CLINTON AND BROWN MAKE LAST APPEALS FOR NEW YORK VOTE
Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas and former Gov.
Edmund G. Brown Jr. of California made their final impassioned appeals yesterday in a New York primary campaign that is virtually certain to shape the race for the Democratic nomination as well as both of their political futures.
Mr.
Clinton, battling to regain his status as the party's presumptive nominee, returned to the central themes of his campaign yesterday, pleading with voters to set aside any misgivings about his character and give him a chance to lead.


After Critical Inquiry, I.R.S. Turns to Ethics Expert
To many people who have clashed with the Internal Revenue Service, it would come as no surprise that Michael S. Josephson, an expert on ethics, says the agency is a place where some employees "distort and conceal information" to get ahead.
What is perhaps more surprising is that after studying the agency for a year and being hired to teach its workers to be more ethical, Mr.
Josephson calls the I.R.S.
"the most efficient and honest taxing organization in the world," adding, "There's not even a close second."


Asteroid Defense: 'Risk Is Real,' Planners Say
TOO faint to be seen by the naked eye, the first asteroid was discovered in 1801 by an Italian monk named Guiseppi Piazzi, working at an observatory in Palermo, Sicily.
By the end of the century, astronomers armed with more powerful telescopes were tracking hundreds of these rocky bodies, which lie in a loose belt between Mars and Jupiter like so much rubble left over from creation.
A troubling new kind of asteroid was found in 1932, one whose eccentric orbit occasionally brings it hurtling across the path of the Earth.
But astronomers did not start looking systematically for Earth-crossing asteroids until quite recently, their search spurred by the theory that periodic asteroid impacts, tens of millions of years apart, have shaped the evolution of life.


Gains by Anti-Immigrant Parties Rattle Bonn
Shocked by the success of far-right parties in state elections on Sunday, German political leaders vowed today to work urgently to resolve the explosive immigration question, which had been exploited by the right.
Party officials agreed to hold discussions to find a compromise, and Parliament scheduled a debate and vote on new proposals for April 30.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Jarryd Beats Cash  Anders Jarryd of Sweden, seeded 14th, defeated Pat Cash of Australia, 6-1, 2-6, 6-1, yesterday in the first round of the Japan Open at Tokyo.
Siemerink of the Netherlands, seeded 12th, routed Toshihisa Tsuchihashi of Japan, 6-0, 6-3. (AP) Meier Advances: Unseeded Silkie Meir of Germany advanced yesterday in the opening round of the $350,000 Bausch and Lomb Championships at Amelia Island Plantation in Florida with a 7-6 (7-0), 6-0 victory over Bettina Fulco-Villela of Argentina.
She will face top-seeded Steffi Graf tonight. (AP) HORSE RACING  Victory for Agincourt  Agincourt shook off a challenge from Dr.
Zoom to take a clear lead in the stretch and went on to a 2 1/2-length victory yesterday in the $33,000 Turn and Count purse for 3-year-olds and up at Aqueduct.
Pension Fraud, carrying 121 pounds with Herb McCauley up, came from far back and finished second in the five-horse field, 1 1/4 lengths ahead of Dressed Shipper, who carried 119 pounds with Jean-Luc Samyn up.
The victory was the first in two starts this year for Agincourt, who carried 110 pounds and was ridden by Jorge Chavez.
Agincourt covered one mile on the fast track in 1:37 3/5 and earned $19,800 for Robert Perez.
Agincourt, who paid $5.80, $3 and $2.20 for $2 across the board, will make his next start in the Wood Memorial on April 18. (AP)


New Yorker Lawsuit Advances
A Federal appeals court ruled that a psychoanalyst can go to trial with a libel suit against The New Yorker magazine and a writer.
Page A20.


Isaac Asimov, Whose Thoughts and Books Traveled the Universe, Is Dead at 72
Isaac Asimov, the pre-eminent popular-science writer of the day and for more than 40 years one of the best and best-known writers of science fiction, died yesterday at New York University Hospital.
He was 72 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of heart and kidney failure, said his brother, Stanley.


Patterns
Trendiness Is Out
In the 1970's, Vogue called for "real life" fashion, according to the exhibition notes in the photo retrospective now at the New York Public Library.
"We are out of costume," the magazine said at the time.


School Officials Optimistic On Upcoming Budget Votes
After two years of widespread rejection, school officials will put their new budgets before the voters in towns across New Jersey Tuesday, and educators say they are hopeful that taxpayers will be less hostile this spring.
Some officials sense a softening of the rabid anti-tax mood that dominated the last two budget votes, nearly toppled Senator Bill Bradley in 1990 and routed Democrats from the state Legislature last November.
In addition, they say, state limits on school budget increases and a hold-the-line mentality by local superintendents may increase the number of approvals.
Yet, they caution, voter anxieties about the recession may be counterbalancing.


Corruption and Cocaine in Peru
I was an adviser to the Peruvian drug police in 1990 in Peru's Upper Huallaga Valley, where most of the world's cocaine originates.
As an enforcement specialist with the Drug Enforcement Administration's Operation Snowcap, I helped the Peruvian police seize smugglers' planes, raid cocaine labs, destroy illegal airfields and disrupt drug mafias known as firmas.
Despite the war on drugs, coca production was not leveling off, Maoist Shining Path guerrillas were extending control over the Upper Huallaga Valley and corrupt Peruvian Army elements increasingly thwarted us.
And corruption was creeping into the ranks of the Peruvian drug police, the main U.S. ally in the drug war.


3 Former Mets Find Happiness
In the turmoil of another Mets spring training, Kevin McReynolds and Gregg Jefferies played quietly and routinely for the Kansas City Royals.
There was no controversy, no clubhouse upheaval, involving either player.
They were gone, along with another former Met, Keith Miller.


Mark Morris Returns, Buffeted but Unbowed
Mark Morris, the bad boy of Belgian dance, has returned to New York, where he opens tonight in a two-week season at the Manhattan Center Grand Ballroom, 311 West 34th Street.
The experiences of his two and a half years as the resident choreographer of the Theatre Royal de la Monnaie, the Belgian national opera house in Brussels, do not seem to have greatly changed him.
Mr.
Morris was widely attacked by a press and public who had greatly revered Maurice Bejart, whom Mr.
Morris succeeded at the theater at the invitation of its director, Gerard Mortier, an admirer of Mr.
Morris's iconoclasm and his musicality.
Back Talk to the Belgians
The young American choreographer, never one for undue reverence, responded in kind, outraging the Belgians further with outspoken views and flamboyant behavior.
Mr.
Bejart specialized in grand rituals danced by exotic, sleek performers.
Mr.
Morris's work was more cerebral, shaped in large part by the concert music to which it was set and danced by everyday-looking men and women of all shapes and sizes.


To Save Money, City Hall Considers Cutting Parades
New York City's parades commemorate anything from gay rights to Greek independence.
But if the Dinkins administration goes through with a suggestion to issue fewer parade permits, Mayor David N. Dinkins will need more than the wisdom of Solomon to decide who gets to march and who does not.
The city's parades have come to symbolize the rich diversity of the city's population, and Mr.
Dinkins himself is fond of referring to the city as a "gorgeous mosaic."


Mayor's Film Office Is Losing Its Director
Jaynne C. Keyes, the director of the Mayor's Office of Film, Television and Broadcasting, announced yesterday that she would leave her post on May 1 to begin work as an agent in the motion-picture and talent departments of the William Morris Agency in New York City.
Ms.
Keyes is leaving the office in a time of uncertainty for the city's film industry, which is struggling to regain the business it lost in a boycott that stopped most filming in New York between November 1990 and mid-May 1991.
During the boycott, the major studios filmed in Los Angeles or on location in cities like Chicago and Pittsburgh instead.
New York also faces increasing competition from the South, where labor costs are far less than here because film workers there are not unionized.
The mayor's film office estimates that filming brings as much as $3 billion a year to the city's economy.


Hand and Arm Ills Linked to Life Style; Contract Protection
To the Editor:
Your article on hand and arm injuries (Science Times, March 3) is better late than never.
Unions have been in the forefront of preventing computer-related injuries since the early 1980's.
District 37's contract language for computer operators is the most comprehensive for public employees.
Technology alone does not cause these injuries.
Layoffs and budget cuts create unmanageable work loads, stress levels and fear of job security.
Workers will listen to their wallets sooner than to the pain and tingling in their fingers, unless they have contract language that guarantees they will not lose their jobs if they stand up for their right to a safe workplace.
Computer operators must have structured time away from the terminal, equipment that can be adjustable to the worker (not the other way around), protection against vision problems and job transfers without demotion where necessary.


Mets Uniforms Honoring Shea
When the Mets opened their season in St.
Louis last night, they were wearing patches on the left sleeves of their uniforms that included the letter S.
The logo is being worn by the Mets this season to honor Bill Shea, who died in October at the age of 84.
Shea, a lawyer, was the man responsible for returning National League baseball to New York.


Hand and Arm Ills Linked to Life Style
To the Editor:
For the last eight years, the Portland Hand Surgery and Rehabilitation Center has been investigating the causes of carpal tunnel syndrome in industrial workers, one of the disorders you discuss in "Epidemic at the Computer: Hand and Arm Injuries" (Science Times, March 3).
We also treat patients suffering from this condition, and our experiences differ from your anecdotal references.
Our evaluation of more than 1,100 workers of varying occupations and more than 300 workers' compensation patients indicates that individual characteristics, such as body mass index (a measure of obesity), age, wrist dimensions and lack of exercise, are major determinants of median nerve entrapment neuropathy, which causes carpal tunnel syndrome.
Poor health habits, such as cigarette smoking, alcohol abuse and excessive caffeinated beverages also appear to affect conduction of the median nerve.


Review/Television; Bill Moyers Listens as Americans Complain
The Americans Bill Moyers listens to in the first installment of his campaign-season series, "Listening to America," are officials of Common Cause and like-minded organizations who give him an earful on the corruption of the political system.
Tonight's program, at 10 on Channel 13, asks "Who Owns Our Government?" Its answer is big givers and politicians on the take.
It is a forceful indictment.
Particular attention is directed to the way high-rolling speculators virtually bought the laws that enabled them to loot the nation's savings-and-loan institutions.
Although the facts have already been well laid out by public television, this account remains as pertinent as the cost to taxpayers.
The language is tough: "colossal rip-off"; "inside job"; "a speculators' paradise."


Samuel Reshevsky Is Dead; Chess Grandmaster Was 80
Samuel Reshevsky, the Polish-born chess prodigy and grandmaster who astounded the world with his feats as a boy and dominated American chess for nearly four decades, died on Saturday at Good Samaritan Hospital in Suffern, N.Y.
He was 80 years old and lived in Spring Valley, N.Y.
Mr.
Reshevsky, who had been semi-retired for many years but still appeared occasionally at tournaments and exhibitions, died of a heart attack, said Rabbi Harvey Waxman of Congregation Beth Medrosh in Monsey, N.Y., who presided at a funeral on Sunday at Congregation Kehilath Israel in Spring Valley.


INSIDE
Bosnia and Herzegovina Recognized by Europe
Hoping to put an end to ethnic clashes, the European Community decided to recognize the sovereignty of the former Yugoslav republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The United States is to follow suit today and will recognize breakaway Croatia and Slovenia as well.
Page A3.
Italian Voters Jolt Old Order
Italian voters dealt a heavy setback to the Christian Democrats, who with coalition partners have dominated politics since World War II.
Page A8.
Top-Level Demotion at G.M.
General Motors, reeling from huge recent losses, abruptly demoted its president, Lloyd E. Reuss.
Page D1.
How's This for Openers?
Bobby Bonilla's second homer was a game-winner in his Mets debut.
The Baltimore Orioles opened their new 'old' stadium with a victory.
Page B9.


Administration Urges Court to Overturn Roe
The Bush Administration this evening filed its Supreme Court argument in support of a Pennsylvania law that restricts access to abortion and, as expected, it included a broad argument for overturning Roe v.
Wade, the 1973 decision that established a constitutional right to abortion.
The argument, which was similar to the position taken by the Administration in other cases, maintained that "a state has a compelling interest in protecting fetal life throughout pregnancy."


Iacocca Pay Chopped 35% Last Year
Lee A. Iacocca, the chairman and chief executive of the Chrysler Corporation, took a pay cut of about 35 percent last year, but his compensation hardly was paltry.
Mr.
Iacocca, 67 years old, who has said he will retire at the end of the year, took home nearly $3 million in salary, stock and other compensation last year, compared with a pay package of $4.5 million in 1990.
Chrysler lost $795 million in 1991 as the American automobile industry experienced its worst year in history.


BRIEFS
*
Accessory Place Inc., Leonia, N.J., a retailer, filed for protection under Chapter 11 of the Federal Bankruptcy Code. *
Asea Brown Boveri A.G. said its ABB Combustion Engineering Systems unit, Stamford, Conn., had received a $270 million contract to help build a power plant in China.


All Fervent on the Recycling Front
ALL right, listen up. It's time to get tough. We're only going to write this once.
We're in an environmental crisis: too much junk polluting our planet.
Adults have had their chance to fix things.
Sure, adults talk a good game against pollution.
And adults are super talkers about the environment, too, especially planning for the environment.
You should see the impressive environmental reports they turn out on recycled paper and then talk about at important conferences.


'Pink Angels' Battle Anti-Gay Crime
Near the stroke of midnight every Friday and Saturday, a group that includes a social worker, a newlywed and a former Air Force sergeant gathers in a circle for a solemn pep talk before heading out onto the restless streets.
"Let's stay alert out there," one of them said Friday night as they locked arms.
"I want to go home in one piece."


A Change at Lipton; A Review at Sega
Two large advertisers have announced a account change and an account review.
As expected, the Thomas J. Lipton Company in Englewood Cliffs, N.J., named J. Walter Thompson New York as agency of record for its estimated $20 million to $30 million Lipton tea account.


B.S.B. Acquires Leff &amp; Squicciarini
Backer Spielvogel Bates Inc. has acquired Leff &amp; Squicciarini Advertising &amp; Public Relations Inc. in Columbus, Ohio, and will merge it with Backer Spielvogel's office there.
The new shop, to be renamed BSB/ Leff &amp; Squicciarini, will be based at what was the Backer Spielvogel office in Dublin, outside Columbus.
Billings will be $46 million from clients like Wendy's International Inc. and BancOhio.


Haitian-Americans Demonstrate in Times Square


Earnings Up 65% at Circuit City in Quarter
Circuit City Stores Inc., one of the nation's largest consumer electronics retailers, yesterday reported surprisingly strong profits for the fourth quarter.
The company's share price rose $2, to $34, on the New York Stock Exchange.
Some analysts said the pickup in sales reflected the improvement in the nation's housing market, as consumers with new homes bought washing machines, refrigerators and television sets.


Review/Television; Death 2 Ways: Real Life and Like Life
How do you like your criminals, played by actors or delivered directly in so-called reality programming?
Television crime dramas, once a prime-time staple, are certainly facing stiffer competition from documentary formats.
Available for comparison tonight are "In the Eyes of a Stranger," a CBS movie at 9 P.M., and "The Iceman Tapes: Conversations With a Killer," an HBO interview at 10.
Directed by Michael Toshiyuki Uno, "In the Eyes of a Stranger" stars Justine Bateman ("Family Ties") as Lynn Carlson, a troubled woman who witnesses a thief's suicide on a subway train.
The man was trying to tell her where his stolen money was hidden, but as she explains to the police she could not hear him over her Walkman headphones.
Nevertheless, the dead man's accomplices are sure she knows the location of the $2 million cache ("This chick is the only chance we got," as one puts it), and the hunt begins.


New Transit Police Chief Is Drummed In


Star-Maker May Hold Answers on Galaxies
A RECENTLY discovered galaxy 13 billion light-years from Earth may provide answers about the early formation of the universe.
Researchers studying the galaxy, designated 10214+4724, say they believe it is forming new stars at more than 10 million times the rate of the most prolific star-forming mass in the Milky Way.


Books of The Times; Sexual Debauchery and Drugs at the Top in China
The New Emperors  China in the Era of Mao and Deng  By Harrison E. Salisbury  544 pages.
Little, Brown &amp; Company. $24.95.
During dynastic times, Chinese scholars divided historical writings into two distinct genres.
Official histories (zhengshi) derived their name from the authoritative official documents upon which they were based.
Unofficial histories, or literally wild histories (yeshi), derived from the eyewitness accounts, personal remembrances, popular lore, rumor and other historical apocrypha.
Because party archives in Beijing are still closed to outsiders, Harrison E. Salisbury in his ambitious book about the lives of Mao Zedong, Deng Xiaoping and Chinese Communist politics was forced to turn almost exclusively to sources of the latter kind.


Tel Aviv Journal; A Fiddler on the Street (and Other New Strains)
Grigory Matyukov rolled up his sleeve to show the bandages wrapped around his left wrist.
That's what comes from playing music on the street, he said.
For 25 years, Mr.
Matyukov was a cellist in Tashkent, Uzbekistan, and he did fine for himself, he says, playing for the local symphony orchestra and opera, and teaching on the side.


Xavier Coach Interested In Villanova Vacancy
Villanova has spoken with PETE GILLEN , the Xavier of Ohio coach, about his replacing ROLLIE MASSIMINO as the Wildcats' coach, and Gillen has expressed interest in the job, The Philadelphia Inquirer reported on Sunday.
Gillen, a former Villanova assistant, was in Minneapolis over the weekend to attend the men's Final Four.
He told The Inquirer that he had spoken with the Villanova athletic director, TED ACETO , about the job.
"There is some interest on both sides," he said.


On My Mind; Jerry Brown's Myth
If you have heard it once, you have heard it a dozen times: It is getting impossible to govern anymore.
It used to be a city that was supposed to be beyond governing, sometimes a state.
Then we were told that the entire country has gone so rotten and haywire that the whole place is ungovernable.


What's a Little Pollution? Europe's Forests Keep On Growing
CONTRARY to a commonly held view, the forests of Europe have grown substantially despite a chronic assault by air pollution, according to a study by scientists in Finland.
Pollution is indeed causing harm, the study says, and could lead to a future long-term decline.
But after analyzing a range of recent studies, the Finnish scientists concluded that from 1971 to 1990, the rate of tree growth on the Continent increased by 30 percent and the total volume of wood in tree trunks increased by 25 percent.


Observer; The Keystone Sack
(Editor's Note: We apologize to our readers for Mr. Baker's column today. Regrettably, sustaining his membership in the Association of American Newspaper Columnists and Allied Journalists Licensed to Traffic in Profundities requires him to publish one column each year waxing poetical, historical, poetical-historical, philosophical, philosophical-poetical or philosophical-historical about baseball.
(This rule was adopted after publication of "The Boys of Summer," by Roger Kahn, a major magazine journalist, revealed the mystical-poetical significance of the Brooklyn Dodgers in the formation of the American psyche. In tribute to Mr. Kahn's pioneering achievement, for many years the requirement stated specifically that the annual baseball piece had to be "mystical-poetical."


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: TV Critic's Notebook; The Telegenic Hopeful Takes It to the Viewers
Like a smiling tourist who has made eye contact with the wrong pedestrian, Bill Clinton has reason to be relieved to get out of New York City even though he may be about to win the lottery.
His aggrieved reaction to rude headlines and ruder hecklers suggests he thinks he has been mugged, but he found a warmer welcome, too.
The city must share credit and blame for his experience with the nature of television campaigning.


Humphrey in Atlanta
Denver Broncos running back BOBBY HUMPHREY arrived at the Atlanta Falcons headquarters at Suwanee, Ga., yesterday for a physical, and he may work out for the team today.
Humphrey has been granted permission to speak to clubs interested in him, in advance of a possible trade.


Canadian Agency Offers Eurobonds
The Export Development Corporation, the Canadian export finance body, yesterday priced $400 million in 7.75 percent, 10-year Eurobonds due April 30, 2002, at a price of 99.665, to yield 7.799 percent, through Credit Suisse First Boston.
Underwriters said the issue was priced to yield about 27 basis points more than United States Treasury securities with a similar maturity, which are currently yielding about 7.39 percent.
A basis point is one-hundredth of a percentage point.


China Party Chief Visits Japan Amid Tensions in Relations
The head of China's Communist Party, Jiang Zemin, arrived in Tokyo today, seeking what the Beijing Government still seems unable to get from most other industrialized nations: technology, aid and at least the formalities of a welcoming reception.
Mr.
Jiang is the first senior Chinese leader to visit Japan since the democracy movement was crushed in June 1989, and his visit here is part of a careful effort by the two countries to rebuild economic ties gradually.
Last summer, Toshiki Kaifu, when he was still Prime Minister, was the first leader of an industrial power to visit China since the killings in Beijing.


Big Investor May Buy Part Of Olympia
Li Ka-shing, a Hong Kong billionaire who heads a global real estate and investment empire, said today that he was interested in bidding for some of the assets of the beleaguered Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd., the world's largest commercial property developers.
In a rare public statement, Mr.
Li told reporters in Hong Kong that he was interested in picking up assets of Olympia &amp; York, the Toronto-based company owned by the Reichmann brothers.
Olympia, which is struggling to make interest payments on an estimated $18.5 billion of debts, is seeking buyers for some of its assets.


Justices, in Entrapment Case, Cast A Rare Vote Against Prosecutors
The Supreme Court overturned a Federal pornography conviction on the ground of entrapment today, ruling 5 to 4 that the Government had failed to prove that a Nebraska farmer would have violated the law in the absence of an elaborate sting operation that took more than two years to induce him to order child pornography through the mail.
The decision, written by Justice Byron R. White, was based on earlier Supreme Court rulings on entrapment, requiring the prosecution to show that a person induced by Government agents to commit a crime had been "independently predisposed" to the criminal conduct.
Unusual Voting Pattern
The ruling is unlikely to cramp the Government's routine use of undercover operations to investigate drug trafficking or the fencing of stolen property.
The majority appeared to view this case almost as an anomaly, an extreme misuse of Government power in which an innocent person was led to commit a manufactured crime.


Treasuries Mixed in Thin Trading
Prices of Treasury securities were narrowly mixed in thin trading yesterday, as credit market participants paused to assess conditions following last week's rally.
Short-term securities continued to attract buyers, despite sharp appreciation last week.
But prices were weaker for long-term notes and bonds.


Stocks Plunge in Tokyo
Stocks were sharply lower in Tokyo today on selling by arbitragers and institutional investors, brokers said.
The 225-share Nikkei index closed down 644.82 points, or 3.5 percent, to 17,791.55.
Today's plunge came on top of a 123.34-point drop on Monday.


It's Their Day Off, But Nets Win Again
Mookie Blaylock and the rest of the Nets have a good thing going.
Blaylock was named the National Basketball Association's Player of the Week yesterday after leading the Nets to victories in their last four games.
The 6-foot-1-inch point guard averaged 19 points, 10.5 assists and 3.5 steals in that four-game stretch while shooting 54 percent from the field.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
General Motors demoted its president, Lloyd Reuss, and removed its chairman, Robert Stempel, from his post as head of a powerful board committee.
John Smith Jr. was named president and chief operating officer, capping the unusual display of power by outside directors.  [ Page D1. ]


Careers; Revamping The Training Of M.B.A.'s
GRADUATE business schools across the nation are revising and updating M.B.A. programs to meet changing business needs.
They are integrating programs to include international aspects, ethics and crisis management, while stressing total quality management, as well as adding courses and seminars to treat the new subjects.
Business school deans say they have relied on the advice of corporate executives, alumni and students in addressing the practicalities needed for the business world.


Deaths and Desertions Undermine Tenacious Angolan Rebel
Jonas Savimbi, who waged war for a quarter-century against the Portuguese colonialists in Angola and the leftist Government that followed, is now battling allegations of killing and treachery that undermine his claim to offer Angolans a decent democratic alternative to years of conflict and misrule.
Mr.
Savimbi's group, the National Union for the Total Independence of Angola, better known as Unita, its Portuguese acronym, emerged from the bush last May after a cease-fire mediated by Portugal and is struggling to convert itself from a tenacious guerrilla army into a political party.


Corrections
Articles on March 28 and last Thursday about a man with AIDS who has told the authorities in Philadelphia that he paid for sex with a number of teen-agers over the last several years misstated the charges against him.
The man, Edward I. Savitz, is being held on several charges involving four boys, including sexual abuse, involuntary deviate sexual intercourse and promoting prostitution; he has not been charged with statutory rape.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.50
6.50
9.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
6.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.87
3.97
5.89
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.95
3.95
5.60
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.02
4.02
5.68
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.10
7.07
7.84
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.88
7.87
8.15
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.80
8.80
9.25
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.73
6.74
7.27
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


A Lethal Army of Insurgents Lima Could Not Stamp Out
Descending from traditional Andean strongholds, the Maoist Shining Path rebels have over the last several months been shifting their attacks from the mountainous countryside to Peru's strategic heart: Lima, seat of government, home to one-third of Peruvians, and center for half of the country's economic activity.
In a decade of fighting, Peru's army has claimed to have killed 11,150 Shining Path guerrillas, but as President Alberto K. Fujimori reaffirmed today by claiming emergency powers, his Government has proved incapable of keeping the rebels at bay.


Court Refuses to Hear S.&amp; L. Executive's Case
The Supreme Court refused today to hear a former savings and loan executive's constitutional challenge to an order by Federal regulators seizing $21 million of his personal assets on 24 hours' notice.
The Justices made no comment as they turned down an appeal by Thomas Spiegel, former chairman of the failed Columbia Savings and Loan Association, which the Government took over last year.
Columbia, based in Beverly Hills, Calif., bought more junk bonds than any other savings institution in the country, and suffered huge losses as the value of the bonds plunged.
Bailing out Columbia is expected to cost taxpayers some $1.5 billion.


Wal-Mart's Leadership Remains in the Family
A day after the death of Sam Walton, the founder and in recent years the spiritual leader of Wal-Mart Stores Inc., the company's directors named the eldest of Mr.
Walton's four children, S. Robson Walton, to succeed him as chairman.
Robson Walton, 47 years old and known as Rob, is the only one of Mr.
Walton's children involved in company management.
He has been a Wal-Mart vice chairmen since 1982 and a company officer since he graduated from the Columbia University Law School in 1969, when he became Wal-Mart's secretary.
He was the company's top legal officer, as general counsel, before being named vice chairman.


Yonkers Offers Anti-Bias Plan on Housing
Top officials of this city, which drew national attention for defying a housing desegregation order, today proposed a new housing plan that they hope will end 12 years of resistance by many whites.
The plan would rely primarily on existing housing, rather than new construction, to meet the desegregation goals of a Federal judge who ordered Yonkers to remedy 40 years of intentional segregation in housing and education.


Orbital Sciences Has F.C.C. License
The Orbital Sciences Corporation received an experimental license from the Federal Communications Commission to launch two small satellites that would be used in a new data communications system for government or business users.
Company officials said that the satellites would cost $20 million to build and launch and that they had already raised the necessary money through a recent stock offering.
The company hopes to launch the satellites in mid-1993.
Orbital, based in Fairfax, Va., said it hoped to eventually incorporate the satellites into a bigger fleet for paging and message services.


Topics of The Times; A Scented Season
Opening the door of the greenhouse where the New York Botanical Garden has installed its newest floral show is like opening the stopper of a vial of perfume.
A whole flood of fragrance pours out, as if spring had been distilled and bottled and was waiting to be released.
Bit by bit, going through what is called "The American Romantic Garden," the fragrances sort themselves out.
Modest narcissus is overpowered by hyacinths, which give way to spicy rosemary and lemony thyme.
The sweetness of lilac and lavender join.
A whiff of tulip comes and goes in an instant but heliotrope trails heavily past the lily beds.


Duke Beats Michigan to Repeat as Champion


President Is Demoted At G.M.
The General Motors Corporation demoted its president yesterday and removed its chairman, Robert C. Stempel, from his post as head of a powerful board committee in an unusual display of power by outside directors.
Still reeling from the biggest loss in American corporate history, G.M. named John (Jack) F. Smith Jr., 53 years old, as president and chief operating officer.
He replaces Lloyd E. Reuss.
Mr.
Smith had been a vice chairman in charge of international operations.


Republican Legislators Are Seeking to Repeal Florio's Ban on Assault Weapons
Republican lawmakers introduced legislation today to repeal Gov.
Jim Florio's ban on assault weapons.
Although the measure's Senate and Assembly sponsors were at pains to describe their repeal as an anti-crime bill that would continue to ban some weapons, it would in fact prohibit only machine guns, which are already covered by a Federal law that bans the manufacture of fully automatic weapons for private sale.
The bill would totally reverse the existing assault-weapon ban and allow military assault-type weapons to be owned and sold like other rifles or pistols.


Library Thieves Take All but the Covers
Rare collections of some of the nation's great treasures -- hand-colored centuries-old prints, detailed architectural drawings and fine early photographs -- are disappearing from library books across the country, pages simply sliced out of their bindings, the empty covers left behind by thieves plundering the easy pickings.
But even as these treasures slip away, the nation's library associations are just beginning to recognize the size of the problem.
No one seems able to say how much irreplaceable material has been stolen, much less how the problem can be fought.


Unions Back Clinton
To the Editor:
I agree with A. M. Rosenthal's April 3 column backing Gov.
Bill Clinton in the New York Democratic primary.
I have one quibble: only a few union leaders are supporting Edmund G. Brown Jr. in hopes of brokering the convention.
Labor leaders, such as myself, Stanley Hill of the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees, Jay Mazur of the International Ladies Garment Workers Union, Lenore Miller of the Retail, Wholesale, Department Store Union, and others, representing more than one million organized workers statewide, have publicly announced for Governor Clinton and are working for his nomination.
SANDRA FELDMAN President, United Fed. of Teachers New York, April 3, 1992


Review/Dance; Balanchine To Massine From Royal Winnipeg
One of the great pleasures of dance-going is seeing performers who not only know what they are doing but look as if they love doing it too.
The Royal Winnipeg Ballet brought that kind of happy sheen to George Balanchine's "Allegro Brillante" on Sunday afternoon at the Brooklyn Center at Brooklyn College, and to much of the rest of the program as well.
The performances of Suzanne Rubio, Gino Di Marco and the eight demi-soloists in "Allegro Brillante" had the effervescence and bouquet of good Champagne, which is exactly what this choreography and its giddily melodic Tchaikovsky score are about.
Their dancing brimmed with clarity, precision and spirit.


Europe Nods to Bosnia, Not Macedonia
The 12-nation European Community decided to recognize the independence of Bosnia and Herzegovina today, arguing that the move could help end the latest outbreak of ethnic violence in the former Yugoslav republic.
But it once again bent to pressure from Greece by delaying a response to the Macedonian republic's request for recognition.
Greece, which is a community member, has accused the republic of trying to usurp the name of its northern province of Macedonia and of harboring territorial ambitions over the region.


U.S., Condemning Fujimori, Cuts Aid to Peru
The Bush Administration today branded President Alberto Fujimori's dissolution of the Peruvian Congress and the detention of politicans "unjustified" and "unconstitutional" attacks on democracy, and suspended all aid except for humanitarian assistance.
Bernard W. Aronson, Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs, who arrived in Peru on Sunday for talks on a range of issues, today canceled an appointment with Mr.
Fujimori and was refused permission to see the President of the ousted Senate, the State Department said.
But Mr.
Aronson was able to meet with the Foreign Minister and the Government's coordinator for human rights.


James Joyce Papers Go on Public Display For the First Time
The National Library of Ireland, where James Joyce did research as a young writer, has made public some 3,000 of his letters, notes and household bills.
The collection, which may be the last major trove of Joyce material, had remained locked up in the library for 51 years at the request of the man who collected them, Paul Leon, Joyce's secretary in Paris for 10 years.
Leon had gathered the papers from his own files and from the Joyce apartment after the Germans occupied Paris in 1940.
Within months, Leon, who was Jewish, was arrested, and later fatally shot by a guard at Auschwitz.
His son, Alexis, spoke at ceremonies at the library on Sunday.
So did Joyce's grandson, Stephen, who continued his campaign against the use of Joyce's personal material by scholars.
His efforts were apparently successful in that the library has decided to withhold some of the items from the public until the year 2050.


Classical Music in Review
Paul Sperry  Tenor Kathryn Bache Miller Theater
Walt Whitman's poems speak to many composers, even if composers don't respond with any great unanimity.
Paul Sperry's song recital last Thursday at the Kathryn Bache Miller Theater presented 13 inspirations drawn from a single writing style.
They ended up saying more about musicians than about poetry.


Review/Music; Remembering and Celebrating Heroes of Germany's Resistance
While the vast majority of Germans and Austrians embraced Hitler as the embodiment of long-dreamed-of destinies, there were dissenters.
Some came late to opposition, appalled not by original goals but by the self-destructive methodology employed.
Others were the "Heroes of Conscience" celebrated at Riverside Church on Sunday evening.
Musicians drawn from orchestras around the world were assembled, and appropriately enough at a church and by a school (Union Theological Seminary) both built on ecumenism.
Remembered in general were the members of the German Resistance and in particular Dietrich Bonhoeffer and Hans von Dohnanyi.
The first was a theologian with ties to Union Seminary, who returned voluntarily to Germany in 1939 and was executed in prison.
The other was active in the smuggling of Jews to safety and in the numerous attempts on Hitler's life.
He, too, was executed.


New Short Cut Found For Long Math Proofs
IN a discovery that overturns centuries of mathematical tradition, a group of graduate students and young researchers has discovered a way to check even the longest and most complicated proof by scrutinizing it in just a few spots.
The finding, which some mathematicians say seems almost magical, depends upon transforming the set of logical statements that constitute a proof into a special mathematical form in which any error is so amplified as to be easily detectable.


Stiff Competition for USAir As New Operator of Shuttle
When USAir begins operating the Trump Shuttle on Sunday, the name on the airplanes will change.
But USAir, which has an option to buy the shuttle after four and a half years, will face the same stiff competition from Delta Air Lines, which bought the Pan Am Shuttle in September.
And both carriers must contend with the problem that helped undo their predecessors: shrinking shuttle traffic along the Washington-New York-Boston corridor.


Baseball; Bonilla Gets to Say Hello by Kissing It Goodbye
Not much was left of opening night, and even less was left of the original lineup for the Mets.
Circumstances and substitutions had left the Mets a desperate, skeleton outfit in the 10th inning here at Busch Stadium.
Of the big bats left, though, one was in the hands of Bobby Bonilla.
They are tremendous hands, huge and powerful, and when a fat Lee Smith slider presented itself with one out and Vince Coleman on second, the hands moved through the strike zone and wrapped up the night.


U.S. Unable to Lead Europe Out of a Slump
Europe's sluggish economy is painfully coming to terms with a new reality: signs of a modest recovery in the United States now matter less than bad news from Germany.
The prevalent pessimism, called "Eurodoldrums" by Smith Barney's international economist, J. Paul Horne, essentially reflects the economic situation in Germany.
The huge financial pressures of rebuilding what was East Germany are causing a higher budget deficit, higher inflation and higher interest rates, which in turn are afflicting an increasingly integrated Continent.


House's Mr. Fix-It Has Own Problems
With the House of Representatives mired in debate over perquisites and privilege, Representative Charlie Rose has taken on the politically influential role of cleaning up the place.
It will be a delicate task for the North Carolina Democrat, who has had ethics problems of his own.
Mr.
Rose, a former county prosecutor, is still countering accusations that he failed to disclose that he had repeatedly dipped into campaign funds for personal use.


Dr. Leland Jacobs, 85, Educator And Columbia Professor Emeritus
Dr.
Leland B. Jacobs, a professor of education emeritus at Teachers College, Columbia University, who was known nationally for his concepts of teaching literature to the very young, died on Saturday at Englewood (N.J.) Hospital.
He was 85 years old and lived in Leonia, N.J.
He died of congestive heart failure, the college said in a statement.


EXECUTIVES
*
Allied Research Corp., Baltimore, a holding company and a manufacturer of advanced weapon systems, named Jay R. Sculley president and chief operating officer and Reinald W. Carter chairman and chief executive. *
British Aerospace Inc., Herndon, Va., a seller of aircraft and parts and a unit of British Aerospace Holdings Inc., named Russell L. Ray executive vice president for airline programs.


Queasy Germany, Queasy Allies
German policy and opinion makers are disturbed by charges abroad of a resurgent German drive for domination of Europe -- perhaps even a secret plot.
Suspicions are bound to be compounded by the startling gains by the extreme right in state elections in Baden-Wurttemburg and Schleswig-Holstein last weekend at the expense of both major parties.
The feeling here, on the contrary, is that Germany is entering a period of vulnerability and bewilderment, unsure of what to do to find a balanced, sensible place in the newly unsettled world.
There is no more conscious policy and just as much knee-jerk reaction to volatile domestic tides in Bonn as in Washington.


A Star in G.M. Effort in Europe
In the mid-1980's, the European operations of General Motors were in such poor shape that the auto maker considered selling or drastically shrinking them.
Last year, G.M. had record sales in Europe, and the $1.76 billion it earned there buttressed record losses from its North American automotive business.
John F. (Jack) Smith Jr., the new president of G.M., who turned 54 yesterday, is credited with planting many of the seeds for the sharp turnaround in Europe.
Auto industry analysts have given him credit for consolidating what had been a segmented and divided enterprise into a pan-European operation in marketing, distribution, cost structure and management.


Bedford Cook, Professor, 68
Bedford Cook, a retired professor of French, died Thursday at his home in Westport Point, Mass.
He was 68 years old.
His family said he died after a long illness.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Politics; Protest Voters Confused At So Many Big Targets
The voters have been yearning for magic, hoping to see a white dove flutter from a black top hat.
They have been longing for dramatic change, that impulse Wile E. Coyote gets as he is about to push the plunger on a bundle of Acme dynamite.
But New York has brought a loss of innocence.
A week of Democratic dueling has shown everyone that the voters will have to choose among negatives, pick their way among lesser evils and figure out which man or party they most want to keep out of the White House.


Theft Through Cellular 'Clone' Calls
Guns drawn, Secret Service agents and local police officers kicked down the door of an apartment in a Phoenix suburb in January and plunged straight into the biggest case of telephone fraud ever.
Half a world away, Palestinians in the occupied territories of Israel were making long-distance calls to other Middle Eastern countries.
And unsuspecting cellular phone subscribers in Arizona were footing the bill.
Law enforcement authorities said they had broken up an elaborate scheme to skirt an Arab boycott of calls from Israel.
In the raid, and a related one in Phoenix, they seized 35 cellular phones, 10,000 microchips and notebooks filled with electronic codes that could allow high-tech bandits to pose as legitimate customers.


Fear of Disease Changing How Doctors Work
Dr.
Frances E. Robles was working in the emergency room of Bronx Lebanon Hospital recently when a taxi driver ran in, shouting that a woman was giving birth in his cab.
Dr.
Robles raced outside and saw that the baby's head was about to emerge.
The doctor, her hands firmly at her sides, waited an agonizing few moments until someone brought protective gloves in case the laboring woman had AIDS.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Republicans; New York Ballot Rules and State Party Help Clear Bush's Path
There is no Republican primary in New York State today, because Patrick J. Buchanan could not overcome the arduous requirements of the state's election law as well as an all-out mobilization by the Republican State Committee to make sure President Bush faced no opposition.
Mr.
Buchanan, the conservative commentator, has scaled back his campaign, and his absence from the New York ballot is a boon to Mr.
Bush.
The lack of a primary means the President has been spared money, staff time and the prospect of wading through the same contentious political scene that Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas and former Gov.
Edmund G. Brown Jr. of California have been attempting to negotiate on the Democratic side.


Detaining the Wrong Aliens
Foreigners seeking political asylum who arrive in the U.S. without proper papers are detained without a hearing in Federal jails.
But illegal aliens who have committed crimes and served time in state prisons are released without being picked up for deportation by Federal authorities.
Both policies need to be reversed.
Before 1980, the Federal Government sensibly allowed refugees seeking asylum to remain free until their cases were adjudicated.
Only those who might flee or posed a threat to safety or security were detained.
That presumption was reversed when many Cubans and Haitians arrived in 1980 and 1981.
Many were detained pending a determination that they were genuine political refugees.
Since 1982, the Immigration Service has required detention for virtually any undocumented alien stopped upon entering the country.


Deal Reached For Doctors At Hospital In Queens
Mount Sinai Medical Center has agreed to take over a city contract to provide doctors to Queens Hospital Center in a deal brokered by state health officials that will cost $6.9 million a year more than the current contract.
The deal ends a search for a new source of medical residents that began in November, when Long Island Jewish Medical Center said it was ending its 26-year contract with the city-run Queens hospital on the ground that it was not a good training ground for medical specialists.


Classical Music in Review
'I Due Foscari'  Opera Orchestra of New York Carnegie Hall
Eve Queler has been exploring the byways of the opera repertory with her freelance Opera Orchestra of New York for 22 years, and although she has taken her share of critical knocks, there can be no doubt about the value of her series to New York's opera lovers.
The rarities she offers, although often flawed, are usually worthy of at least an occasional re-examination.
And beyond the curiosity value of her programming, Miss Queler has proved an astute talent scout.
She has presented the first New York performances of many notable singers, including Gabriela Benackova, Ghena Dimitrova, Barbara Hendricks, Richard Leech and Juan Pons, and can draw on their loyalty for return engagements when their careers flower.


Alzheimer's Dilemma: Whether to Tell People They Have the Disease
YOU notice your memory is off a little.
You pause in a conversation, unable to find the right word.
It is harder to keep track of things.
When asked about something you have just read, the answer escapes you.
You cannot remember someone's name.
Sometimes you even forget where you are.
After shopping, you do not remember where you parked.
You misplace the keys.
You forget to meet your spouse at the bank as planned.
At tennis, you sometimes serve to the wrong court.
No one comments on the memory lapses, but as they get worse and worse family members know that something is wrong.


For Russia, Reforms Without Aid Will Fail; Opportunity Knocks
To the Editor:
As a blueprint for immediate or long-range United States policy toward Russia, "Let Germany Do It" (Op-Ed, March 21) by Robert G. Livingston is negative and misguided.
Mr.
Livingston's argument that the interests of the United States in Russia are far less than those of Germany revives the specter of isolationism.
The future of our country and the well-being of our people demand the same risk taking that led Yankee traders to open the markets of Japan and China in the 19th century.
We are in grave danger of losing out to the entrepreneurs not only of Germany but also of Japan, Italy, South Korea and other countries.


Teflon-Like Material Could Prevent Graffiti
Chemists reported today that there was new hope for winning the battle against graffiti that have proliferated on walls around the world since the invention of spray paints and marking pens.
Though not ready for marketing, its developers say, the new anti-graffiti agent promises to do to spray-can marks what antibiotics did to streptococci.


CHINA DENIES VISAS TO TWO SENATORS
Two leading Democratic Senators who have been critical of China's human rights record have been denied visas to visit China this month, Congressional aides say.
The denial is highly unusual, and likely to increase antagonism toward China in Congress.
The Senators, Claiborne Pell of Rhode Island, chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee, and David L. Boren of Oklahoma, chairman of the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, were planning to visit Tibet.
The trip was scheduled for mid-April.


Baseball Considers Major Changes
The start of the third season of major league baseball's four-year contract with CBS and ESPN is a reminder that by this time next year, the future of nationally televised baseball may be decided.
And it may be very different.
A game-of-the-week format may return, if not on one (or two) networks, but via syndication in which an independent company would produce the games and distribute them to local stations.


Review/Music; The Living Traditions Of Northern India
There are times when music really is an art in play, when sound seems to come into being for the sake of pleasure, inspiring thrill at its difficulty and wonder at its powers.
This was the sense I had listening to performances of Northern Indian music at Symphony Space on Saturday night, presented by the World Music Institute.
Although this concert, titled "Masters of Indian Music," was supposed to last four hours, when I left after four and a half, the play was still proceeding.
At that time, Sultan Khan was coaxing extraordinary sounds out of his sarangi, one of India's oldest bowed instruments, carved out of a solid block of teak, with goatskin stretched over its resonating chamber.
Mr.
Khan, a member of one of India's musical families, has a worldwide reputation (he was heard on the soundtrack of "Gandhi"), but there was no sense of commercialism in his playing.
Using fingernails to change pitches of the instrument's gut and metal strings (not the pads of the fingers as in Western string instruments), sliding into and out of notes, he made the ancient instrument (held like a cello by a cross-legged player) sound like a supple human voice.
Its slightly nasal whine, produced with a thick bow, was shaped into wiry, sinuous phrases.
Mr.
Khan created miniature arabesques, toying with the ear in exquisite, ornamented melodies of a Karnatic, South Indian raga.


Classical Music in Review
New York Chamber Symphony  92d Street Y
On paper, the presentation of Bach's B-minor Mass by Gerard Schwarz and his New York Chamber Symphony on Saturday evening held several attractions, including Amy Kaiser's Concert Chorale of New York and a good group of soloists: Harolyn Blackwell, Susanne Mentzer, John Aler and Olaf Baer.
But problems began even before the start, when Ms.
Mentzer fell ill and had to be replaced.
Wendy Hoffman took over on short notice, and sang strongly at times but occasionally ran off the track, most disastrously in the Christe Eleison, where she also derailed the soprano, Ms.
Blackwell, for a considerable stretch.


Sports of The Times; Mets Return To the Scene Of the Debut
IT all began in this town, 30 years ago, with a stalled elevator and a laughing terrorist named Stan Musial.
There was danger lurking everywhere for the original New York Mets, but even they were hopeful on their first opening day.
"If you can't be optimistic on opening day, you're really in trouble," Jeff Torborg said yesterday before his very first game as the Mets' manager, which the Mets would win, 4-2, in 10 innings.


Review/Fashion; Blass and Herrera Keep It Real, Mostly
Realism rules as the fall and winter fashion openings begin in New York.
Usually the curtain raiser is a big show at the Plaza or Pierre hotels, but on Monday, Carolina Herrera and Bill Blass introduced their collections modestly in their Seventh Avenue showrooms.


Orioles Settle Into Their Cozy New Nest in the Heart of Downtown
A rather mournful song was written in the early 1970's, lamenting the fate of parks called Ebbets and Connie Mack, Shibe Park and the Polo Grounds, thus scorning what was new and uniform, soulless and concrete-encased.
But those who mourned the loss of intimacy and joy experienced at these stadiums long gone, as the songwriter Joe Raposo did in "There Used To Be a Ballpark" should know that once again there is a jewel in the heart of Baltimore's restored downtown harbor area.
For Oriole Park at Camden Yards, a traditional baseball-only stadium, progressed at last past the dress-rehearsal stage today as Baltimore played its season debut against the Cleveland Indians.


Topics of The Times; The C.I.A., Open and Shut
Since making a great show of announcing his new policy of openness, Robert Gates, the Director of Central Intelligence, has regrettably said nothing about the overall size of intelligence budgets, past and present.
Nor has he revealed the names and functions of all U.S. intelligence agencies, including a few whose very existence is not known to most members of Congress or the public.
This information would allow Congress to exercise more informed judgment in allocating the $30 billion believed to be spent on various intelligence activities by various agencies.
Mr.
Gates did promise a welcome new approach to declassifying the documents in its voluminous files.
The C.I.A. would, of course, continue to excise any references to sources and methods of intelligence-gathering.
But he strongly implied that the agency would no longer withhold bushels of documents only tangentially related to national security.


By Design; Wave of Black for Evening
Whatever works for evening wear was worn to Vogue's 100th anniversary party last week.
And the best was in black.
The glittering crowd wore everything from bell-bottoms to ball gowns.
A few outfits were modest.
Many were elegant.
Others were daring.
And more than one was a touch shocking.


The New Soul of the Machine
WHEN the major planets fall into alignment in the heavens, soothsayers prophesy upheaval and chaos.
So beware the Ides of April.
A similar portentous alignment is occurring this month in the personal computer industry as several major companies introduce new or improved operating system software.
Operating system software is the foundation software upon which all other computer applications operate.
It is, in an anthropomorphic sense, the soul or DNA of the machine.
The most popular operating system is DOS, used by an estimated 70 million computers.
DOS is more than 10 years old, well beyond retirement age when measured in computer years, and several newer operating systems are maneuvering to replace it.


Few Strikers Return to Their Jobs As Caterpillar's Deadline Passes
Striking members of the United Automobile Workers union held firm in the nation's most bitter labor dispute today, largely defying an order by Caterpillar Inc. that they return to their jobs or risk being replaced by nonunion workers.
Caterpillar said about 300 of the 12,600 striking workers had crossed the picket lines, while union leaders insisted that the number was far lower.
The union, which has been on strike for five months, said that the low nunmber demonstrated that its members were united in wanting Caterpillar, the world's largest manufacturer of construction equipment, to match a labor agreement signed last year between the U.A.W. and Deere &amp; Company, but the union was far from jubilant about the day's events.


Stanley S. Scott, 59, Nixon and Ford Aide
Stanley S. Scott, who served as an aide to two Presidents and was a vice president of Philip Morris U.S.A., died Saturday night in New Orleans.
He was 59 years old.
He died of cancer, his family said.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Turnout; Stirring the Melting Pot of New York's Democrats
Nearly 3.8 million Democrats are eligible to vote in today's New York Presidential primary.
But in trolling for support, the candidates have found it unusually difficult to identify who is likely to vote for whom.
Most population groups are divided in their views and many potential voters say they are still undecided.
Among the racial, ethnic, religious and geographic groups that campaigns typically aim at, New York City accounts for as much as 60 percent of the primary vote.
Long Island and the four northern suburban counties customarily provide another 15 percent or so, with the rest from upstate.
Statewide, Jews and white Catholics may each constitute about 3 in 10 voters and blacks, 1 in 4 or fewer.


Health To Play Big Role For Yanks
The Yankees spent $30.6 million to sign free agents Danny Tartabull and Mike Gallego last winter, but they may not reap immediate dividends on their sizable investment today.
Both players are saddled with nagging injuries and their prognosis for an opening-day game that features Roger Clemens opposing Scott Sanderson is unsettled.


Sequestering Juries Costs the Taxpayers and Serves No One
To the Editor:
Glenn T. Riddell, an officer of the New York Supreme Court Officers Association, misses important points in "Sequestering Juries Guarantees Trial System" (letter, March 17), his defense of overnight sequestration of juries.
Perhaps Mr.
Riddell is unaware that New York State is the only state in the country that still requires jury sequestration in all felony trails.
Other states sequester juries, and so do Federal courts, but only in high-profile, high-publicity cases (the Mike Tyson trial in Indiana is a good example).
Are all the trials in all these other states subject to "violence, tampering and unfair solicitation," as Mr.
Riddell states?
Of course not.
The other 49 states have simply abandoned an ancient and unnecessary practice that costs the taxpayers and serves no one.


Yeltsin Suffers a Rebuff From Russian Congress
The Congress of People's Deputies, Russia's highest legislative authority, opened its first session since the demise of the Soviet Union today with a pointed reminder to President Boris N. Yeltsin that he does not rule alone.
Mr.
Yeltsin's desire to have the architect of Russia's economic reforms, Yegor T. Gaidar, present the main report to the Congress about the reforms was rebuffed by the legislators.
Apparently offended, they insisted in three quick votes that Mr.
Yeltsin give the report himself, which he is expected to do on Tuesday.


Credit-Card Use in February Up as Other Borrowing Fell
In what may be a sign of reviving buying interest, the Federal Reserve Board said today that consumers expanded their use of credit cards in February, although they paid off more debts than they incurred.
Overall consumer installment credit -- the type of debt that requires monthly payments -- fell by $199 million in February after growing by a slight $53 million in January.


Police Kill Suspect in Slaying of Policeman
A man wanted in the slaying of a Los Angeles County sheriff's deputy was shot and killed today by state police troopers, officials said.
Cesar Uriel Mazariego-Molina, 26 years old, was killed in an orchard in rural Plattekill Township in Ulster County, about 75 miles north of New York City, said state Trooper John Jackson, a police spokesman.


Japan in Danger of Not Qualifying for Finals
The calamities that plagued the Japanese crew during the semifinals of the America's Cup challenger trials last week are likely to seal the team's fate on the race course Tuesday.
If Japan's Nippon syndicate fails to win its match against New Zealand, the team won't have enough points to make it to the finals.
"We've dug ourselves in pretty deep holes this week," said Chris Dickson, Nippon's skipper, after racing Sunday.
"And it's getting very dark down there."


Couples Atop Ranking
Going into the Masters, which starts Thursday, FRED COUPLES once again holds the No. 1 spot in the Sony world ranking.
Even though he took a break from competition, Couples regained the top spot when NICK FALDO finished sixth in the tournament at New Orleans last weekend. (AP)


Bond Insurer Backs Sun Life
The Sun Life Insurance Company of America introduced a new product yesterday that for the first time offers holders of guaranteed investment contracts insurance in the event that the Los Angeles-based company is unable to meet its obligations to contract holders.
Under the terms of the guaranteed investment contract, principal and interest payments are fully guaranteed by Sun Life, a unit of Broad Inc.


Hurley Just Throws Passes, Not Barbs
At the end of Bobby Hurley's junior season, another year that ended with a championship at stake, the most outstanding player of the national collegiate basketball tournament wore a baseball hat backwards.
And when Hurley was asked to offer a critique of Christian Laettner's mistake-filled first half in the 71-51 championship-game victory over Michigan, Duke Coach Mike Krzyzewski turned to the player who, as a freshman, had heard the worst of Laettner's blunt criticisms.


Big Utility Is Rebuked In U.S. Study
Bad management has left workers at the four nuclear plants in Connecticut confused and demoralized, the Nuclear Regulatory Commission said yesterday in a report on Northeast Utilities, New England's largest power company.
The report is the first broad assessment of management at Northeast, which has been besieged by an unusual cluster of problems in recent months.
Equipment has broken, reactor operators have failed licensing exams and Federal officials have found that the company harassed three employees, including a top engineer, who cited safety problems.


Resume Writers Can Read Between the Lines; An Early Barometer of Trouble, and Then a Sympathetic Ear
Nowhere perhaps is there a more accurate barometer of the economy than in the offices of those who write resumes for a living.
They offer walking case studies of the psychology of coping with a faltering economy and provide early warning signs of industries going bad.
Stan Wynett said he did not need to read the newspapers to find out whose company is on the verge of financial collapse.
Mr.
Wynett said their employees drifted into his cluttered office on the 10th floor of a building on Madison Avenue.


Vietnam Gas Project
Petro Vietnam, Vietnam's state-owned oil company, said today that it would soon begin negotiations with Liquigaz/SNC Lavalin of Canada on the construction of a $300 million natural gas pipeline.
A Petro Vietnam official confirmed a local newspaper report quoting the head of Petro Vietnam, Truong Thien, as saying Vietnam had chosen the Canadian group to discuss the deal.
The pipeline will carry natural gas from Vietnam's South China Sea oil rigs and bring it onshore.
The gas is currently burned off.
The project will include construction of the pipeline and of a liquefied petroleum gas plant to bottle the gas.


Market Place; Equitable Seeks A Radical Change
MORE than two million policyholders of the Equitable Life Assurance Society of the United States recently received a hefty packet describing Equitable's plans to transform itself from a mutual insurance company to a publicly traded stock company.
The policyholders will have until May 6 to try to wade through the 336 pages of documents to decide whether to vote for or against the move to go public.
If the plan goes ahead, as most people expect, policyholders will be rewarded with stock, cash or a combination of the two.


Ukraine Is Praised On Economic Plans, But Not Vigorously
The International Monetary Fund complimented the Ukrainian Government today for "its stated commitment to a market economy," but the fund's statement fell short of the endorsement it issued last week of Russia's fast-paced reform program.
Over the past week, the I.M.F.'s executive board has been reviewing the economic liberalization programs of the former Soviet republics in preparation for their joining the fund around the time of its meeting on April 27.


Robert A. McCardell, Dean of Faculty, 63
Robert A. McCardell, a former dean of faculty and teacher at the Horace Mann School for 35 years, died yesterday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 63 years old.
He died of cancer, his family said.


Nassau County Planning to Buy Large North Shore Land Parcel
A pristine woodland of steep ravines and lush wet meadows, one of the largest remaining open space in heavily developed -- many residents say overdeveloped -- Nassau County, will be purchased by the county for $28.6 million.
Despite wrenching financial difficulties, including the layoffs of 2,000 employees, the Board of Supervisors voted unanimously today to approve the purchase of interests in 231 acres of land in Oyster Bay Cove on the North Shore.


Nassau Halts Its Layoffs During Talks
Nassau County halted laying off county workers yesterday, after almost 2,300 had lost their jobs, and officials began a new round of negotiations to solve the county's continuing fiscal crisis.
"It is my sincere hope that we will be successful in preventing the human tragedy of further layoffs," said County Executive Thomas S. Gulotta.


Fox Signs Chevy Chase For a Late-Night Show
The Fox Broadcasting Company moved to join the increasing competition in late-night talk shows yesterday by announcing that it had signed Chevy Chase to be the host of a comedy-talk show.
Fox said Mr.
Chase had agreed to a multi-year deal that would allow him to develop and produce series for its television production company, 20th Television, and to star in a feature film for 20th Century Fox.
The deal hinged on the agreement that Mr.
Chase, who gained fame in the original cast of "Saturday Night Live," would return to late-night television.


CHRONICLE
Supporting parks, large and small, urban and rural, has long been a Rockefeller tradition, so the Parks Council thought it only fitting that it present its annual award to the philanthropic family.
Tomorrow night ABBY O'NEILL, the president of Greenacre Park in midtown Manhattan, a granddaughter of John D. Rockefeller Jr. and a daughter of Abby Rockefeller Mauze, will accept the tribute at a dinner-dance at the Plaza hotel.
Among the city parks and gardens supported by the Rockefellers are Central Park, along with its zoo; Fort Tryon Park; Bryant Park, and the Peggy Rockefeller Rose Garden at the New York Botanical Garden.


Assistant Coach Adds To Wolverines' Fab
Which is the most important ingredient to success: talent or coaching?
Someone recently put the question to Steve Fisher, and he responded by relating an incident that had occurred earlier in the day.
Michigan's team bus was making its way through downtown Minneapolis, and someone was telling Fisher where the other Final Four teams were staying.


Director of U.S. Arts Alliance to Retire
Anne G. Murphy will retire at the end of this month after 13 years as executive director of the American Arts Alliance, the largest arts lobbying organization in the nation, the alliance's chairman said yesterday.
David Starr, chairman of the organization's board and publisher of The Union-News of Springfield, Mass., praised Ms.
Murphy's behind-the-scenes role in the Congressional reauthorization of the National Endowment for the Arts in 1990.


For Russia, Reforms Without Aid Will Fail
To the Editor:
Doug Bandow (Op-Ed, March 26) and Leslie Gelb (column, March 30) offer useful cautions about financial assistance to Russia, but are seriously off base in their analyses and data.
They both claim that Russia has squandered huge sums of Western aid in the last two years ($44 billion in 1991, according to Mr. Bandow; $50 billion in the last 20 months, according to Mr. Gelb).
A response to both is in order in view of International Monetary Fund approval of Russia's economic reform plan (front page, April 1) and the Bush Administration's move to join a seven-nation fund to aid Russia (front page, April 2).
Mr.
Gelb writes that "the money has virtually disappeared without a trace." In fact, the $50 billion is a mirage, though an understandable one.
According to European Economic Community data, the former Soviet Union received commitments of assistance of $52.6 billion in 1990 and 1991.
Only $28 billion of that was disbursed, and the I.M.F. estimates that only about $15.6 billion of what the Soviet Union received went to Russia (the rest went to the other republics).
Russia also had to make huge payments of interest and principal on accumulated debt, which in 1990-91 came to $15.5 billion, of which about $13.1 billion was actually paid.


Classical Music in Review
National Auditions Winners  Metropolitan Opera
The Metropolitan Opera's National Council holds yearly auditions for young talent, doing things that many music competitions advertise and cannot quite follow through on.
Principal among them is an emphasis not on winning and losing but on the identification of new voices.
Again this year there was not one winner; there were eight, and each had two opportunities to sing on the Met's stage on Sunday afternoon.


Setback for Greek Government in Election
Greece's two-year-old conservative Government said today that the Socialist opposition had registered a major success in Athens's by-election, but it dismissed demands for its resignation and new general elections.
The election in Athens, in which the governing conservative party refused to take part, also resulted in a large protest vote against all parties and a sharp rise in the far-rightist vote.


Excerpts From Court Ruling in Entrapment Case
Following are excerpts from the Supreme Court's decision today in Jacobson v.
United States, holding that the Government entrapped a Nebraska farmer into violating the law against child pornography.
Justice Byron R. White wrote the majority opinion, joined by Justices Harry A. Blackmun, John Paul Stevens, David H. Souter and Clarence Thomas.
Justice Sandra Day O'Connor's dissenting opinion was joined by Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist and by Justices Anthony M. Kennedy and Antonin Scalia.
FROM THE DECISION By Justice White
On Sept. 24, 1987, petitioner Keith Jacobson was indicted for violating a provision of the Child Protection Act of 1984, which criminalizes the knowing receipt through the mails of a "visual depiction (that) involves the use of a minor engaging in sexually explicit conduct." Petitioner defended on the ground that the Government entrapped him into committing the crime through a series of communications from undercover agents that spanned the 26 months preceding his arrest.


Classical Music in Review
Mozart Fortepiano Festival  Tully Hall
The fortepiano, once more accessible on recordings than in the concert hall, has become much more popular over the last decade.
But who would have thought that the instrument would become sufficiently entrenched to support a daylong marathon concert?


Biologists Tell a Tale Of Interfering In-Laws
AMONG humans, a visit with the in-laws can rank as one of life's little blisters, an experience just slightly more agreeable than, say, a CAT scan.
But humans have nothing on the white-breasted bee eaters of Kenya.
These birds are such outrageous relations that when a young, newlywed female moves into her husband's territory, ready to lay her eggs and get a family under way, her parents-in-law will do everything in their power to wrench the young couple asunder.


Hunter Expels One and Suspends Nine in 1990 Grade-Fixing Cases
Hunter College officials disclosed yesterday that they have expelled one student and suspended nine others over the last year for paying hundreds of dollars to have some of their worst grades altered by a college employee.
The officials said that they uncovered and halted the scheme in the fall of 1990 but have only recently begun to complete disciplinary hearings against the students, all of whom are undergraduates.
Proceedings against an 11th student are still pending, the officials said.


New Policing for Times Sq.: Maps, Not Guns
Clad in a freshly pressed faux police uniform, J. Marshall Johnson steeled himself for a challenge that might rattle even the most battle-hardened cop: matinee day in Times Square.
It was early Wednesday afternoon, and thousands of theatergoers zigzagged through dense traffic and hordes of pedestrians as they made their way to Broadway shows.
Mr.
Johnson, a newly deployed public safety officer, knew all too well that people often lose their bearings on entering the chaotic confines of Times Square.
So he anchored himself to the sidewalk on Seventh Avenue near 45th Street as frantic latecomers rushed over and pointed to addresses on their tickets while asking for help.


Into the Fire in Peru
Latin Americans call it an "autogolpe," a self-coup.
On Sunday night Peru's President, Alberto Fujimori, dissolved congress, suspended the Constitution and the judiciary and began rounding up his critics.
Military leaders are cooperating in this assault on democracy and human rights.
The hemisphere's democracies need to respond swiftly and vigorously -- with diplomatic ostracism, economic sanctions and support for those whose life and liberty are threatened.


The In-Your-Face Primary
Spring has already sprung the cliche of the season.
It's impossible to open a newspaper or turn on a television set without hearing about
in-your-face
basketball, movie characters, boxing strategy or, most emphatically, today's New York Presidential primary election.
Why, people say, this state's campaign embodies the very worst of in-your-face politics -- rude confrontation, selfish tribalism, exaggerated superficiality.
An AIDS activist tries to shout down Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas, for instance.
A Jewish legislator denounces former Gov.
Jerry Brown of California.


Italy's Long-Ruling Party Suffers Its Worst Setback Ever in Voting
Italy's Christian Democrats, who have dominated politics here since World War II as Europe's longest-ruling political dynasty, suffered their worst setback in elections today as insurgent groups gnawed at the support for established politicians.
Two days of high turnouts in the election left none of the bastions of Italy's politics unscathed.
According to computer projections tonight, the Christian Democrats' share of the vote fell below one third, its lowest ever, while the renamed Communists, once the most powerful Communist party in Western Europe, also lost ground.


A Senator's Vote Against Taxes Jeopardizes His Leadership Post
It is not often that a single vote can cost a lawmaker $24,500 a year, but that seems to be the case for Senator Tarky J. Lombardi Jr., a Syracuse Republican.
The Senate majority leader, Ralph J. Marino, irate at Mr.
Lombardi's vote last week against the new taxes and fees in the state budget that Mr.
Marino was in charge of negotiating, plans to strip Mr.
Lombardi of his post as chairman of the state Senate's Finance Committee, officials of the chamber said today.


Defendant in Tourist Killing Maintains That Victim Fell on Knife
One of three defendants on trial for the murder of Brian Watkins, a Utah tourist who was slain in a subway station in 1990, described in a videotaped statement played in a Manhattan courtroom yesterday how the victim died when "he fell on my knife."
Without a trace of emotion, the defendant, Yul Gary Morales, said in the statement that he tried to intervene in what he said was a fight involving his friends on a midtown subway platform.
As he went up to the group that was fighting, he said, one of them grabbed at him.


Shift in Executive Style For Toyota Unit in U.S.
The Toyota Motor Corporation said yesterday that Shinji Sakai would replace Yukiyasu Togo as chief executive of its United States sales arm.
Officials of the Toyota Motor Sales U.S.A.
Company said that a date had not been set for Mr.
Sakai to take over but added that the change would probably occur this summer.
Other changes in the top management of the North American division include the shift of Yale Gieszl, senior vice president for finance and administration, to replace Robert McCurry as executive vice president for sales and operations in the United States, said a Toyota executive who spoke on condition that he not be identified.


DDB, in Surprising Choice, Fills Top Post in New York
IN an unexpected move that brings a brash voice into the New York advertising community, DDB Needham Worldwide yesterday named Andy Berlin the president of its flagship New York office.
Effective May 1, Mr.
Berlin, 42 years old, will succeed Peter Falcone, 56, who has held the post at DDB Needham and a predecessor agency, Doyle Dane Bernbach, since 1985.
The change comes two and a half months after the Omnicom Group, which owns agencies including DDB Needham, agreed to buy the stock that it did not own in Goodby, Berlin &amp; Silverstein.


N.Y.U. Head Remains Wedded to Classroom
Sleeves rolled to the elbows and pens firmly ensconced in shirt pocket, L. Jay Oliva is addressing 25 undergraduates at New York University who have signed up for his course on "Topics in the History of the Russian Empire." In front of almost every student is a soft drink and a cookie, a nice touch, and one that Dr.
Oliva can easily provide.
After all, he runs the place.
Dr.
Oliva, who took over officially as the university president in November, teaches the course every Wednesday afternoon in the spring semester.
The subject this day is Napoleon's conquering march from Warsaw to Moscow and the emperor's hasty retreat in the bitter Russian winter.
Or, as Dr.
Oliva says in the easygoing manner that is his trademark, "the shootout at the Warsaw corral."


Sears Stores to Carry Apple Macintosh PC's
Apple Computer Inc. said today that it would begin selling its Macintosh personal computers and printers at Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company stores, expanding its presence in the retail market.
Until now, Apple has distributed its products primarily through specialized computer dealers, education sales consultants, and resellers to universities and government.


Chess
Roman Dzindzichashvili, a Queens grandmaster and former United States champion, and Alexander Ivanov of Brookline, Mass., America's newest grandmaster, tied for first place in the Master Section of the Mid-America Class Championships in Chicago.
The two former Soviet players won $1,500 apiece.
They each scored 4 1/2- 1/2 in the five-round Swiss-system open tournament, which attracted 53 entrants to the Ramada Inn O'Hare from March 13 to 15.
Their only draw was with each other in Round 4 of the two-rounds-a-day competition.


In Poll, Executives Back Free Trade
Corporate executives who are suppliers, customers and rivals of the swelling ranks of foreign companies in the United States get a firsthand glimpse every business day of the economic impact of the nation's free-trade policies.
And most of them conclude that the benefits of free trade -- stimulating economic activity and efficiency -- outweigh the costs of stiffer foreign competition, like lost jobs and markets for some industries, according to a New York Times/CBS News Poll.


The Campaign on Television
Where voters can find coverage of the primary elections and appearances of the candidates on television today.
All times are Eastern daylight:
WABC News in New York City, Channel 7, will broadcast an election special from 9 to 10 P.M.
It will be followed by an ABC News nationwide special that continues to 11 P.M.


Bridge
A player who finds himself a trick short in a three no-trump contract can sometimes put pressure on the opponents by running a long suit immediately.
An example is the diagramed deal from the 1991 Cap Gemini Pandata tournament in the Netherlands in January 1991.
South was the young British star, Andrew Robson, who came close to repeating his 1990 victory with Tony Forrester.
The one no-trump response was substandard, and so was the final contract of three no-trump.
When the spade king was led, South correctly won with the ace, allowing for the possibility of an eventual endplay.
He then played hearts, and was delighted when the queen fell.
When he ran his remaining hearts West chose to unguard both his minor-suit kings and South guessed right by cashing the club ace, bringing home the game.


Court Says Psychoanalyst May Sue The New Yorker
A Federal appeals court ruled yesterday that a psychoanalyst who charged that his quotes in a New Yorker magazine article in 1983 were fabricated can sue the magazine as well as the author of the article for libel.
The ruling by the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, in San Francisco, advances the cause of the psychoanalyst, Jeffrey M. Masson, in a case that stemmed from an unflattering profile that the writer Janet Malcolm did for the magazine in 1983 and which later appeared as a book.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Trail; 'Gonzo' Godfather Swings at Clinton
Billy Crystal had his say.
So did Phil Donahue.
Even Regis Philbin found it hard to refrain from commenting when Gov.
Bill Clinton insisted that he had never inhaled the marijuana that touched his lips 25 years ago.
So why haven't we heard from the man who carried a black bag filled with drugs on every campaign he ever covered, the man who invented, and perfected, "gonzo" journalism, the missing link between politics and the pharmaceutical industry?


CHRONICLE
For a man who would never dream of going to a party, Rabbi MENACHEM M. SCHNEERSON is attracting a glittering list of partygoers to a celebration of his birthday.
The rebbe, the leader of the Lubavitch Hasidic movement, turns 90 next Tuesday, and tomorrow in Washington more than 800 guests from Congress, the diplomatic corps and the worlds of art and finance will gather at the Grand Hyatt for a reception and dinner billed as "Celebration 90."
ELIE WIESEL and RONALD PERELMAN are the chairmen of the event.
Among those who have said they will attend are Senators Daniel Patrick Moynihan, Alfonse D'Amato, Joseph Biden, Orrin Hatch, Christopher Dodd, Frank Lautenberg, Joseph Lieberman, Arlen Specter, Harris Wofford and Claiborne Pell.
Ambassadors or representatives from 34 countries will be on hand, and YAACOV AGAM, the Israeli artist, will unveil a painting that will be sent to the rebbe.
Other celebrations are planned for Thursday in Jerusalem and Monday in Tel Aviv.


Daly May Be Leaving
After this National Basketball Association season, CHUCK DALY will leave as the coach of the two-time champion Detroit Pistons, according to a published report yesterday.
Booth Newspapers, quoting an unidentified Pistons player, reported that the 61-year-old Daly called the team together on Saturday evening and told players of his decision.
The newspaper group reported that Daly told JACK McCLOSKEY, the Detroit general manager, and owner BILL DAVIDSON of his decision Sunday night.


Arlington, Tex., Tax-Exempts
A $96 million tax-exempt bond offering by Arlington, Tex., was priced yesterday through underwriters led by Morgan Stanley &amp; Company.
The financing includes $79 million in permanent improvement refunding bonds that are priced to yield from 3.1 percent for an issue due in 1992 to 6.5 percent in 2008, and $17 million in permanent improvement bonds priced to yield from 3.7 percent in 1993 to 6.6 percent in 2007.
A bond due in 2012 is priced to yield 6.7 percent.
Underwriters said the issue was rated Aa by Moody's and AA by S.&amp; P.


College Basketball; First-Rate Defense Gives Duke Second Title
The rafters back home at Cameron Indoor Stadium will never be the same.
A year after Duke University earned its long-awaited first national championship banner, the Blue Devils used a sudden, decisive defensive dominance of the Michigan Wolverines tonight to achieve a matching set.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Watch; Face to Face, Clinton and Brown Show Their Best
The two main Democratic Presidential candidates went on the "Donahue" program yesterday for the most innovative media event of 1992, a nationally televised debate without a moderator.
It was a revealing hour of television, although not quite as entertaining as their separate appearances on the programlast week, when former Gov.
Edmund G. Brown Jr. of California discussed his heterosexuality and Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas finally explained why he hadn't inhaled.
The candidates dealt with a wide range of questions on the programs, but unfortunately they did not address one that might have been in minds of viewers and media consultants who had been following the New York campaign.
Why, when "Donahue" was available, did the candidates bother doing anything else?


Microsoft And MIPS
MIPS Computer Systems Inc. introduced a powerful new line of personal computers today, and the Microsoft Corporation displayed an updated version of its popular Windows software at the Spring Comdex computer industry show here.
MIPS, best known as a chip maker, said its ARC System computers were designed to the specifications of an industry consortium that included MIPS, Digital, Microsoft, Compaq and other companies.


Guarini Quitting Congress After 7 Terms
In a blow to New Jersey's influence here, Representative Frank J. Guarini, the iconoclastic Eastern establishment Democrat who maintained a luxury apartment overlooking Central Park while representing the ethnic polyglot of Hudson County, N.J., announced today that he would not seek an eighth term.
"It's time to go home," Mr.
Guarini said, noting that he has spent almost a quarter-century in public service.
"It's time to resume my private life. The job satisfaction hasn't been the greatest, but it's not the work itself. It's just that deep down in your guts you know when it's time to go home to friends and family."


Delta Blames Creditors for Shutdown of Pan Am
Delta Air Lines charged in a lawsuit yesterday that the creditors committee in the bankruptcy of Pan American World Airways had taken a series of destructive steps that led to the liquidation of Pan Am and then sought to pin the failure on Delta.
The charges were made in a countersuit by Delta against the committee, which brought suit against Delta in early December seeking $2.5 billion in damages for breach of contract.
Delta ended up on the defensive after the Pan Am collapse in early December, which led to the loss of 7,500 jobs.
Attacks by Creditors and Unions
Blistering attacks by lawyers for the creditors and union leaders in the bankrupcty court left the impression that after acquiring Pan Am's valuable European routes, Delta had only gone through the motions of trying to rebuild a smaller Pan Am around its remaining Latin American routes.


Stocks in Broad Rise, With Dow Up 26.38
Stock prices rose broadly yesterday in moderate trading, led by a continued rally in energy stocks.
It was the second straight increase in the Dow Jones average of 30 industrial stocks, which shot up 26.38 points, to 3,275.49.


Never Mind the Big Loss, Just Point Knicks Ahead
The Knicks did not spend today dwelling on their failure Sunday to beat Cleveland -- again.
Instead, they spent today concentrating on Tuesday's game against Detroit.
It was easier that way.


METRO DIGEST
THE NEW YORK PRIMARY  THE FINAL DAY
Bill Clinton and Edmund G. Brown Jr. made their final, impassioned appeals in a New York primary campaign that is virtually certain to shape both their political futures and the race for the Democratic nomination.
A1.
Amid misgivings about the candidates, strategists ponder moves and their alternatives.
A23.


N.H.L. Board Refuses to Vote on Proposal
The National Hockey League team owners refused to vote on a new proposal by the players yesterday and said they would offer a proposal of their own today in an effort to end the players' strike.
Bob Goodenow, executive director of the N.H.L.
Players Association, said yesterday's developments were "in one sense a disappointment" because he had hoped for a solution to the strike, which began last Wednesday and threatens the Stanley Cup playoffs.


Quotation of the Day
"The pros tell me that a lot of amateurs go out and they throw it into the dirt even though they have great arms." -- PRESIDENT BUSH, after his ceremonial toss fell short on baseball's opening day.  [ A22:5. ]


Q&amp;A
Unknown Places
Q.
What is the biggest unexplored area left on earth?
A.
"The ocean floors are the biggest unexplored place on earth," said Dr.
Carol Urness, professor of history and acting curator of the James Ford Bell Library at the University of Minnesota in Minneapolis and a past president of the Society for the History of Discoveries.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-17  REFORM OR COUP IN LIMA?
Peru's President, Alberto Fujimori, dissolved Congress, imposed censorship and arrested leading politicians in what he called an offensive against rebels and drug traffickers and others called a coup.
A1  STRIKING AT THE HEART OF PERU
The Shining Path rebels, whose carnage has cost 25,000 lives and about $20 billion, have moved from the mountainsides into the shantytowns of the capital.
A1
U.S. aid to Peru is halted.  A16  EUROPEANS RECOGNIZE BOSNIA
The European Community recognized the independence of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and the U.S. is not far behind.
A3
Independence has not liberated Sarajevo from violence.A3  MESSAGE TO MOSCOW
President Yeltsin's message from the Russian Congress of People's Deputies was short and clear: he does not rule alone.
A10  COMPROMISE VOWED IN GERMANY
Alarmed by the success of far-right parties, German leaders vowed to resolve the issue of unfettered immigration, which had been exploited by the right.
A12  SLAP TO CHRISTIAN DEMOCRATS
Italy's longest-ruling post-war political dynasty suffered its worst election setback at the hands of insurgent parties.
A8  U.N.
VIOLATIONS BY IRAQ AND IRAN
The Bush Administration said both Baghdad and Teheran technically violated United Nations orders when Iraqi fighter jets confronted Iranian planes that had bombed a guerrilla base inside Iraq..
A5  NEW FIGHT FOR SAVIMBI
Jonas Savimbi, an Angolan rebel leader, is battling allegations of killing and treachery inside his organization.
A17  CHINA CALLS ON JAPAN
The head of China's Communist Party, Jiang Zemin, arrived in Tokyo seeking technology, aid and a formal welcome.
A6  CHINA REJECTS VISAS
Two Senators critical of China's human rights record have been denied visas to visit.
A7  At least 5 died when police fired at protesters in Katmandu.
A9  Tel Aviv Journal: Fiddling for survival on the streets.
A4  National A18-25  DEMOCRATS' DAY OF RECKONING
Governor Clinton and former Governor Brown made final impassioned appeals to voters in New York in a contest that is virtually certain to define the race for the Democratic nomination.
A1
New York's elite looked beyond the primary with misgivings.  A23
The 3.8 million Democrats who can vote in New York's primary.  A23
The Democrats' persistent but subtle campaign for the gay vote.  A24
Why Republicans have been so quiet in New York.  A22
Campaign Watch: "Donahue" as almost ideal candidates' forum.
A24  COURT FINDS FEDERAL ENTRAPMENT
An unusually divided Supreme Court overturned a Federal pornography conviction on the ground of entrapment, ruling that a Government sting operation had led a Nebraska farmer to order child pornography through the mail.
A1
A psychoanalyst can go to trial against The New Yorker.  A20  STRIKERS DEFY CATERPILLAR
Striking auto workers held firm, largely defying an order by Caterpillar that they return to their jobs or risk being replaced.
A1  CLEANING HOUSE UNDER A CLOUD
Representative Charlie Rose of North Carolina, entrusted with clearing up various scandals at the House, has trouble of his own with ethical questions.
A21  MAKING HONESTY I.R.S.
POLICY
A consultant hired to teach ethics to the I.R.S. said the agency had many problems, but also said it was the "most honest taxing organization in the world." A18  PLUNDERING THE LIBRARIES
Rare books and irreplaceable prints, drawings and photographs are disappearing from libraries across the country.
So many books have been stolen or mutilated that the Library of Congress has closed its stacks to the public.
A18  FIGHTING HATE CRIMES AND MORE
The Pink Angels are patrolling the streets of Chicago, guarding against harassment of homosexuals and other crimes in a neighborhood where a gay man was recently shot.
A18  Arizona conducted its first execution in 29 years.
A25  Metropolitan Digest, B1 ALTERING PRACTICE OF MEDICINE
Fear of things like AIDS, tuberculosis, hepatitis and violence are changing the way health-care workers practice medicine, sometimes to the potential detriment of their patients.
A1  Business Digest, D1 Science Times C1-10  Skeptics scoff, but some researchers plan to avert a killer asteroid.
C1  In-law troubles at breeding time in the avian world.
C1  A simpler way to test complex mathematical proofs.
C1  The Doctor's World: Whether to tell patients they have Alzheimer's.
C3  Sports B9-15  Baseball: Mets top Cards.
B9
Cozy nest for Orioles.  B11
Yanks' lineup to be announced.
B11  Basketball: Duke beats Michigan to repeat as national champs.
B9  Women ponder popularity of tournament.
B12  Knicks looking ahead.
B15  Good news for Nets.
B15  Columns: Vecsey on the Mets.
B9  TV Sports B11  Obituaries B7-8  Isaac Asimov, prolific writer of science fiction and popular science.
B7  Samuel Reshevsky, grandmaster and former child prodigy.
B8  Fashion Page D28  Realism from Blass and Herrera.
Arts/Entertainment C13-18  Mark Morris returns to New York, unchastened.
C13  Director of mayor's film office resigns.
C13  James Joyce papers go on display in Dublin.
C13  Music: A concert honoring Resistance heroes.
C13  Word and Image: Debauchery at the top in China.
C17  Editorials/Op-Ed A26-27  Editorials A26  The in-your-face primary.
Into the fire in Peru.
Detaining the wrong aliens.
Topics: C.I.A., open and shut.
Letters A26  Russell Baker: The keystone sack.
A27  A. M. Rosenthal: Jerry Brown's myth.
A27  Stephen G. Trujillo: Corruption and cocaine in Peru.
A27  Flora Lewis: Queasy Germany, queasy allies.
A27


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: New York; Campaign Fury Is Giving Way To Speculation
After a New York primary campaign that has produced such sound and such fury, some of the most important political players were speaking in whispers yesterday, plotting or merely pondering their next steps in the confused and confusing contest for the Democratic Presidential nomination.
The outcome of today's balloting will create its own consequences, of course.
But many of the party's big-name officeholders and strategists are already looking past the count because of deep misgivings about the active contenders, Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas and former Gov.
Edmund G. Brown Jr. of California -- "maybe the only two candidates we have," in the words of Frank Mankiewicz, an old Kennedy and McGovern hand, "who can't possibly beat George Bush in the fall."


A Joy Ride by the Fab 5 Ends With a Final Jolt
In the end, defeat was not the result of freshman jitters, or the inexperience that critics repeatedly predicted would eventually catch up with the young and talented Michigan Wolverines.
In the end, it was Duke. Plain and overpoweringly simple.


Molly Picon, an Effervescent Star Of the Yiddish Theater, Dies at 94
Molly Picon, the comedic actress and singer who lightened and brightened the often dolorous themes of Yiddish theater with shows that were sprightly operettas, died yesterday in Lancaster, Pa.
She was 94 years old.
She died in her sleep at the home of her sister, Helen Silverblatt, said Seymour Rexite, president of the Hebrew Actors Union.


For the Jets, Spring Camp Is Here, but O'Brien Isn't
As the Jets opened their four-day minicamp for veterans here on the Hofstra campus today, there were some new faces and some old faces around, some faces in unfamiliar places and a few missing altogether.
The most familiar of the missing faces was that of quarterback Ken O'Brien, who led the team to an 8-8 record and the playoffs last season.
Place-kicker Raul Allegre, the ex-Giant who kicked the Jets into the playoffs with two dramatic boots in the regular-season finale against Miami, was also missing, as was reserve offensive tackle Mark Hayes.


Candidates Would Ban Assault Weapons
To the Editor:
The fifth in your timely "200 Million Guns" series (March 12) incorrectly states that Gov.
Bill Clinton has no firm position on banning assault weapons.
To a questionnaire sent to all the Presidential candidates by Marylanders Against Handgun Abuse, of which I am chairman, Governor Clinton stated that he supports banning these weapons.
Mr.
Clinton and Edmund G. Brown Jr., as well as the three former Democratic candidates, stated that they supported a ban on assault weapons and a national five-day waiting period for purchase of handguns.
Neither George Bush nor Patrick J. Buchanan responded to our questionnaire.


Public &amp; Private; And Now, Pragmatisim
The daffodils are pressing skyward, the winter coats are ratty and in need of a rest, and July will be here before we know it.
It is time to get serious.
We've had our season of None Of The Above, the complaints that Mr.
Right never stepped up to a podium and into our lives.
Like the stages of serious illness, we've passed through anger and denial during this primary season.
It is time for resolution, reconciliation, what the existential or the insurgent might call peace.
Bill Clinton is going to be the Democratic candidate for President.


U.S. Recognizes 3 Yugoslav Republics as Independent
The United States, which for months held out for a unified Yugoslavia, announced today that it was recognizing the independence of three of that country's secessionist republics.
President Bush said in a statement that he would move immediately to establish diplomatic relations with Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia and Slovenia, the three republics that have been recognized by the European Community.


2 Queens Congressmen Favor Weakening Cable TV Bill
Two Democratic Congressmen from Queens have quietly sided with the cable television industry in an effort to weaken a bill that would allow cities to set the price of local cable television service.
The role of the two lawmakers, Representatives James H. Scheuer and Thomas J. Manton, has surprised supporters of the legislation, including consumer groups that have praised their voting records, because the two lawmakers until recently had little active involvement on the issue.


6.57% Is Top Yield On Phoenix Bonds
The City of Phoenix has tentatively priced for sale to the public $237.4 million in tax-exempt general obligation refunding bonds through underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company
Serial bonds are priced to yield from 5.1 percent in 1995 to 6.45 percent in 2007, with bonds due in 2004 to 2006 not reoffered to the public.
For a longer maturity, a bond due in 2013 is priced to yield 6.57 percent.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Voters; New Yorkers Cover All Bases, Saying They're Unhappy With the Players
Torn by their options in a field that two-thirds of voters found unsatisfactory, New York's Democrats yesterday passed up their chance to choose just one of the above and fell back on all of the above instead.
Voters gave Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas a plurality of their support.
But with clenched teeth and crossed fingers, they spoke of choices they felt they did not have, choices they made onlyat the last minute and choices they wished they had not had to make at all.
In the end, anguished at their party's long exile from the White House but unsure how best to end it, they spread their votes around.


CHRONICLE
IVAN F. BOESKY, the former Wall Street stock speculator who was convicted of filing false stock-trading records and who came to symbolize the materialistic excesses of the 1980's, has sued SEEMA BOESKY, his wife of 30 years, for $1 million a year in temporary alimony.
Mr.
Boesky filed the claim requesting $20,000 a week in "interim financial support" last month in State Supreme Court in Manhattan, where the case has been labeled Anonymous I vs.
Anonymous II.


Report Criticizes U.S. Plans For Improving Car Mileage
A panel of the National Research Council has found room for significant gains in automobile gas mileage, but has criticized both the Federal Government's current way of setting standards and the main legislative proposal for increasing fuel efficiency.
The panel's report, released today, said new incentives should be considered for consumers, beyond simply requiring the auto industry to meet efficiency targets.
By increasing gas taxes, or by imposing fees on gas-guzzlers and paying subsidies to those who buy efficient cars, the current regulatory approach could be strengthened or replaced, the panel suggested.


Major Issues to Address As Legislators Wind Up
More than a dozen major legislative proposals that would touch almost every Connecticut resident remain unresolved as the General Assembly heads into the final four weeks of its regular spring session.
The bills include a sweeping overhaul of the welfare system, a restructuring of how the tax system treats manufacturers and cuts in aid to education.
Lawmakers say the fate of most, if not all, of the plans will be determined in closed party caucuses and deals made out of the public eye.


Sewell Sillman, 67, Artist and Publisher, Is Dead
Sewell Sillman, a painter, art teacher and print publisher, died on Sunday at his home in Lyme, Conn.
He was 67 years old.
He died of cancer, said his companion, James McNair.


Thailand's Military Chief Appointed to Prime Minister's Post
Thailand's top military commander became its Prime Minister today, a year after he led a coup that toppled the nation's democratically elected Government.
While proving once again that the Thai military retains ultimate power in this nation of 57 million people, the appointment of the commander, Gen.
Suchinda Kraprayoon, also threatened to set off public protests by middle-class Thais who are increasingly fed up with military domination of the Government.


Brooks Bros. Strike Threat
The unionized sales staff at Brooks Brothers stores have mailed letters to company charge card customers announcing that they will strike on Friday if the company changes its compensation policies and asking for support.
"We are going to be fleeced by the golden fleece" is the letter's opening line and outlines the company's proposals for changes in wages and salaries and employees' objections to those proposals.


Lechters Inc. reports earnings for 13wks to Jan 25


Critic's Notebook; Why Is Bournonville Still Appealing? Look at Danish Ballet
August Bournonville was a specifically Danish choreographer.
But he was so only in the sense that his good friend Hans Christian Andersen could be regarded as just a Danish storyteller rather than the universal writer he was.
The contemporary appeal of the Royal Danish Ballet's special heritage of Romantic works, as well as the tension between their national and international aspects, was repeatedly demonstrated last week at the Bournonville Festival II.
This exultant eight-day immersion in the 19th-century Danish choreographer's ballets by a superb company closed over the weekend literally with a burst of fireworks from the Royal Theater's roof.


Choice for Labor Post A Man of Strong Views
While Marvin H. Kosters has moved into the usual no-comment mode for people about to undergo the Senate confirmation process, there is no lack of information as to what he really thinks.
That is a marked difference from Janet L. Norwood, who most recently held the job of Commissioner of Labor Statistics, the post for which Dr.
Kosters has been selected by President Bush.
He regards raising the minimum wage as bad policy, for example, and has been dubious about assertions that Reagan-era tax and economic policy have caused a significant increase in inequality of incomes.
Neither view, expressed in a host of articles and in public comments over the years, is likely to endear Dr.
Kosters, the 58-year-old director of economic policy studies at the American Enterprise Institute, to the Labor and Human Resources Committee headed by Senator Edward M. Kennedy, which will hear his testimony in the confirmation process.


Deprenyl Research Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Midwesco Filter Resources reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Woosnam's at Augusta, But Not Feeling Masterly
Considering that he was the No. 1-ranked player in the world for most of the last 12 months, as well as the owner of what many consider to be the most natural swing in golf, Ian Woosnam comes to this year's Masters as a decidedly unsung defending champion.
Despite the fact that he won five other events worldwide last year, his performance after his dramatic one-shot victory at Augusta last April, for his first major championship, was disappointing.


Oshap Technologies Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Carolina Freight Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 21


Suspect in Deputy's Slaying Killed by New York Troopers
A suspect in the slaying of a Los Angeles County sheriff's deputy, a case featured three days ago on the television program "America's Most Wanted," was shot to death here on Monday by state troopers.
The state police said a viewer of the show had called them to say that the suspect, Cesar Uriel Mazariego-Molina, 25 years old, was working as a migrant worker at an orchard in Plattekill, about 60 miles north of New York City.


Missile's War Record Revised
The Army said today that the Patriot missile was less effective against Iraqi Scud missiles fired at Israel and Saudi Arabia in the Persian Gulf war than previously asserted.
Senior officers, testifying before the House Government Operations Committee, said that after reviewing technical information and damage-assessment reports, they concluded that Patriots intercepted 70 percent of the Scuds fired against Saudi Arabia, not 80 percent as previously believed, and 40 percent against Israel, not 50 percent.


BSN Corp. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Knicks Stumble Into a Tighter Fix
Suddenly, the Atlantic Division race has become much closer than it was three days ago.
And it has become closer than the Knicks would like.
Leading for all but the first six minutes, the Detroit Pistons dumped the Knicks, 103-94, at Madison Square Garden last night.
Meanwhile, the Boston Celtics won an important road game in Cleveland, 100-97, against the Cavaliers.


Philip Paul Wiener, Professor, 86
Prof.
Philip Paul Wiener, who taught philosophy at City College and Temple University in Philadelphia, died Sunday at Memorial Mission Hospital in Asheville, N.C.
He was 86 years old and lived in Asheville.
His family said he died after a brief illness.


Poland Buzzes With Party Strife and Talk of Coup
It may be only posturing, or Poles' love for intrigue, but political leaders here, including a senior Government official, have been publicly worrying about the political stance of the army, with some ascribing undemocratic intentions to President Lech Walesa.
The jarring talk in the first Eastern European nation to oust Communism comes against a backdrop of gridlock in the fragmented Parliament.
Mr.
Walesa has repeatedly insisted he will follow the Polish Constitution, but he also speaks from time to time of taking "the reins" in his hands.


Bronx District Attorney Dismisses Two Assistants
Two assistant district attorneys in the Bronx have been dismissed amid an investigation of the release of confidential information to defense lawyers in an organized-crime case, a law-enforcement official said yesterday.
Steven R. Reed, a spokesman for District Attorney Robert T. Johnson, said Arthur Marino and Jay Scharf, both 28 years old and both hired in August 1989, were dismissed on Friday because of "conduct inconsistent with their oath of office." But Mr.
Reed declined to elaborate on what might have triggered the dismissals.


Theater in Review
A Midsummer Night's Dream  John Jay Theater 899 10th Avenue (at 58th Street) Manhattan Through Saturday By William Shakespeare; directed by Joe Dowling; set design by Douglas Stein; costumes by Catherine Zuber; lighting by Allen Lee Hughes; composer, George Fulginiti-Shakar; production stage manager, Elizabeth Stephens.
Presented by the Acting Company, Zelda Fichandler, artistic director; Margot Harley, executive producer.
WITH: Jonathan Earl Peck, Trish Jenkins, Major West, Terra Vandergaw, Mark Stewart Guin, Rainn Wilson, Angie Phillips, Patrick Kerr, Andrew Weems, Duane Boutte, Derek Meader, Dan Berkey, Jed Diamond, Jeffrey Wright, Lisa Benavides and Kati Kuroda.
Every interpretation of "A Midsummer Night's Dream" must find its own special blend of ethereality and farce.
Without shortchanging the play's magical elements, Joe Dowling, who directed the Acting Company's invigorating new production of Shakespeare's classic, tilts the balance toward rough-and-tumble comedy.


East Bloc Treading Water In a Sinkhole of Lethargy
They have abolished the ritualistic May Day parades and renamed the streets, but three years after the collapse of Communism, the former satellites of the Soviet empire are still struggling to root out the deeper psychological legacies.
Communism's external characteristics -- political repression, censorship, big brotherism -- proved easier to erase than had been widely assumed.
Similarly, after just a few months of reform, the most glaring flaws of the old command economy began to vanish as shops, once empty, stocked up with bananas, tuna fish, olive oil and imported cosmetics.


A Familiar Chord In Iran's Campaign
A parliamentary election campaign in Iran strikes a chord that is familiar to voters in the United States: unhappiness with the incumbents.
And some of the 2,050 candidates, like those seeking office anywhere, struggle for name recognition.


Reviews/Fashion; Klein and Ellis Define The Spectrum of Style
CALVIN KLEIN'S clothes were calm, relaxed and cool.
No grand flourishes.
Marc Jacobs's collection was frenetic, unpredictable, energetic.
Between the two, they set the outer parameters of fashion for the fall and winter season.
Everything was layered in the same color at Calvin Klein.
The colors centered on platinum, sand and other muted shades, and deepened to navy, chocolate and wine.


What's Right With Brown's Proposed Flat Tax; What's Wrong With It
To the Editor:
Michael Weinstein's March 9 Editorial Notebook on Edmund G. Brown Jr.'s flat-tax proposal glosses over serious problems with the plan.
*
The lack of a capital gains tax would be a bonanza for speculators in stocks, bonds, commodities and real estate, which would not be compensated for by the tax on interest and dividends.
The spectacle of no tax on million-dollar incomes, while people with modest income pay 13 percent, would hardly seem fair.


Mariners' Sale Remains in Cloud of Secrecy
The maneuvering surrounding the Seattle Mariners has become so confused that the chairman of baseball's ownership committee issued a statement yesterday saying he would hold a news conference after the committee's meeting, which he has moved to another site so it could remain secret.
The ownership committee will meet today to act on a revised plan under which a Japanese group would buy 49 percent, or a minority share, of the Mariners instead of 60 percent as originally proposed.


Kentucky Presses Crackdown on Local School Mismanagement, Charging 4 People
In a continuing crackdown on mismanaged school districts, Kentucky education officials have charged school board members and a superintendent in four school systems with neglect of duty, influence peddling and misconduct.
The charges, filed by the Office of Education Accountability, an investigative arm of the State Legislature, will be reviewed Friday by the State Board of Education in Frankfort to determine whether the local school officials should be removed.


Books of The Times; Revolt in the Synagogue, Unrest in the Choir
His Master's Voice  By Robert Kotlowitz 338 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $21.
In Robert Kotlowitz's charming novel about Jewish life in wartime Baltimore shortly after D-day in Normandy, there's plenty of tsoris behind the calm facade of the House of Israel synagogue.
Some of the members of the Orthodox congregation are rebelling against their pompous rabbi.
Even while recovering from surgery, the congregation's wealthy treasurer is making passes at the nurses, at the cantor's wife and at anyone else within his reach.
The cantor's teen-age daughter is secretly dating an Italian boy.
The widows in the congregation . . . well, don't ask.
And the cantor is beginning to doubt his religious feelings.


Daily News Names Operating Officer
The Daily News has appointed Art Wible, a former News executive, to the post of senior vice president and chief operating officer, in charge of advertising, circulation, promotion and strategic planning.
The appointment, which was announced by the newspaper on Monday, is the most recent move in the paper's fight for survival since it declared bankruptcy in December after the death of its owner, Robert Maxwell.


Leeco Diagnostics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


First Central Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


F.D.I.C. Postpones Increase For Deposit Insurance Fees
Besieged by intense lobbying by both the banking industry and the Bush Administration, Federal regulators today postponed at least until January an increase in the premiums banks pay for deposit insurance.
Regulators said they needed more time to prepare a long-awaited new fee schedule for premiums based on the risks banks take, rather than on their size.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Changes at G.M.
General Motors broke with its past when an outside director, John G. Smale, was placed in charge of a top board committee to monitor management more closely.
The former Procter &amp; Gamble chairman led the drive by G.M.'s outside directors to pursue "more aggressive management."  [ Page A1. ]


Corrections
A report in the Chronicle column yesterday about a dinner in Washington celebrating the 90th birthday of Rabbi Menachem M. Schneerson misstated the date of the event.
It was last night.
Another report in the same column misstated the date of a Parks Council awards dinner.
It was also last night.


Shift at Ketchum's New York Office
In the second change this week in the top leadership at an agency's New York office, Ketchum Advertising said yesterday that Thom Miller, 42 years old, president of Ketchum Advertising New York, had left "to pursue other personal interests."
The departure of Mr.
Miller, who had held the position since 1985, followed a realignment under which the president of Ketchum Advertising U.S.A., Bob Kroyer, relocated to New York from Pittsburgh and Paul H. Alvarez was appointed president and chief executive of the parent company, Ketchum Communications.


Anguish Among Caterpillar Strikers as Jobs Are Offered to Others
For Dennis Hussenann, the toughest part of being on strike is having to explain to his three children that they cannot buy new clothes, that they cannot have money to go to any of the new films they want to see and that there will be no frills at dinner time.
"We've been eating a lot of beans and noodles," said Mr.
Hussenann, a 44-year-old gauge mechanic who has worked at Caterpillar Inc. for 26 years and has been on strike for five months.
"This has really been a strain for all of us. We're really trying to scrape together whatever we can just to have a halfway decent meal."


Arazi Lives Up to Billing in Derby Warm-Up
"Arazi, an American Star," read the headlines in the French racing forms on the eve of today's Prix Omnium II.
And when Arazi reached the paddock before his first race as a 3-year-old, he received an American star's welcome: scores of television cameras, boom microphones and flashes going off in rapid succession.
Minutes later, Arazi calmly and impressively lived up to his billing, winning by five lengths over a grass course softened by overnight rain at the Hippodrome de Saint Cloud.
The race, at 1,600 meters, or slightly less than a mile, will be his only warm-up before the Kentucky Derby on May 2.


Corrections
An article and caption on Monday about New Yorkers' views of the Democratic Presidential candidates misstated one voter's view.
Jacky Clay, a student at Fordham University, was referring to Gov.
Bill Clinton and former Gov.
Edmund G. Brown Jr., not to Mr.
Brown and Jesse Jackson, when she said, "I don't care for either one."


U.S. Attorney Halts Inquiry Into Dinkins Stock Transfer
Unable to verify information provided by Arnold I. Biegen, an admitted embezzler and former mayoral adviser, the United States Attorney in Brooklyn has halted a re-examination of a disputed stock transaction involving Mayor David N. Dinkins and his son, investigators said yesterday.
The investigators said that despite nearly three months of work, prosecutors had been unable to corroborate much of Mr.
Biegen's information and that they had questions about his veracity and candor.


Monitoring Pollution at Its Source
In smog-choked Southern California, air-quality regulators have long monitored factories, refineries and other sources of industrial air pollution in the way the Internal Revenue Service keeps track of taxpayers: by requiring voluminous record-keeping and swooping in for the occasional audit.
But in the next few years, regulators here plan to shift to a new system more like the one the A. C. Nielsen Company uses to monitor the television programs emitted into American households.
Each smokestack or other major source of pollution will be wired with sensors or tracking devices to measure emissions on a continuing basis.
The data will be transmitted to a central computer for record-keeping and analysis.


2 Neighborhoods Linked In Scandal and in Shame
The Grays Ferry section of South Philadelphia is a neighborhood of tidy two-story row houses with vinyl siding and metal awnings.
But the steel grates on the windows and barbed wire fencing around the high school were no defense against the sex scandal that has touched the neighborhood's teen-age boys.
Two weeks ago, the authorities reported that a man with AIDS may have paid several hundred young men for sex or other activities in the last few years.
Many of the teen-agers known to have been involved were not street hustlers, but boys who grew up in neighborhoods like Grays Ferry.


Rough Entry to League for Saberhagen
The trade was in the works, and so the scouting report on Bret Saberhagan was circulated through the Mets' front office.
There was data on top of data, and then there was the clincher in the last line.
"Can't see how the guy ever loses," it read.
Well, here's how: nine hits, three walks, seven runs in two and one-third innings.


Taxi Hits Blind Man And Dog on 5th Ave.
A blind man and his guide dog, fixtures on Fifth Avenue and 57th Street where the man sold pencils, were struck at the corner yesterday afternoon by a taxicab that jumped the sidewalk, the police said.
The man, Thomas Armstrong, 62 years old, suffered head injuries and broken bones.
He was listed in serious condition at Bellevue Hospital Center last night, said John Clark, a hospital administrator.


Jansko Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Eating Well
THE depressing statistics on diet success rates provided by the National Institutes of Health at a symposium last week probably came as no surprise to Oprah Winfrey or to others who lost many pounds on quick weight-loss schemes and gained them all back.
According to the institute's report, most women who had lost weight had not kept it off after five years.
What the report did not address are the alternatives that might work: in particular, revising the composition of the diet without actually reducing the number of calories consumed.
But no diet plan has long-lasting effect without exercise.
And there are no quick fixes for most people.


More Military Retirees Going Into Classrooms
When Steve Dexter retired from the Navy last fall, the former captain embarked on a new career as a sixth-grade teacher in an inner-city school in Portsmouth, Va.
Although the widely traveled officer can speak firsthand about the cultures of Egypt, Italy and Greece to his world history class, Mr.
Dexter often finds himself frustrated by the problems of his 22 students, 19 of whom come from single-parent homes and many of whom are poor.


Iran's Candidates Share Theme: U.S. Is the Enemy
In a fluorescent-lighted mosque down a dark, narrow alley in the midst of the greengrocers' stalls of south Teheran, three candidates for Parliament are campaigning.
They do not kiss babies or shake hands or make promises.
Rather, they sit cross-legged on a cold, damp floor covered with dusty carpets, sipping tea and fielding the questions from a group of 30 men who have come to hear them.
"What about all we hear about the luxurious lives of some Government officials?" said one man, asking a question often raised in a country where reports of official corruption are spreading and the unofficial inflation rate is 50 percent.
Without mentioning names, the questioner asserted that Hojatolislam Mehdi Karudi, Speaker of the Iranian Parliament, had spent 200 million rials -- close to $150,000 -- on his daughter's wedding.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: News Analysis; The Voters' Message: Very Murky Results Show Unhappiness With Choices
Maybe it was foreordained.
Two weeks of tumult -- two weeks of accusation and denial, heckling, shouting, frustration and fury, mostly in the streets and television studios of New York City -- produced far more color than clarity, and the New York Presidential primary sent a very murky message.
Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas won tidily enough here, but he failed to pull completely free of his competition, both active and passive.
He had hoped to make his nomination seem inevitable once again, as it had seemed to most prominent Democratic politicians only a few weeks ago, but yesterday a solid majority of New Yorkers voted against him, and about half of that group voted for a man with a suspended candidacy, former Senator Paul E. Tsongas of Massachusetts.
Wanted: Another Candidate
Almost two-thirds of those who cast Democratic primary ballots, according to a survey of voters leaving their polling places, said they wished that candidates other than Mr.
Clinton and former Gov.
Edmund G. Brown Jr. of California were running.


Bygone Food, Chock Full o'Memories
IT can happen anywhere, anytime, for no apparent reason: suddenly, a mouthwatering vision floats into mind.
There, unmistakably, in all its pale-pink glory, is a Lady Baltimore cake with lopsided icing, frothy prune or apricot whips, cupcakes carelessly coated with chocolate.
Or maybe it's cream cheese slathered on date-nut bread, crumbly scoops of chopped eggs and onions, or hybrid rolls with onion pieces tucked in the middle.
Now the vision is joined by another sense: smell.
Hot dogs sizzling, heavenly coffee waiting for its dollop of cream, baked beans burbling under a blanket of molasses.


N.H.L. Players Reject 'Final' Offer
The National Hockey League season lurched drastically toward a Stanley Cup-less finish yesterday evening at the Plaza Hotel, where the league president, John Ziegler, announced that the Players Association had rejected the owners' final offer for a collective-bargaining agreement to end the week-old strike.
"It's a sad day, my friends, a sad day," Ziegler said in a baroque Rose Room filled with stark, modern labor problems.


Quality Products reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


60-Minute Gourmet
TURKEY was not something I was exposed to very much as a boy growing up in Burgundy, though it was available.
It was introduced to Europe in the 17th century, but was not part of the traditional French cooking repertory.
When turkey was brought to Europe by Jesuits, it was known as Indian chicken (or poule d'Indes), names coined by Spanish conquerors in the century before.
Until recently, Americans reserved turkey only for Thanksgiving.
But the bird's versatile and inexpensive meat has led to a newfound popularity.
Supermarkets now carry turkey steaks and turkey parts, which are ideal for quick family cooking.
The only caveat in cooking turkey meat, as all Thanksgiving chefs know, is that extra care must be taken to keep it moist.


G.O.P. Courts Jews With Eye to Future
As Republicans court Jewish voters at the annual meeting of the leading pro-Israel lobby this week, they seem as intent on trying to gain support for future elections as on repairing President Bush's immediate problems with American Jews in the 1992 campaign.
In an appearance on Monday night before the American Israel Public Affairs Committee, Senator Connie Mack, the Florida Republican whose 1994 campaign will largely depend on the conservative Jewish vote in his state, said it was "immoral" for Mr.
Bush to make Israel's request for $10 billion in housing loan guarantees conditional on a freeze on West Bank settlements.


Reviews/Television; Mom Adds a Daughter, and a Show Goes On
Television tinkering can be a wondrous process.
Last year, CBS's "Royal Family," created by Eddie Murphy, was one of a very few new series showing ratings strength.
Then, in October, Redd Foxx, who was playing the lead role of Al Royal, died suddenly, right on the set.
Sincere mourning was heavily tinged with panic.
The actress Jackee, formerly of the series "227," was grabbed to play the half-sister Ruth, also known as Coco, of Victoria, now Al's widow and still portrayed by Della Reese.
More time was needed, though, to work out necessary adjustments, and the show went off the air temporarily.
Tonight at 8, it's back, with Jackee and Ms.
Reese sharing carefully calibrated star billing.
One slight change: Coco is now Victoria's elder daughter.
A family portrait on the living-room wall allows Mr.
Foxx to gaze down on the new proceedings, looking as grumpy as ever.


Renegade Researchers Offer Rebuttal: U.S. Schools Are Better Than Many Say
Forget all the bad news about American schools.
There is no crisis in American education, say a number of renegade researchers whose ideas have touched off a bitter debate with broad implications for education policy in an election year.
By falsely claiming that almost all American schools are failing, these critics charge, the Bush Administration and others divert attention and money from the real crisis: poor inner-city and rural schools.


Gillen Says No to Villanova Offer
Some seasons are better than others.
Last year, Xavier of Ohio made it to the playoffs and Coach PETE GILLEN got an opportunity to say no to Notre Dame, where he was once an assitant coach.
This year, the Musketeers didn't make the playoffs and the best Gillen has been able to do is say no to Villanova, where he was once an assistant coach.
Gillen, who had visited the Villanova campus on Monday, said late yesterday afternoon that he had decided to remain at Xavier rather than replace an old friend, ROLLIE MASSIMINO, as Villanova's coach.
Massimino has resigned to take over at Nevada-Las Vegas.


Harris Leaves Bucks to Pursue Coaching
DEL HARRIS left his job as vice president of basketball operations for the Milwaukee Bucks yesterday to pursue coaching opportunities in the National Basketball Association.
Harris, who stepped down in December as Bucks coach -- 17 games into the team's worst season in 13 years -- will still be paid for the final year of his contract, a team official said.


Margaret Barker, 83, Actress and Director
Margaret T. Barker, an actress and director who was an original member of the Group Theater, died on Friday at New York Hospital in Manhattan.
She was 83 years old and had homes in New York City and Fairfield, Conn.
She died of lung cancer, her family said.


Port Authority Pulls Back From Sale of Waterfront
Responding to outrage and the urging of a leading adviser to Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, the Port Authority agreed yesterday to step back from its plan to sell a strip of prime Brooklyn waterfront to developers.
The move, proposed by Vincent Tese, head of the Urban Development Corporation of New York, would give local residents time to complete a public development plan.


Retirement at Penney Leads to Promotions
The J. C. Penney Company announced several executive promotions yesterday, prompted by the retirement of Robert B. Gill, vice chairman and chief operating officer of J.C.
Penney stores and catalogue.
Mr.
Gill, who has worked for the company for 39 years, will retire June 1.
James E. Oesterreicher, executive vice president and director of J.C.
Penney stores, will become president of the stores and catalogue at that time.
He joined the company in 1964 as a management trainee in Lansing, Mich.


Peru's Maoist Drug Dealers
Some well-meaning analysts still ignore the truth about Shining Path, the Maoist revolutionary movement terrorizing Peru.
While the guerrillas may be ruthless, those who romanticize them claim they are untainted by the drug trade that poisons Peruvian society.
This is a myth.
I know from my experience working for the Drug Enforcement Administration in Peru that the guerrillas are systematically involved in all levels of the drug trade in the Upper Huallaga Valley, where most of the world's coca is grown.


Editorial Notebook; Taking a Swing for Cities
Probably no opening day baseball game has been covered by so many specialists as Monday's contest between the Baltimore Orioles and the Cleveland Indians.
There were architecture critics to celebrate the debut of Baltimore's magnificent new/old stadium, Orioles Park at Camden Yards.
There were political analysts to schmooze with Washington bigwigs and watch President Bush throw out the first ball, an ill-chosen curve that bounced in front of the plate.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: New York; Voters Give the Nod to the Outsiders
Democratic voters in New York's Presidential primary delivered two pointed messages to local politicians yesterday: It is good to be an outsider and maybe even better for the Rev.
Jesse Jackson to embrace your opponent.
For all the endorsements and organizational support that Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas received, he mustered only a plurality against two decided underdogs.


Long History of Wine Emerges From a Cloud
SOMETIME in the next few days, a container filled with South African wine will arrive at Savannah, Ga.
It is the first South African wine shipped to the United States since sanctions were imposed on the South African Government in 1986 because of its policy of racial segregation.
Wine makers in this verdant southwest corner of Africa have been looking forward to this first shipment since the sanctions were lifted last July, looking forward with joy and apprehension.
Will the Americans like their wine?
Will the deep-seated American revulsion toward apartheid linger on in the form of antipathy toward their products?
Will it persist even though, they say, the tide has turned in the long fight here against institutionalized racism.


'Thousand Acres' Wins Fiction As 21 Pulitzer Prizes Are Given
Jane Smiley's "A Thousand Acres," a novel that weaves the plot of "King Lear" through the story of an Iowa farm woman who was sexually abused by her father, won the Pulitzer Prize for fiction yesterday.
The drama award went to "The Kentucky Cycle," a six-hour historical epic by Robert Schenkkan, which was never performed on Broadway.
In journalism, three newspapers -- The New York Times, Newsday, and The Sacramento Bee -- each took two prizes.


Ruling Gives Deadline to Albany for Redrawing Districts
A Federal court ruling issued today gives the State Legislature until April 27 to either agree on a plan for drawing new Congressional districts or risk losing control of the redistricting process to the courts.
A panel of three judges, who conducted a hearing in Federal District Court in Brooklyn, made the ruling in response to a lawsuit filed last week by the Puerto Rican Legal Defense and Education Fund.


Stock Fall In Japan Worsens
The stock market crisis deepened today as prices plummeted for a second straight session to their lowest level in more than five years.
The drop came despite an announcement last week that the Government was taking steps to try to bolster the frail market.
The shares of top banks have been especially hard hit, a sign, analysts said, of a worrisome decline in confidence in Japan's financial system.


Come to Kiev. Listen to Ukraine.
Since the collapse of the Soviet Union, Ukraine has been determined to become a full member of the world community.
But in the West, Ukraine is seen as unpredictable and unreasonable, particularly in its dealings with Russia.
We are often charged with reckless nationalism but the claim is seldom examined.
Ukraine has been losing the propaganda war, creating unwanted and unnecessary dangers for everyone.
A principal explanation for the misperception is that news accounts and expert opinion in the West have a pro-Russian bias.
For example, the $24 billion Western program of assistance announced last week was reported as aid to Russia, with little attention to Ukraine's share in it.
The explanation for this tilt is that the West has long had strong contacts with Moscow and poor contacts with Kiev.
The former Soviet Government and Communist Party funneled everything through Moscow; the Government and party are gone, but the funnel remains.
The U.S.
Government's presence in Russia is substantial, but not in Ukraine, which is the size of France.
Hundreds of members of the international press corps are permanently stationed in Moscow, but only a handful are found in Kiev.
Western business and academic ties have been almost exclusively with Russia.
There is alarm in the West when Ukraine questions the fate of tactical nuclear weapons that are being removed to Russia.
But Western accounts never ask if Ukraine's questions have merit.
What is happening to the weapons?
Are they being destroyed, as agreed, or simply being relocated in Russia?
It surprises Ukrainians that the West, with its history of demands for verification in arms control, finds such concerns surprising.
Western representatives talk only with officials in Moscow about removal of the weapons.
If the West does not talk with officials in Ukraine, aren't Ukrainians right to raise their own alarms?
The West parrots the charge that Ukraine wants to create an army of 400,000 troops.
It would be easy to talk with Ukrainians and find out that this would mean a more than two-thirds reduction in troops now in Ukraine.
Such a rapid reduction will create enormous problems.
The difficulty of finding work and housing for the former soldiers is the principal reason that the immediate reduction cannot be greater.
The long-term plan is to have an even smaller army.
Western press reports have repeated the propaganda that Ukraine was unwilling to carry its share of the debt of the former Soviet Union.
Anyone who has visited Kiev knows that Ukraine has always agreed to pay its share of the debts.
But Ukraine also demands its share of the assets.
Nonetheless, the West cooperates when Russia takes all the assets.
The Soviet seat on the U.N.
Security Council is now the Russian seat.
Possibly the seat could not be divided.
But is this true for Soviet embassies that are now Russian embassies, for Soviet hard-currency earnings that are now Russian, for Soviet gold -- and for the Black Sea fleet, over which Boris Yeltsin reasserted control yesterday.
Perhaps the most revealing complaint associated with the Western misunderstanding of Ukraine involves its plan to replace the ruble with the hryvna, the new Ukrainian currency.
Those few Western experts who have been to Kiev and have listened are convinced that everyone, including Russia, will be better served if Ukraine moves quickly to a new currency that can support its economic reforms.
Introducing a new currency is not reckless nationalism; it is responsible and necessary in order to preserve trade and develop economic relations with other countries, including Russia.
Russia must understand that it has truly independent countries on its borders.
The challenge Ukraine faces is to act as responsibly as possible and to strengthen contacts with everyone, including Russia and the West, while it transforms its economy, politics and society.
The challenge for the West is to work at strengthening ties with new countries like Ukraine.
Just four months ago, Ukrainians voted overwhelmingly for independence.
Ukraine won't go back.
Neither can the West.
Throw off old habits, come to Kiev and talk with Ukrainians about Ukraine.


Irish to Submit Abortion Issue to Referendum
The Irish Government said today that it intended to call a referendum proposing legal changes that would guarantee women the right to travel abroad for abortions and allow the distribution of abortion information within the country.
Prime Minister Albert Reynolds told his Cabinet that in addition to the referendum, which would seek to change a constitutional amendment that virtually prohibits abortions, legislation would be prepared to control and regulate the information.
Abortion was virtually banned under the amendment until a Supreme Court decision in February.


Review/Film; Helping the Homeless to Tell Their Own Story
Why are these people smiling?
It is 9 degrees above zero in Tompkins Square Park in New York City, and the street musicians seen in Lech Kowalski's short film "Chico and the People" look almost impervious to the weather.
Although their breath shows up on camera and some of them can be seen warming their hands over trash fires, a majority of the film's participants appear caught up in the jazz rhythms played by Chico Freeman and his ragged, exuberant street ensemble.
The spirit of community, as captured by Mr.
Kowalski in pure and wordless terms, is enough to conquer the cold.
"Chico and the People," the first part of a program opening today at the Film Forum, is an apt prelude to "Rock Soup," Mr.
Kowalski's longer and angrier look at street life on the Lower East Side.
Filmed principally at an outdoor soup kitchen on Ninth Street, a place first seen under a torn, dripping tarpaulin on a miserable day, the stark black-and-white "Rock Soup" gives voice to the many emotions experienced by those who go to the kitchen for meals.
What is surprising in Mr.
Kowalski's vision is the closeness and hope he sees binding the participants together.
They would no doubt prefer to be elsewhere, but they have found the kind of sustenance that surpasses mere creature comfort.


Dispute on Search For a Missing Boy
The mother of a 6-year-old boy who vanished at a carnival last spring has quit the five-member board of the nonprofit group organized to find the child.
The mother, Michelle Lodzinski, 25, said her son, Timothy Wiltsey, disappeared May 25 in Sayreville.


FINANCE/NEW ISSUES;
The Federal National Mortgage Association, known as Fannie Mae, priced for sale a total of $1.4 billion in debentures, equally divided between 5-year and 10-year maturities, through various securities dealers.
For the five-year issue, the interest rate is set at 7 percent and offered at a price of 99.875 to yield 7.03 percent, or about 28 basis points more than Treasury securities with a similar maturity.


Easing Plight of Mentally Ill Homeless
Dr.
Elissa Sanders, a 30-year-old psychiatrist, normally cares for the city's well-to-do -- lawyers, artists and Wall Street bankers who pay $200 for an hour of therapy in a comfortable office on the Upper East Side decorated with colorful Impressionist prints and soft leather chairs.
Once a week, though, Dr.
Sanders walks a few blocks to a cramped, dimly lighted building to treat patients whose broken lives reveal another side of her wealthy neighborhood.


New Faces in Congress May Mean Less for New Jersey
No matter who wins next fall's Congressional elections, one sure loser will be New Jersey itself.
Its delegation to the United States House of Representatives, the source of all money bills and thus the prime keeper of the pork barrel, will be cut from 14 to 13 members.
And in a system in which seniority means power and pork, the retirement announcements in the last week of Robert A. Roe and Frank J. Guarini mean that the New Jersey delegation will be weaker than it has been in two decades, with a mere handful of senior members and, barring the unforeseen, not a single committee chairmanship.


Harleysville Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


America West Holders Panel
America West Airlines said today that it had dropped efforts to disband a committee of stockholders to help speed the airline's emergence from bankruptcy protection.
In return, the committee agreed to limit its spending on professional fees to $150,000 a month.
America West filed a motion to disband the committee last month, saying the holders, primarily employees, essentially had no assets to protect and were wasting money on fees for lawyers and investment bankers.
The airline said the value of its stock was likely to be wiped out in a reorganization.


Nutrasweet's Race With the Calendar
Time is running out for the Nutrasweet Company.
On Dec. 14, Nutrasweet's decade-long monopoly ends for the sale of the artificial no-calorie sweetener aspartame in the United States.
Though the fateful day is more than seven months away for Nutrasweet, a unit of Monsanto, considerable behind-the-scenes maneuvering is already under way at Coca-Cola, Pepsico and other companies eager for sharply lower prices on the most expensive ingredient in diet soda.


Advanced Micro Posts Record Quarter Sales
Advanced Micro Devices Inc. reported record quarterly sales today on earnings that surpassed analysts' estimates.
Growth was driven primarily by the company's clones of the Intel 386 microprocessor, which now has 40 percent of the market, Advanced Micro said.
Analysts said Advanced Micro's strong results boded well for the Intel Corporation's quarterly earnings.
Intel has benefited from the same strong market, but has even better profit margins because a large percentage of its sales comes from the more powerful 486 and special low-voltage versions of the 386, which command higher prices than Advanced Micro's chips.


European Chairman Picked By SmithKline Beecham
SmithKline Beecham P.L.C., the British-American pharmaceutical and consumer products company, has named Dr.
Charles Woler chairman of its European pharmaceutical operations, effective June 1.
Dr.
Woler, a 42-year-old French citizen, succeeds Martyn Greenacre, 50, who has announced his intention to go with his family to the United States to pursue other career opportunities.
Mr.
Greenacre has been with the company for 19 years and was appointed chairman of SB Pharmaceuticals' operations in Europe in July 1989.


Yeltsin Rebukes Ukraine Over Fleet
The Russian President, Boris N. Yeltsin, in a sharp rebuke to competing claims by Ukraine, moved today to put the Black Sea Fleet under Russia's jurisdiction, raising the stakes in a game of brinkmanship now being played out by the two most powerful states to emerge from the former Soviet Union.
Mr.
Yeltsin's decree came as a response to a move on Monday by the Ukrainian President, Leonid M. Kravchuk, asserting Ukraine's legal authority over military forces on its territory, including ships from the Black Sea Fleet based in the Crimean port of Sevastopol.


Shades of the Mood Ring: Tanning Badge
Badges that measure doses of sunlight have been developed by a San Diego company for people worried about the thinning ozone layer and the effects of ultraviolet rays on the skin.
The badges are similar in concept to the ones worn by X-ray technicians to measure cumulative doses of radiation.
Called Sun Alert, each badge consists of a plastic circle about an inch in diameter with an adhesive backing that adheres to clothing or skin.


Accounts
*
USAir, Arlington, Va., to Earle Palmer Brown Advertising, Bethesda, Md., for its new USAir Shuttle, formerly the Trump Shuttle.
Billings were not disclosed.
Earle Palmer Brown also handles USAir's retail account. *
Tootsietoy, Chicago, to Duncan &amp; Partners, Chicago, for the toy manufacturer's product lines, previously handled by the Zak Agency, New York.
Duncan was chosen over Mitchner, Ross, Kahn, Chicago, in a review.
Billings were not disclosed.
A campaign is expected in the fall. *
Janovic Plaza Inc. and Janovic Paint House Inc., Long Island City, Queens, to Quint &amp; Quint Advertising Inc., New York, for the home decorating retail chains' accounts.
Billings were not disclosed.


Congressional Remapping Upheld by Supreme Court
The New Jersey Supreme Court today upheld a Congressional redistricting plan that was approved nearly two weeks ago by a bipartisan commission.
The unanimous decision by the five-judge court removed a potential roadblock to New Jersey's June 2 primary, for which the filing deadline is Thursday.


Personal Health
THE only good news dieters seem to hear these days comes from commercials and advertisements.
Tommy Lasorda testimonials notwithstanding, a national panel last week confirmed that more than 90 percent of dieters fail to keep the pounds off permanently.
In fact, whether they have shed 15 pounds or 50, most regain nearly all they have lost within a year.
The federally sponsored panel, which issued a consensus report based on two days of scientific presentations from the nation's leading obesity specialists, found little or no evidence to support the claims of commercial programs and products that promote weight loss, at least claims about long-term results.


Showalter Gives Short Notice, but Yanks Deliver
The season opener game was an hour away and Buck Showalter still did not have a Yankee lineup.
Was the rookie manager kidding himself?
Roger Clemens would soon be pitching for Boston, so this was no joke.
Decisions had to be made.
Showalter made them when he was ready.
He waited for updated reports on two injured players, then cobbled together a lineup that rapped Clemens for three runs in the sixth inning to thrust the Yankees to a 4-3 victory over the Red Sox at Yankee Stadium.


What's Right With Brown's Proposed Flat Tax
To the Editor:
"Mr. Brown's Flat Tax: Tilted" (editorial, March 27) is itself tilted.
As a practicing certified public accountant in New York more than 35 years, I have long been in favor of a flat tax.
We accountants have much better things to do than continue to account for the ploys of politicians who change the tax code for their constituents' special interests; for the unions, the Government employees and all the rest who would derive advantage from loopholes.
The Robert Hall-Alvin Rabushka plan you favor is a poor solution.
Once you start to have exemptions, credits and progressive rates, you again start the ball rolling for complexity and change.
I find that taxpayers, generally, would much prefer to know there is one set rate with an unchangeable code to rely upon, rather than a constantly changing code, continually amended.


First Flordia Banks reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


BRIEFS
*
Air Methods Corp., Denver, said its shareholders had approved a 1-for-6 reverse split of the company's common stock. *
All Nippon Airways, Tokyo, started a Tokyo-Moscow-Paris route.


Review/Film; They Sing, They Dance, They Go on Strike
The premise for "Newsies," an elaborate Disney live-action musical about the New York newsboys' strike of 1899, never sounded all that promising in the first place.
But this film's real trouble lies in its joyless, pointless execution.
As directed by Kenny Ortega, the choreographer whose credits include many stage acts and rock videos as well as the film "Dirty Dancing," "Newsies" is a long, halfhearted romp through what is made to seem a not terribly compelling chapter in New York City's history.
The story remains tedious even though Joseph Pulitzer, William Randolph Hearst and Theodore Roosevelt are all briefly on hand to give it color.
A score featuring music by Alan Menken and lyrics by Jack Feldman provides the film's only bright spots, but even these are bungled.
Many of the musical numbers are staged so strangely that the characters, when they begin singing, appear to have taken leave of their senses.
Christian Bale, as the film's hero who dreams of escaping to the Southwest, is made to sing "Santa Fe" while ambling through a dusty, too-picturesque New York street at night.
The staging goes well beyond run-of-the-mill fantasy when it sends him leaping onto a horse and frolicking on a hay wagon.


Quotation of the Day
"General Motors is such a symbol because of its size and because it seemed as tough a place to change as you could find in corporate America. The board really exercised dominion over the company. G.M. will not be the same again." -- ROBERT A.G.
MONKS, an adviser to large institutional shareholders.  [ D19:1 ]


AEL Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


I.B.M. in Time Issue
The International Business Machines Corporation and Time magazine said today that the computer maker will be the exclusive advertiser for a special Time issue called "The Millennium," due this fall.
The issue will focus on future prospects in such fields as politics, technology and education, the companies said.
Time, owned by Time Warner Inc., said the special issue could serve as the cornerstone of a larger marketing partnership between the companies.


Aegon Insurance Group reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Rubber Stamp Is Tossed Aside By G.M. Board
The General Motors Corporation -- long known as one of America's most smug and insular companies -- has abandoned its past in placing an outside board member in charge of a top board committee to monitor more closely G.M.'s management.
John G. Smale, the 64-year-old former chairman of the Procter &amp; Gamble Company and a marketing man who flattened that company's bureaucracy, led the drive by G.M.'s outside directors to pursue, as the board said, "more aggressive management" in trimming costs, winnowing bureaucracy and possibly closing more plants.


Clemency for Army Doctor Who Refused War Service
An Army Reserve doctor who was convicted of desertion for refusing to serve in the Persian Gulf war has been granted clemency and released from a military prison after serving about eight months of her original 30-month sentence.
The doctor, Yolanda Huet-Vaughn, a former captain who is married with three children, was convicted in August by a military court-martial.
In December, her 30-month sentence was reduced to 15 months.
She was released in a surprise move on Monday from the United States Disciplinary Barracks at Fort Leavenworth, Kan.


Corrections
A picture last Friday with a chart detailing the verdicts in the trial of John Gotti and Frank Locascio was published in error.
The picture showed John D'Amico, who has been identified by Federal prosecutors as a capo, or captain, in the Gambino crime family, not Mr.
Locascio.


Trade Talks Reopened Secretly Over Key Issue
The United States and the European Community have secretly reopened negotiations on a cornerstone of last week's agreement to limit Government subsidies to commercial aircraft manufacturers, American and European officials said today.
Trade officials continued to press their governments publicly today to approve the agreement, and insisted that the dispute could be resolved quickly and quietly.
But in private, they are arguing heatedly over how much money governments can channel to aircraft makers through military contracts and other deals.
Such contracts give the manufacturers a leg up on navigational gear and other components that can be used in commercial as well as military aircraft.
Pointing Fingers


Reviews/Fashion; A Medley by Pomodoro
YOU never know what to expect from Carmelo Pomodoro.
Because he's not afraid to experiment, his collections sometimes go off the track.
But this time he was right on.
He picked up on all the important fall trends, giving each one a personal twist.
He concentrated on a long, lean look in men's-wear flannel, velvet, leather and stretch wool.
Berets and authentic riding boots lent a racy air to calf-length skirts with high slits in back, maxi-coats over city shorts, sleek black leather jackets and jeans, poor-boy sweaters and velvet pants.


Economic Scene; Choreographing The Deficit Dance
EVERYBODY knows that a bigger budget deficit would be bad news.
Everybody, that is, except the 100 heavyweight economists (including six Nobel winners) who last week urged Washington to douse the recession with some old-fashioned Keynesian pump-priming.
And Robert D. Reischauer, the widely respected director of the Congressional Budget Office, who last week warned that penny pinching on the deposit-insurance bailout would increase its ultimate cost while adding only cosmetic improvements in deficit finance.


This Long Island Industry Is Beating the Recession; Demand Remains Strong for Alarms and Security Systems to Keep Burglars Away
Don't get jumpy if you think that something is watching you.
Lots of things are.


Market Place; Wang Strives To Get on Feet
WALL STREET analysts who follow Wang Laboratories Inc. are craving information about the battered minicomputer company, which has spent the last three years trying to redirect itself.
Richard W. Miller, a former General Electric executive who in 1989 was brought in to Lowell headquarters to save the company from drowning in red ink, says he has simply been too busy to talk to financial analysts.
He said he planned to rekindle those relationships in the next six months.


American Air Expected to Revise Fares
American Airlines is expected to announce a large fare reduction in some of its major markets and hubs in the next few days, but industry executives said that the carrier has been raising fares in hundreds of smaller markets in the last three days, in some cases substantially.
An industry executive who did not want to be identified said that American's strategy appeared to be to soften the impact of the fare reductions in the big markets by raising fares in smaller cities.


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR Diary:
During a recent visit to my daughter, Rebecca, at her apartment in the East 80's, I was unsettled to hear the piercing sound of a fire alarm, signaling a blaze in another apartment in the building.
A suburbanite myself, I was impressed at how relaxed the building's residents were as they calmly descended the 20-odd flights of stairs and coolly congregated in the lobby while firefighters dashed about.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
Advanced Technology Laboratories, a manufacturer and distributor of ultrasound systems and a unit of Westmark International Inc., named David M. Perozek president. *
Chem Design Corp., Fitchburg, Mass., which develops, manufactures and sells chemicals, appointed Michael J. O'Donnell vice president and chief financial officer.


Theater in Review
Gunmetal Blues
Theater Off Park 224 Waverly Place Manhattan Through May 10
Book by Scott Wentworth; music and lyrics by Craig Bohmler and Marion Adler; directed by Davis Hall; scenery and costumes by Eduardo Sicangco; lighting by Scott Zielinski; production stage manager, Lisa Ledwich; musical direction, arrangements and orchestrations by Mr.
Bohmler.
Presented by AMAS Musical Theater, Rosetta LeNoire, founder and artistic director; William Michael Maher, producing director.
WITH: Daniel Marcus, Michael Knowles, Marion Adler and Scott Wentworth.
"She had hair the color of moonlight on topaz and a mouth that would have sent Shakespeare thumbing through a thesaurus," muses Sam Galahad (Scott Wentworth), a Sam Spade-like private eye, about a blonde who broke his heart.
The central character in "Gunmetal Blues," a musical sendup of film noir presented by AMAS Musical Theater, Sam does a number of amusing things, including furiously slapping his trench coat in time to a lovelorn ballad.


Imatron Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Tough Sell For Late News Shows
THE Big Three television networks have started staying up late.
They are offering viewers overnight newscasts that significantly expand weeknight broadcasting hours, but the response from advertisers and their agencies has so far been more yawns than yeas.
Last week, CBS became the third of the trio to present such a show when it introduced "Up to the Minute." ABC introduced "World News Now" in January, two months after NBC began telecasting "Nightside." The programs are televised between 2 A.M. and 6 A.M., depending on when they are scheduled by local stations.


Foster Wheeler Pact
Foster Wheeler Power Systems Inc. unit said today that it had been chosen by the Reading Energy Company to help develop a $280 million waste-to-energy project in Robbins, Ill., that will process about 60 percent of the household trash from Chicago's south suburbs.


Corrections
An obituary yesterday about the actress and singer Molly Picon misstated the publication date of her autobiography, "Molly!" It was 1980.


What's Right With Brown's Proposed Flat Tax; Increase Savings
To the Editor:
The tax law changes that the Bush Administration and the Democrats propose address short-term voter appeal.
The tax packages do not focus on a way to increase savings, which will allow for long-term capital investment in production and for rebuilding infrastructure.
Inflation devalues our savings, and then savings are taxed as income.
A deduction should be allowed for the yearly average rate of inflation from our gross earned income.
And it is time for our elected representatives to remove the taxes on income derived from savings accounts.
This is seed money for investment in a more productive future.


A Stadium Charged With Shared History
If the newest renditions of the Boston Red Sox and the New York Yankees needed reminding, the sign that hung above the bleachers in right field at Yankee Stadium said it all yesterday afternoon.
Simple in presentation, admirable for the economy of effort, all that was printed on a white sheet above the frenetic throngs on a perfectly sunny opening day was this: "1918."


Transit Workers Stage Protest Rally


Northrop Backs Off On Offer for LTV Unit
The Northrop Corporation indicated late today that it would not join the bidding for the aerospace and missile business of the LTV Corporation before final offers are due on Wednesday because a Defense Department review of the deal would not be completed in time.
A Northrop spokesman, Tony Cantafio, said LTV's aircraft-assembly operations "would fit" with Northrop's plans to expand that part of its business and that Northrop had studied participating in a bid by the Carlyle Group.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Apr. 3
Mar. 27
Apr. 5
1992
1992
1991
Gasoline production, daily
6.8
6.8
6.7
Distillate production, daily
2.9
2.8
2.8
Gasoline stocks
219.2
222.0
206.5
Distillate stocks
93.4
97.8
97.1
Crude imports, daily
5.3
5.1
5.0
Product imports, daily
1.7
2.1
2.1
Crude stocks
337.4
342.6
336.4
Crude production, daily
7.3
7.3
7.5
Refinery utilization (%)
86.8
84.4
84.0
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Keeping Politics and Intelligence Separate
To the Editor:
"C.I.A., Word and Deed -- Still Slanted" (editorial, April 2) states that "Mr. Gates is entitled to put the best spin he can on intelligence assessments to prop up Administration policy."
I am not so "entitled." My responsibility, clearly and unequivocally, is to provide intelligence assessments that are as honest and objective as I and the intelligence community analysts can make them.
There can be no compromise on this point.


Dynamic Classics Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Wine Talk
SOUTH AFRICAN wine makers bristle at the suggestion that they are third-world producers.
They point out that they were making wine a century before the first fumbling efforts of the American colonists to grow European grapes and that they had a 200-year head start on such upstarts as Chile, Argentina and Australia.
The records are vague, but it appears that red and white table wines were produced from grapes grown around the Cape of Good Hope in the middle of the 17th century.
Huguenot settlers planted pontac, a grape that has all but disappeared from South African vineyards, and may have been what we know as petit verdot.
Steen, which is the local name for chenin blanc, was also planted and still thrives all over the western Cape.
Constantia, one of the world's best-known wines in the 18th and early 19th century, seems to have been made from muscat de frontignan grapes and may have been fortified for the long voyage to Europe.


Lawyers Say U.S. Has Lost Haitian Refugee Files
Lawyers representing Haitian refugees held at the United States Navy base at Guantanamo, Cuba, have told a Federal judge that more than 50 Haitians who qualified to apply for asylum may have been returned to Haiti mistakenly, and that the records of at least 2,500 refugees had been lost through computer errors or poor record-keeping.
A Congressional report, to be made public Thursday, is expected to include similar findings.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Primaries; CLINTON IS VICTOR IN NEW YORK WITH 41% OF DEMOCRATIC VOTE; TSONGAS EDGES BROWN FOR 2D
Gov.
Bill Clinton won a bitterly contested Democratic primary in New York yesterday, but more than half of the vote went to Paul E. Tsongas's campaign from the sidelines and Edmund G. Brown Jr.'s anti-establishment crusade.
Mr.
Clinton, battling to restore his status as the presumptive nominee, also prevailed yesterday in the Kansas primary and, according to surveys of voters leaving the polls, in the Wisconsin primary.


Bronco Lineman Suffers Heart Attack
Offensive lineman ELBERT CRAWFORD was hospitalized after suffering a heart attack yesterday while working out with the Denver Broncos, the club announced.


Gottschalks Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 1


Big Names Abound on Jazz Festival Bill
Dizzy Gillespie, McCoy Tyner, Elvin Jones, Tito Puente, David Murray, Illinois Jacquet, Mel Torme, Charlie Haden, Lionel Hampton, Nina Simone, B. B. King and Ray Charles are among the artists who will perform in the JVC Jazz Festival, from June 19 through 27 on stages around the city, as well as in Stanhope, N.J., and Saratoga Springs, N.Y.
There will be tributes to Dizzy Gillespie, Stan Getz, Lionel Hampton, Clifford Brown, Buck Clayton and John Coltrane, and appearances by several big bands, including Charlie Haden's Liberation Music Orchestra and Illinois Jacquet's group.
Gerry Mulligan will bring together a 10-member ensemble to play arrangements from Miles Davis's landmark "Birth of the Cool" recording.


Victory by New Zealand Ends Nippon's Cup Bid
It has been nearly five years since Chris Dickson joined the Nippon team as skipper of Japan's first-time America's Cup effort.
But now the campaign had come down to a match race today against the yacht from New Zealand.
Nippon asked for a delay to fix a broken backstay block, the first sign that things weren't going right.
But the team rallied, leading New Zealand up the first leg and around the mark by 17 seconds.
By the third mark, however, the joy ride was over.
New Zealand passed Nippon and led all the way to the finish in a 10-to-12-knot breeze.


The Pulitzer Prizes


Peru Chief Orders New Mass Arrests
Following up his seizure of broad powers, President Alberto K. Fujimori of Peru moved swiftly today, ordering the roundup of more politicians and labor leaders and sending troops to prisons where terrorist suspects are confined.
He also signed sweeping decrees to give the Government of National Reconstruction he had proclaimed a semblance of a legal framework.
But in an effort to quiet growing international protests over what many here were calling a civilian-military coup, Mr.
Fujimori ordered the withdrawal of military and police forces from television, radio and newspaper offices.
They were sent there on Monday when Mr.
Fujimori, with the consent of the armed forces, assumed virtual dictatorial powers.


Back Bay Restaurant reports earnings for Qtr to March 29


BanPonce Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Clinton; Buoyed by a New York Victory, Clinton Calls It the Turning Point
When Gov.
Bill Clinton waded into the jubilant crowd at his victory party last night, 100 video screens flashed behind him and the speakers at the Ritz pounded with the strains of Steve Winwood's rock hit "Roll With It Baby."
After weeks of New York primary campaigning that the candidate said felt "like a ride on the Coney Island Cyclone," Mr.
Clinton is ready to be on a roll.


Review/Theater: The End of the Day; Baitz's Mockery of an Age of Money
As befits a play whose opening night is an election night, Jon Robin Baitz's new comedy, "The End of the Day," begins with a man rehearsing the Pledge of Allegiance.
As befits a play about the state of the nation, not to mention civilization, in the dispiriting year of 1992, the man mangles the pledge's words.
Not that he cares.
The man in question, an English-born psychiatrist named Graydon Massey, would rather stare narcissistically at himself in the mirror, puff on a cigar and try on different ties.
Though he is expected to give a patriotic speech at the party celebrating his naturalization as an American citizen, he is in Malibu, after all.
At the end of the day, what will really matter to his well-wishers: his choice of words or his choice of Armani?
Mr.
Baitz's answer to that question is not remotely in doubt.
"The End of the Day" offers a bleak yet hilarious portrait of a present-day world in which only money talks: in politics, business, medicine, culture and the privacy of one's own home.
What is also not in doubt is Mr.
Baitz's extraordinary talent.
At the age of 30, this playwright now has two provocative, compulsively watchable plays running in New York City, and this one, like its predecessor, "The Substance of Fire," is marked both by the structural gropings of a fledgling craftsman and the aching articulation, scathing wit and deep convictions of a mature artist with a complete vision.
"The End of the Day" also shares its predecessor's good fortune in receiving a wonderful production at Playwrights Horizons.
Among other achievements, the director, Mark Lamos, has coaxed Roger Rees back to the New York stage for the first time since "Nicholas Nickleby" to give a performance that was worth the wait.


Jurors in Noriega's Trial Say They're Badly Split
The jurors in the Federal trial of Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega told the judge today that serious differences had developed among them in three days of deliberations, and he responded to their request for guidance by telling them that a mistrial on some counts was an option.
That exchange between the jurors and Judge William M. Hoeveler came after the jury's foreman, Lester C. Spencer, sent a note asking the judge to answer two questions.


Food Notes
Passover Pricing
Along with setting aside shelves for boxes of matzoh and jars of gefilte fish, grocers have also been known to jack up prices for Passover.
Starting last year, the New York City Department of Consumer Affairs has waged a campaign to prevent such price gouging by wholesalers and retailers.


Update on Frank McGuire's Status
FRANK McGUIRE, a Hall of Fame coach, was in serious but stable condition yesterday at Baptist Medical Center but physicians said he faces intense physical therapy and possibly some paralysis because of a stroke.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: On the Sidelines; Tsongas Says Vote Reveals a Powerful Force
Former Senator Paul E. Tsongas of Massachusetts said tonight that his strong showing in today's New York primary, in which he did not campaign but finished second, represented power that the Democratic Party -- and particularly Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas -- would have to deal with. 'There's Power There'
On March 19, Mr.
Tsongas suspended his bid for the party's Presidential nomination after losing a series of primaries to Mr.
Clinton.
Tonight he refused to say whether his showing today would lead him to re-enter the race.


One Fine Half Gives Duke 2d in a Row
Of all the zany chants and biting remarks the devoted young followers of the Duke University basketball team had conceived through the years, there was nothing quite like the claim they could stake here late Monday night, filling the Metrodome with a joyous noise.
"Deja vu . . . deja vu . . . deja vu . . . deja vu."


Standard Microsystems Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Iowa City Journal; Town Faces Its Ghosts Without Anger
She cannot rage against the student who senselessly shot her and five other people at the University of Iowa last November because she cannot fill her lungs with enough air to scream.
But in a voice barely above a whisper, Miya Rodolfo-Sioson says she would not scream even if she could.


China Spites the Senate
As a sovereign country, China is free to decide which foreigners it will admit, and when.
But it foolishly insults the United States Senate and the American people by withholding visas from two leading Senators who hoped to make a fact-finding trip this month to Tibet.
The Senators might help Beijing appreciate its mistake -- by proceeding with their fact-finding from Washington.
Claiborne Pell, who heads the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, and David Boren, chairman of the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, were apparently barred because they have tried to attach human rights conditions to Beijing's "most-favored-nation" trade status.
Senator Pell has also criticized China's policies in Tibet.


Pen Software By Microsoft
The Microsoft Corporation said today that its pen-based operating system software, Microsoft Windows for Pen Computing, was available.
Also known as Windows for Pens, Microsoft's product was introduced before that of the Go Corporation, which will announce the availability of its rival software, Penpoint, on April 16.
"To make personal computing even more personal and broadly accessible, the interaction between the individual and the computer must become less obtrusive and more natural," Mike Maples, Microsoft's executive vice president for the worldwide products group, said in a statement.


Argentina Reaches Pact To Cut Debt
Argentina and its foreign bank lenders agreed early yesterday on a plan in which the banks will forgive about $8 billion of the $23 billion they are owed and Argentina will repay its past-due interest and begin repayment of its remaining debt.
The agreement, reached at 5 A.M. at a hotel in Santo Domingo, in the Dominican Republic, where bankers were attending a meeting of the Inter-American Development Bank, comes nearly 10 years after a default on repayment of bank loans by Mexico that was followed by a series of defaults by other third world countries with heavy debts from the 1970's.


Robert A. Martinez, Professor, 49
Dr.
Robert Anthony Martinez, an associate professor of black and Hispanic studies at Baruch College, the City University of New York, died on Friday at New York University Medical Center.
He was 49 years old and lived in Brooklyn.
A statement from Baruch said his death was AIDS related.


CHRONICLE
And what was HOWARD GOLDEN, Brooklyn Borough President, doing on New York's Democratic Primary Day?
He was in Beverly Hills, Calif., anointing MARTIN LANDAU and BRENDA VACCARO as the King and Queen of Brooklyn.
They will be crowned at the 10th annual Welcome Back to Brooklyn festival on June 14. (Mr. Golden did vote, by the way -- by absentee ballot.)
The winners were announced at the Beverly Hills City Hall by Mr.
Golden and ROBERT CATELL, the president of Brooklyn Union Gas Company, sponsor of the festival, because that is where many stars live, Mr.
Golden said.
But he added that winners must have roots in Brooklyn.


Through the Faces of Babes, a Celebration of Life
PUT the babies right over your shoulders so we can see their faces," Tamar Rogoff, choreographer, instructed the dancers.
As the music of Tchaikovsky filled the East Village rehearsal space, a half-dozen parents obeyed.
Soon, they would be doing all manner of other things with the infants, most about 6 months old.
Kissing them, rocking them, tossing them high in the air.


Judge Denies Retrial Bid By Helmsley
A Federal judge yesterday denied Leona Helmsley's request for a new trial and ordered her to begin serving her four-year prison sentence on April 15.
The ruling by Judge Thomas P. Griesa of Federal District Court in Manhattan appeared to destroy the 71-year-old defendant's last chance to escape beginning a prison sentence, which coincides with the income tax filing deadline, for her 1989 tax fraud conviction.


Kleinert's Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Book Notes
A Triple Serialization
In an unusual promotion for a book, the Time magazine empire is close to concluding a deal to carry excerpts from the Sam Walton autobiography in three of its magazines: Time, Fortune and Money.


Croat Towns Bombed in Bosnia and Herzegovina
The Serbian-led Yugoslav Army ordered air strikes today on predominantly Croat-populated towns only hours before the United States recognized Bosnia and Herzegovina as an independent state.
According to a Yugoslav Army spokesman, the pre-dawn air attacks on the towns of Siroki Brijeg and Citluk in western Herzegovina were ordered in retaliation for an all-night assault by Croatian militiamen on Serbian forces at Mostar Airport.


Suffolk Takes Step Toward Constructing Stadium
The Suffolk County Legislature took the first step today toward construction of a professional sports stadium, with hopes of attracting a professional baseball team to Long Island.
The legislators, by a vote of 14 to 3, adopted a proposal for a $45,000 feasibility study to assess the potential market and solicit teams in both the major and minor leagues.


CHINA OFFERS PEEK AT FAMED PRISONER
The Government said today that Wei Jingsheng, China's most famous political prisoner, is living in a private cell at a prison farm and that he refuses to admit that he has done anything wrong.
The disclosures today marked the first time that the Government has provided extensive details of the imprisonment of Mr.
Wei, a 42-year-old essayist who has just begun the 14th year of a 15-year sentence.


Howard S. McMorris, A Retired Lawyer, 81
Howard S. McMorris, a retired New York lawyer, died on Sunday at the Princeton Medical Center in Princeton, N.J.
He was 81 years old and lived in Princeton.
He died after a brief illness, his family said.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-16  STRUGGLE FOR IDEALS IN EAST
The street names may have changed and the May Day parades become history, but the former Soviet satellite nations are struggling to root out deeper psychological legacies.
A revolution of the mind is unfolding, and this ferment may not end until the next generation comes of age.
A1  YELTSIN DEFENDS HIS WORK
President Yeltsin of Russia vigorously defended his Government and economic plans before a skeptical Congress of People's Deputies.
He warned the lawmakers not to short-circuit Russia's transformation by diluting his power.
A3  RUSSIA MOVES FOR BLACK SEA FLEET
Yeltsin moved to put the Black Sea fleet under total Russian control, getting closer to a confrontation with Ukraine.
A3  PERUVIAN ACTS ON CONTROLS
President Fujimori moved swiftly to consolidate power in his new, military-backed Government, rounding up opposition and union leaders and carrying out broad decrees to legitimize the changes.
A12  A U.S.
MISTAKE IN HAITI?
Lawyers representing Haitian refugees held at the United States Navy base at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, have told Federal judges that more than 50 Haitians who qualified for asylum may have been returned to Haiti by mistake.
A10  U.S.
RECOGNIZES NEW LANDS
The United States, which had been holding out for a unified Yugoslavia, recognized the independence of Croatia, Slovenia, and Bosnia and Herzegovina, and said it would immediately establish diplomatic ties.
A10
The Yugoslav Army admitted killing 7 in air strikes in Bosnia.
A10  ARAFAT'S PLANE REPORTED MISSING
A plane carrying Yasir Arafat, the Palestine Liberation Organization chairman, has disappeared over the Libyan desert, P.L.O. and civil aviation officials said.
A1  CANDIDATES VIE IN IRAN
Throughout Iran, just over 2,000 candidates are struggling for recognition in campaigns for election on Friday to 270 seats in Parliament.
Factions have stepped up their attacks against opponents -- and against the United States.
A11  IRAQ AGREES TO DESTROY ARMS
Iraq told United Nations inspectors it would begin on Wednesday to destroy what the world organization says is the technical heart of its nuclear weapons program.
A11
Chiphou Journal: Cambodian village recalls journalists' deaths.
A4  How goes the Polish Army?
Some politicians are concerned.
A16  National A17-22, B6  VICTORY FOR CLINTON
Governor Clinton won the bitterly contested Democratic Presidential primary in New York, and surveys of voters leaving the polls in Wisconsin and Kansas also showed the Arkansan prevailing.
A1  A MURKY MESSAGE
News analysis: Although winning tidily enough in New York, Governor Clinton failed to pull free of his competition.
A1
Clinton said the results proved the strength of his message.  A21
New York voters delivered a pointed message to local leaders.  A21
New York's Democrats chose "all of the above." A21  G.O.P. MENDING FENCES WITH JEWS
Courting Jewish voters at the annual meeting of the leading pro-Israel lobby, Republicans seem as intent on gaining support for future elections as on repairing President Bush's immediate problems with American Jews for the 1992 campaign.
A19
A group seeking greater Republican diversity won a rights suit.
A19  THE SHAKE-UP AT G.M.
General Motors, long one of America's most insular companies, abandoned its past this week when an outside board member, John G. Smale, was placed in charge of a top board committee to more closely monitor management.
The board, long a docile rubber stamp for management, had not exercised its powers so forcefully since the early days of the auto industry.
A1  CATERPILLAR STRIKERS GAMBLE
For the 12,600 workers striking the world's largest maker of construction machinery, the walkout has suddenly become an anguishing gamble that may mean the loss of their jobs forever.
A18  PIPELINE BLAST IN TEXAS
An explosion of liquefied petroleum gas rattled buildings 70 miles away, killed one person and injured at least 13.
A17  NORIEGA JURORS DIVIDED
The jurors deliberating the fate of the deposed ruler of Panama told the judge that serious differences had developed among them.
A17  A NEIGHBORHOOD SHAKEN
The Grays Ferry section of South Philadelphia is a neighborhood of tidy two-story row houses with vinyl siding and metal awnings.
But the steel grates on the windows and the barbed-wire fencing around the high school were no defense against a sex scandal that has touched the neighborhood's teen-age boys.
A18  Iowa City Journal: Ten minutes of horror, and the aftermath.
A17  A House bank investigator hinted at an aggressive inquiry.
A22  Education Page A23  How bad are American schools?
Researchers ignite a new debate.
People leaving the military find a logical new career in teaching.
Metropolitan Digest, B1  Business Digest, D1 The Living Section C1-14  The Wine Regions -- South Africa: History of wine emerges.C1  At Lunch With: Markey Mark.
C1  Regional tastes of Italy enrich the Easter table.
C1  As many versions of matzoh balls as sections of U.S.
C1 Health Page C15  Sports B7-12  Baseball: Yankees win opener.B7  Dykstra breaks his wrist.
B8  Cardinals top Mets, 9-2.
B9  Ex-Mets look past the past.
B9  Column: The ultimate Yankee still shows class.
B7  Smith on Baseball.
B9  Araton on Pro Basketball.
B10  Hockey: N.H.L. owners' final offer is rejected.
B7  Obituaries D22  Arts/Entertainment C16-24  Theater: "The End of the Day," by Jon Robin Baitz.
C17  In Review C21  Film: "Newsies." C17  "Mindwalk." C22  Editorials/Op-Ed A24-25  Editorials.
A24  The man with the ball.
Entrapment out of control.
China spites the Senate.
Robert B. Semple: Stadiums.
Letters A24  Anna Quindlen: And now, pragmatism.
A25  Volodymyr Lanovoy: Come to Kiev.
Listen to Ukraine.A25  Stephen G. Trujillo: Peru's Maoist drug dealers.
A25


What's Right With Brown's Proposed Flat Tax; Others Pay Much More
To the Editor:
In all the talk about runaway Federal Government deficits, almost no one mentions that we Americans pay a much smaller percent of our income as taxes than other major industrial nations.
And much of what we pay to Washington goes to the Pentagon for imaginary future wars and an ever-higher bill for interest on past borrowing.
Consequently, the percent of our income that goes to essentials in Government services is far to low, and we borrow huge sums to cover less than adequate performance of these services.
Instead of telling the American people that we have lived far too long too high off the hog -- though not with equitable sharing -- our politicians peddle the idea that we are spending too much on welfare, foreign aid, teacher salaries.
Anyone who talks about restoring taxes on the wealthy to a higher and fairer level is attacked as talking class warfare.
You cannot even get Wall Street to agree to pay a small transfer tax on stocks, as it did years ago, to bolster New York City, while bridges rust and libraries close.


Bank Yields Are Mixed Once Again
Yields on bank money market accounts and certificates of deposit were mixed for the week ended yesterday, according to The Bank Rate Monitor.
It was the third straight week of mixed results.
"With the demand for loans down at banks, there is no pressing need to pull in more cash," said Robert K. Heady, publisher of The Monitor.
"In fact there is a bountiful amount of money, and the lending institutions are awash with cash."


Nets Come Up Short in Playoff Battle
With 40 percent of their starting lineup either out or hurting, the Nets tonight did battle with Atlanta, their chief competition for the eighth and final playoff spot in the Eastern Conference.
When the smoke cleared, the Nets had taken a step back with a 104-97 defeat, and the Hawks had leap-frogged a half game over them.
Chris Morris was home with a 103-degree temperature.
The ailing Derrick Coleman showed up and even matched Mookie Blaylock's team high of 16 points, while also grabbing 5 rebounds in 24 minutes.
But Coleman had to sit down for the entire fourth quarter after the boil on his left groin became too painful for him to play.


Variations on Murder and the Insanity Plea
If Jeffrey L. Dahmer, the Milwaukee man who killed and cooked youths of his acquaintance, is sane, as a jury has ruled, then who is insane?
That question seems to have inspired "Murder or Madness," tonight's offering from "48 Hours," at 10 on CBS.
No definitive answer is forthcoming, but several case histories draw attention to the elements that go into the legal determination of whether a murderer or someone who has attempted murder knew right from wrong.
Erin Moriarty reports on a North Carolina man who was judged not guilty by reason of insanity in 1989 for indulging in a shooting spree that left four people dead and nine others injured.
He said he was driven to the act by voices from God.
Now expressing repentance, he is seeking release from a psychiatric hospital.


INSIDE
U.S. Now Recognizes 3 Ex-Yugoslav States
The United States, which held out for a unified Yugoslavia, said it was recognizing the independence of three former republics.
It will move immediately to establish diplomatic relations with Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia and Slovenia.
Page A10.
Peruvian Establishes Control
Peru's President ordered the roundup of opponents and signed sweeping decrees to give his Government a legal framework.
Page A12.


Man Charged in Crown Heights Turmoil
A 28-year-old Brooklyn man was charged yesterday with first-degree riot in a disturbance that led to the fatal stabbing of a Hasidic Jew in Crown Heights on Aug. 19, 1991, after a black child was killed by a car driven by another Hasidic man.
The arrest and arraignment of the man, Robert Wesley, was announced by the Brooklyn District Attorney, Charles J. Hynes, who said Mr.
Wesley had been on parole for a 1986 robbery at the time of the 1991 incident.


AT LUNCH WITH: Marky Mark; The High Priest Of Hot and Now
MARKY MARK makes an impression on women.
Last Wednesday afternoon, four Canadian teen-agers were lying in sleeping bags, camping out under the marquee of the Academy Theater on West 43d Street in Manhattan, positioning themselves to get the best spot at his concert the next night.
It's a pay-per-view television event, a rap concert that will be shown every Thursday this month, and the fans want their devotion beamed nationwide.
"We drove 12 hours to see him!" said 17-year-old Andrea Walton.
"He's gorgeous, and he has an awesome body! We love his music, too!"


New York State Senate Sabotages Action on Air Pollution
To the Editor:
"On the same day that a state board gave final approval to a regulation placing strict new limits on motor vehicle emissions," you report from Albany on March 24, "the State Senate passed legislation that would delay putting the rules into effect." Thus, New York's most important air pollution strategy in years is in jeopardy, thanks to misguided panic in the State Senate.
The program, advanced under Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's leadership by the Department of Environment Conservation, would apply California's tough new emission standards to motor vehicles sold in this state beginning in 1995.
By 2003, 10 percent of new cars would have to be certified as zero-emission vehicles (probably electric) under the technology-forcing rules.


Sports of The Times; The Ultimate Yankee Still Shows Class
FOR the Yankee opener at Yankee Stadium, the ultimate Yankee would soon be throwing out the ceremonial first ball.
And now, in the runway behind the dugout, silver-haired Joe DiMaggio was wearing a blue blazer with a red-and-blue figured tie and a white shirt, dark gray slacks and black winged-tip shoes.
At age 77, he projected class and dignity, qualities that the Yankees and all of baseball haven't always projected lately.
"I haven't done this," he said, "since the 1981 World Series."


What's Right With Brown's Proposed Flat Tax; Include a Credit
To the Editor:
The Hall-Rabushka flat tax plan (editorial, March 27) can use some more time for thinking.
Personal exemptions may add some progressivity, but can do little to protect the poor.
The value of any exemption declines as income falls below the taxable threshold.
A 20 percent tax with a $5,000 exemption would net taxpayers a $1,000 savings.
But for a $3,000 earner, $2,000 of the exemption is wasted.
Replace the exemption with a $1,000 refundable tax credit, and the outcome changes significantly.
Taxpayers at the $5,000 margin see no difference; however, the $3,000 earner's income rises by $400.


3 Ex-Mets Look Past the Past
It just happened that the Mets were on television, live and in color from St.
Louis.
The volume was low, but who needed it?
Gregg Jefferies knew the players.
He knew the score.
He had spent more than three seasons in New York and endured the hot lights that go with the job, but now he was watching from a distance.


Rehabilitation of Williamsburg Bridge Cables Begins


ICN Pharmaceuticals Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Corrections
An article yesterday about resume services misstated the name of the company where Peter Newfield, a resume writer in Westchester County, is a managing partner.
It is Career Resumes.


Officers Vow to Keep Pressure on Mob After Gambino Trial
John Gotti's conviction on murder and racketeering charges in New York has added a touch of drama to the scheduled trial here of seven people linked to the Gambino crime family, but New Jersey's top law-enforcement officials say that even if the second prosecution is successful they will not be able to relax.
Col.
Justin J. Dintino, the Superintendent of the New Jersey State Police, said state and Federal convictions of members of the Gambino and other crime families have put them on the defensive and reduced their effectiveness.
But, he added, "as long as the public supports their chief money-making enterprises, illegal gambling, loan sharking and narcotics, they will remain in business."


With Joe DiMaggio Leaving, It Just Won't Be the Bowery
Fans of banking, as well as of baseball, will soon be asking the plaintive question, "Where have you gone, Joe DiMaggio?"
Later this month, the Bowery Savings Bank, for which the baseball legend has been serving as a spokesman on and off for almost two decades, will take the name of its owner, Home Savings of America.
After Mr.
DiMaggio is featured in advertisements publicizing the change, he will end his association with the bank.


Bridge
Some 70 years ago a perky 12-year-old girl watched her uncle playing whist and announced that she could play better.
She proved it, earned some pocket money and grew up to be one of the greatest female bridge-players of all time.
She was Rixi Markus, who died on Saturday in London at the age of 81 after a remarkable 60-year career.
She made her reputation as the youngest member of an Austrian squad that won three straight international women's team titles from 1935-37.
The last of these was a world championship, the first of four.
In 1938 she fled Austria by train as Hitler's forces entered the country, taking her 8-year-old daughter to London, which became her permanent home.
She soon proved to the British bridge community that was analytically swift, combative and occasionally controversial: She was involved in two bridge-related libel cases, one as a defendant and one as a witness.


Judge Tells U.S. to Make Political Parties Comply With Rights Law
Ruling that the major political parties must comply with a landmark civil rights law, a Federal judge ordered the Government today to insure that the parties do not discriminate in selecting delegates to their national conventions.
The judge, Charles R. Richey of Federal District Court here, said the Civil Rights Act of 1964 covered the delegate-selection process because the major political parties accept large amounts of Federal money to conduct their nominating conventions.
He ordered the Federal Election Commission to move with "all deliberate speed" to issue rules insuring that the parties do not discriminate on the basis of race, color or national origin.


No Costumes And No Sets. Why? No Funds.
The Lar Lubovitch Dance Company, which opened last night for a week at City Center, 131 West 55th Street, has added a slide show to its program.
The projections are not scenes from dance history, sketches for a new work or even snapshots from Mr.
Lubovitch's last vacation.
Instead, they are a gesture of frustration and protest.
The slides accompanying "American Gesture" will show Ann Hould Ward's costume designs for the piece.
Mr.
Lubovitch's company will dance the piece in rehearsal clothes on a bare stage.
For "Waiting for the Sunrise," instead of the costumes designed by Ms.
Ward, Mr.
Lubovitch dressed his dancers in secondhand clothes found in antique stores.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.50
6.50
9.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
6.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.53
3.99
5.66
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.87
3.95
5.61
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.97
4.02
5.69
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.04
7.10
7.90
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.87
7.88
8.20
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.83
8.80
9.26
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.73
6.73
7.27
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Theater in Review
Chekhov Very Funny
Pearl Theater 125 West 22d Street Manhattan Through May 2
Four one-act plays by Anton Chekhov; directed by Shepard Sobel; set design by Robert Joel Schwartz; costumes by Barbara A. Bell; lighting by A. C. Hickox; stage manager, Mary-Susan Gregson.
Presented by the Pearl Theater Company.
CONCERNING THE INJURIOUSNESS OF TOBACCO WITH: Dan Daily.
THE BEAR WITH: Frank Geraci, Robin Leslie Brown and Dan Daily.
THE MARRIAGE PROPOSAL WITH: Frank Geraci, Dan Daily and Robin Leslie Brown.
SWAN SONG WITH: Frank Geraci and Dan Daily.
In the traditional homage to the genius of Chekhov, attention usually centers on the major masterpieces to the neglect of the wonderfully witty short pieces this great Russian writer called his "vaudevilles." The Pearl Theater Company has sought to correct that oversight by staging four one-acts in an evening titled "Chekhov Very Funny."


Reviews/Film; Engaging in Conversation on the Normandy Coast
In Bernt Capra's "Mindwalk," opening today at the Film Forum, an alienated scientist (Liv Ullmann), a losing candidate for the United States Presidency (Sam Waterston), and an American poet (John Heard) who lives in self-imposed exile in France meet by chance at Mont-St.-Michel and spend the day walking and talking.
Though not exactly spontaneous and seldom witty, it is good serious talk, a sort of feature-length op-ed piece.
The source material is "The Turning Point" by the director's brother, Fritjof Capra, a physicist and the author of the best seller "The Tao of Physics," which finds links between science and religious mysticism. (The Austrian-born Capra brothers are no relation to Frank Capra.)


Hewlett Contract
The Hewlett-Packard Company said a unit of the Hughes Aircraft Company would buy up to $100 million worth of its PA-RISC-based work stations and servers.
Hewlett will supply up to 4,300 Apollo 9000 Series 700 systems to Hughes Data Systems over the next four years.
Hughes will make the systems more rugged for use in Navy ships, submarines and land-based operations under a Pentagon contract.
The deal is part of a two-year-old strategic alliance between Hewlett and Hughes.


Wirth of Colorado Is 7th Senator To Decide Against Running Again
In the latest sign of discontent in Congress, Senator Tim Wirth, a respected Democrat who had been an important voice on environmental matters, announced today that he would not seek re-election.
The move, which threw the Colorado race into disarray, came without any sign of real trouble in the campaign of Mr.
Wirth, a 52-year-old politician known for hard work and a genial manner.


Inquiry on House Bank Case May Focus on Use of Money
The special counsel who is conducting a preliminary inquiry into possible criminal wrongdoing at the House bank said today that he might examine how some lawmakers spent the money they obtained from overdrawing on their accounts.
The comments in an interview with the recently appointed counsel, former Federal Judge Malcolm R. Wilkey, suggested that he intended to pursue a more aggressive investigation than the inquiry carried out by the House ethics committee.
That panel disclosed the names of the 22 worst abusers at the House bank, but it declined to look into how the overdrawn money was spent.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on March 21 about trading the day before in the credit markets misstated the amount of two-year Treasury notes purchased by Salomon Brothers at an auction on May 22, 1991.
Salomon bought more than the 35 percent allotment allowed by the Treasury, but not as much as 94 percent.


Arkansas Facing a Deficit, Clinton Learns
Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas was told by state officials yesterday that the $2 billion state budget may fall as much as $20 million short of revenue projections and that he may have to institute budget cuts.
Mr.
Clinton returned from his Presidential campaign to Arkansas yesterday to attend the funeral of Sam Walton, the founder of Wal-Mart Stores Inc., which is based in Arkansas, and was briefed on the budget problems while he was there.


Voter Turnout Drops Sharply
About 27 percent of New York State's 3.7 million enrolled Democrats voted in yesterday's Presidential primary, sharply lower than the last three Presidential primaries here.
The turnout was down from 45 percent in 1988 and 39 percent in 1984, when the Rev.
Jesse Jackson's candidacy generated a record vote from blacks, and 31 percent in 1980, when Sen.
Edward M. Kennedy challenged President Jimmy Carter.


Message From G.M.'s Board: Cut Losses Fast
The historic overthrow of General Motors' president leaves Robert C. Stempel, G.M.'s chairman and chief executive, in a fight for authority over his company.
In the two years since he took office, Mr.
Stempel, who is 58 years old, has moved slowly, even deliberately, in paring down the world's largest auto maker to bring it into line with its diminished market share.


MCI Offers A Business Discount
In an expansion of its popular "Friends and Family" program, the MCI Communications Corporation said yesterday that it was offering 20 percent discounts on long-distance calls to small-business customers, but with the same requirement as residential customers: that businesses try to enlist others in MCI.
MCI has made strong gains in market share in the last year, in part because of the "Friends and Family" program aimed at residential customers.
The program takes advantage of MCI's smaller share of the market by offering deep discounts that could be prohibitively expensive to A.T.&amp; T.


CHRONICLE
CALLIE KHOURI has had much to contemplate in recent days.
Last week she won the Academy Award for best original screenplay, for "Thelma and Louise," and today she is to receive a special award from New York Women in Communications.
"How could anyone expect this embarrassment of riches?" she said.
"It would take superhuman arrogance."
But, Ms.
Khouri quickly added, "I would just as soon it be me as anybody else." Though the Oscar may have more national cachet, Ms.
Khouri said of today's prize, to be presented at the organization's annual Matrix Awards luncheon: "I am so honored. Whenever a group of women gets together to recognize other women, there is something special."


METRO DIGEST
METRO DIGEST  THE NEW YORK PRIMARY
CLINTON WINS NEW YORK PRIMARY
Gov.
Bill Clinton won a bitterly contested primary in New York yesterday, but more than half the vote went to Paul E. Tsongas's campaign from the sidelines and Edmund G. Brown Jr.'s anti-establishment crusade.
With 99 percent of the precincts reporting in New York, Mr.
Clinton had 41 percent, as against 29 percent for Mr.
Tsongas and 26 percent for Mr.
Brown.
Mr.
Clinton won all four major New York City boroughs, but ran about even with Mr.
Tsongas in the suburbs of New York.
A1.


Robert Deane Pharr, Novelist, 75
Robert Deane Pharr, an author whose several novels included "The Book of Numbers," died last Wednesday at Upstate Medical Center in Syracuse.
He was 75 years old and lived in Watertown, N.Y.
He died during surgery for an aneurysm, his family said.


Israelis Shell Villages In Southern Lebanon
Several Shiite villages in southern Lebanon came under Israeli artillery fire today as Israel Air Force jets flew reconnaissance overhead, Lebanese security officials said.
The officials said the strike heightened anticipation of an Israeli reprisal raid to a guerrilla attack on Monday that left two Israeli soldiers and three guerrillas dead.


Lucky Moves Save 2 Lives In Pier Fire
The denizens of Pier 84 off West 44th Street have suffered through muggings, beatings, mental illness, alcoholism and other Dickensian ravages that accompany life in a shantytown.
But occasionally, life takes a lucky turn, even here.
So it was that two residents of the pier were plucked from a roaring fire inside their tiny camper by an ambulance crew from St.
Clare's Hospital that happened to be passing through the area between jobs early yesterday morning.


The Man With the Ball
Almost everyone could find some comfort in yesterday's Democratic primary results.
Republicans could relish the complex new evidence that the Democrats seem never to tire of finding ways to tarnish their chances for victory in November.
Paul Tsongas supporters were entitled to a genuine "Wow! What a moral victory!" Their man wasn't even running, yet he ran
twice
as well as expected in New York.
They are alive with hope that the announcement he promises for this morning is that he's getting back in the race.


Entrapment Out of Control
By relentlessly pursuing a law-abiding Nebraska farmer named Keith Jacobson to test his willingness to break the law, overzealous Federal officers broke the permissive legal rules against entrapment.
By defending this excess all the way to the Supreme Court, the Justice Department displayed even broader irresponsibility -- and a need for court supervision.
Fortunately the high court has thrown out Mr.
Jacobson's conviction for receiving magazines containing sexually explicit photographs of children through the mails.
But this decision, on an uncomfortably close vote of 5 to 4, only exposes the need for Congress to require Federal agents to obtain court warrants, similar to search and wiretap orders, before setting up traps and stings.


New Australian Coin
Australia today introduced the Kookaburra, a jumbo silver coin weighing a kilogram, or 2.2 pounds.
The coin's introduction was delayed twice to build up enough stocks to meet an expected flood of orders.
The coin, named after Australia's kingfisher bird, which has a distinctive laughing call, is 4 inches in diameter and one-half inch thick.


Chiphou Journal; In a Cambodia Village, Old Sorrows Are Revisited
This village about 10 miles from the Vietnamese border, on the old French colonial road linking Phnom Penh and Saigon, has changed beyond recognition, but it remains the place where the mass disappearances of journalists, victims of the war in Cambodia, began.
On April 5, 1970, at a Vietnamese Army roadblock about three miles east of here, six photographers and members of television camera teams were seized and never seen again.


Short-Term Treasury Issues Gain
The sharp drop in stock prices yesterday helped to push up prices of short-term Treasury bills and notes as investors leaving the equity market sought a liquid haven in Government securities.
Intermediate to long-term securities also posted gains, but traders said there was little activity in maturities of longer than five years.


Duty Free International reports earnings for Year to Jan 31


Vacation Spa Resorts reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Eltingh Upsets Agassi  Another tournament, another early exit for Andre Agassi.
Undermined by his own errors and handcuffed by his opponent's 115-mile-an-hour serve, Agassi lost his 1992 clay-court debut yesterday to Jacco Eltingh of the Netherlands, 4-6, 6-1, 6-1, at the Conde de Godo tournament in Barcelona, Spain.
Agassi has won only 4 of his 10 tournament matches this year, and has failed to reach the quarterfinals of any event.


An Alternate League? Maybe, Say Players
With the National Hockey League facing a lengthy crisis, striking players last night met to debate whether they would form a rival league in the fall.
"That's one of the options we're considering," Mark Messier, captain of the Rangers, said.
"In 1972, the World Hockey Association was formed in just two months. We have the resources and the people to do it."


Fitch and Riley Placed In Coach-of-Year Race
A strong case could be made for several coaches to be Coach of the Year in the National Basketball Association, and two of them happen to work within minutes driving distance of each other, depending on the flow of traffic in and out of the Lincoln Tunnel.
This is not intended so much as a hometown vote for the Knicks' Pat Riley or the Nets' Bill Fitch, but more of a pre-playoff acknowledgement for achievement well beyond expectation.
And in some cases, belief.


Menendez to Seek Congressional Seat
State Senator Robert Menendez, perhaps the pre-eminent Hispanic politician in New Jersey, announced today that he would run for the United States House of Representatives from a newly created district with a heavy minority population.
Mr.
Menendez's office said he would make his formal announcement on Wednesday at Liberty State Park in Jersey City.


Gas Explosion Tears Through Texas Pastures
A six-year-old boy was killed and at least 13 people were injured today in an explosion that apparently resulted from a leak of a large amount of liquefied petroleum gas from a pipeline outside this east central Texas town.
Several homes were left in shambles one to two miles from the explosion and rolling pasture was charred.
The explosion was of such force and of such a peculiar nature that it rattled buildings 70 miles away in Houston and was heard 140 miles away.


Kosher Wines Go Toward the Pale
ZVI NAVEH, an Israeli who settled in Sonoita, Ariz., and made his first kosher wines under a Naveh Vineyards label in 1991, plans to produce a rose of cabernet this fall.
And when Yitzchak Applbaum and his partners in Teal Lake Cellars in Sacramento, California's newest producer of kosher wines, expanded their line, they made a blush wine, a 1991 pinot noir blanc.


1992 Pulitzer Prize Winners and Their Works in Journalism and the Arts
GENERAL NONFICTION  Daniel Yergin "The Prize: The Epic Quest for Oil, Money and Power"
Half-historian and half-energy expert, Daniel Yergin seems perfectly cast to write about the 20th-century addiction to oil, and many reviewers have already said that his latest work, "The Prize," deserves to become the standard work on the subject.
Mr.
Yergin's intention was not to break new ground, but rather to make sense out of a tremendous amount of hard-to-understand data, hidden forces and complex personalities.
Mr.
Yergin mourns the dependency that has so distorted international relations and harmed the environment.
Mr.
Yergin is president of Cambridge Energy Research Associates, an energy consulting firm.
FICTION  Jane Smiley "A Thousand Acres"
In "A Thousand Acres," Jane Smiley weaves together the themes of farm and family.
In an update of "King Lear," an Iowa farmer decides to divide his land among his three daughters, unleashing a family tragedy.
The family is a rich and familar territory for Ms.
Smiley.
She offers intimate, closely observed portraits of family life in the novella and short stories that make up "The Age of Grief" (1987), and in "Ordinary Love and Good Will" (1989), which comprises two novellas.
Ms.
Smiley was born in Los Angeles and grew up in St.
Louis.
She received a bachelor's degree at Vassar College and a Ph.D. in medieval literature and languages at the University of Iowa.
She lives in Ames, Iowa, where she teaches at Iowa State University.
POETRY  James Tate "Selected Poems"
James Tate won for "Selected Poems," culled from nine of his previous books.
He first came to prominence at the age of 23 when "The Lost Pilot" won the Yale Series of Younger Poets Award in 1967.
Energetic, surreal and humorous, the verse has poured out in a torrent ever since in such works as "The Oblivion Ha-Ha" (1970), "Hints to Pilgrims" (1971), "Absences" (1972), "Hottentot Ossuary," (1974), "Viper Jazz" (1976), "Riven Doggeries" (1979), "Constant Defender" (1983), "Reckoner" (1986) and "Distance from Loved Ones" (1990).
Mr.
Tate grew up in Kansas City and attended the University of Missouri, Kansas State College and the University of Iowa.
DRAMA  Robert Schenkkan "The Kentucky Cycle"
Robert Schenkkan, 39 years old, won for his two-part, 6-hour 40-minute dramatic work that has been described as miniseries theater.
An epic 200-year history of Kentucky's Cumberland Plateau performed by 20 actors, it traces seven generations in the lives of three interrelated families.
At times intermarrying, they battle for domination of eastern Kentucky from 1775 to 1975.
Mr.
Schenkkan received a B.A. from the University of Texas at Austin, and a master's degree in theater arts from Cornell.
He has worked as an actor and writer on Broadway, Off-Broadway and in regional theaters.
HISTORY  Mark E. Neely Jr.
"The Fate of Liberty: Abraham Lincoln and Civil Liberties"
Mr.
Neely, who is the director of the Lincoln Museum in Fort Wayne, Ind., and author of "The Abraham Lincoln Encyclopedia," studied over 10,000 cases of the suspension of the writ of habeas corpus during the Civil War.
He brought to light one of the most troublesome chapters of the Lincoln Administration.
"I guess my conclusion," he said yesterday, "was that we have forgotten what it was like for all kinds of people to become captives of military power when a war was being fought on our own soil." He was born in Amarillo, Tex., in 1944 and graduated from Yale, where he received a doctorate in American history in 1973.
BIOGRAPHY Lewis B. Puller Jr.
"Fortunate Son: The Healing of a Vietnam Vet"
This book is "a dark and corrosive autobiography," in the words of William Styron, who reviewed the book for this newspaper.
It is the work of a man who, as an American soldier in Vietnam in 1968, stepped on a land mine and lost both his legs.
Mr.
Puller is the son of Gen.
Lewis B. (Chesty) Puller, who became the most decorated Marine in the history of the corps, serving in World War II and the Korean War.
Mr.
Puller was born in Camp Lejeune, N.C., and attended local schools in Tidewater, Va.
He served as a combat platoon leader in Vietnam until he was wounded and evacuated.
He was awarded the Silver Star and two Purple Hearts.
Mr.
Puller has a law degree from the College of William and Mary.
He is a senior attorney in the Office of the General Counsel of the Department of Defense.
MUSIC  Wayne Peterson "The Face of the Night, The Heart of the Dark"
Wayne Peterson, a 64-year-old composer and pianist, lives in San Francisco, but is currently a visiting professor of composition at Indiana University in Bloomington.
His orchestral work, "The Face of the Night, the Heart of the Dark" is a two-movement score that lasts about 19 minutes.
Mr.
Peterson described his style as "fairly dissonant," but added, "In this particular piece, the lines are much longer than in previous works I've written, and there is a re-emerging tonal element." Mr.
Peterson studied at the University of Minnesota and the Royal Academy of Music, in London.
He was a professor of music at San Francisco State University from 1960 until his retirement last year.
PUBLIC SERVICE  Tom Knudson The Sacramento Bee
Tom Knudson describes the Sierra Nevada, which stretch along 400 miles of California's eastern border, as "one of North America's most majestic mountain ranges." But as Mr.
Knudson's five-part series, "The Sierra in Peril," pointed out, those mountains have also been ravaged by air pollution, overdevelopment and overpopulation.
The series, which ran in The Sacramento Bee last June, won Mr.
Knudson his second Pulitzer Prize.
Mr.
Knudson, 38 years old, joined The Bee as a staff writer in 1988 and has since covered various topics related to natural resources.
He graduated from Iowa State University in 1980 with a degree in mass communications and journalism, and worked at The Des Moines Register and The New York Times.
He won the 1985 Pulitzer Prize for national reporting for a series in The Register about safety and health problems in agriculture.
INVESTIGATIVE REPORTING  Lorraine Adams and Dan Malone The Dallas Morning News
Lorraine Adams and Dan Malone spent over two years meticulously documenting civil rights violations by law-enforcement officials throughout Texas.
"We had guns pointed at us and our lives were threatened," Ms.
Adams said yesterday after their 20-part series on police misconduct won a Pulitzer.
"We found the kind of human-rights abuses you would expect to find in a third-world country," she added.
A prosecutor and a police officer who were among the subjects of the series have since been indicted, Ms.
Adams said.
Ms.
Adams, 32 years old, who conceived the series, is a general-assignment reporter at The Morning News, where she has worked since 1984.
Mr.
Malone, 37, joined the paper in 1985 and was named Fort Worth bureau chief in February.
SPOT NEWS REPORTING  New York Newsday
The New York Newsday staff was awarded the prize for spot news reporting for its coverage of the derailment of a New York City subway in Manhattan on Aug. 28, 1991, in which five people were killed and more than 200 injured.
The motorman's blood was found to contain twice the legal level of alcohol.
More than 70 staff members, including 35 reporters, worked on the paper's first-day coverage, producing stories that ran to 16 full pages.
Don Forst, New York Newsday editor, said the award was particularly gratifying because the paper had devoted considerable effort to covering the city transit system, and particularly its subways, which Mr.
Forst called "possibly the most all-encompassing thing in New York City for most people."  INTERNATIONAL REPORTING  Patrick J. Sloyan Newsday
Patrick J. Sloyan, senior correspondent for Newsday, was cited for reporting on the Persian Gulf war, done after the war had ended and the pool system that had restricted journalists had disintegrated.
Among other things, he revealed that thousands of Iraqi soldiers had been buried alive by American tanks.
Mr.
Sloyan, 55 years old, served as Newsday's European-Mideast bureau chief from 1981 to 1986, when he became the Washington bureau chief.
He graduated from the University of Maryland in 1963 with a degree in economics.
While stationed in West Germany, he worked as a public information officer for the 10th Infantry Division and as a reporter for "Hell on Wheels," a newspaper for the Second Armored Division.
NATIONAL REPORTING  Jeff Taylor and Mike McGraw The Kansas City Star
Jeff Taylor and Mike McGraw won their prize for their critical examination of the United States Department of Agriculture in a seven-part series published in December.
Mr.
Taylor, 30 years old, who joined The Star in February 1990, said he had wanted for some time "to look at a government agency, explain how it works, how big is the bureaucracy, where the money goes -- and the Department of Agriculture was a natural for this farming area." The project took 16 months, as the reporters traveled around the country, interviewing farmers and government employees and waiting for the agency to provide information, Mr.
McGraw said.
"We filed 70 requests under the Freedom of Information Act and never got all the information," said Mr.
McGraw, 43, who joined The Star in 1989.
BEAT REPORTING  Deborah Blum The Sacramento Bee
During her eight years as a science reporter at The Sacramento Bee, Deborah Blum says she has been both fascinated and troubled at the ethical choices faced by scientists who experiment on animals.
Last November, her four-part series, "The Monkey Wars," focused on the questions surrounding experimentation on primates.
Ms.
Blum, 37 years old, joined The Bee in 1984.
She received a bachelor's degree in journalism from the University of Georgia in 1976.
She also holds a master's degree in science journalism from the University of Wisconsin.
FEATURE WRITING  Howell Raines The New York Times
Howell Raines, who was born in Alabama in 1943, won for a personal essay, a reminiscence about his friendship with Grady Hutchinson, his family's black housekeeper when he was growing up in Birmingham, and an account of their meeting more than three decades later.
He wrote the piece, he said yesterday after learning of his award, because "I realized that my lifelong interest in race relations and civil rights had its deepest roots in my relationship with Grady Hutchinson." Mr.
Raines, who is Washington editor and chief of the Washington bureau of The New York Times, has a long history of writing about racism and civil rights, dating from the 1960's.
"The piece was an homage to Grady," Mr.
Raines said, "for being the first person I heard talk honestly about racial prejudice, and to my parents for having the kind of home where racism was not taught." COMMENTARY  Anna Quindlen The New York Times
Anna Quindlen's column, "Public &amp; Private," which appears on the Op-Ed page of The New York Times and is syndicated throughout the country, has been a twice-weekly argument that public issues have an impact, both philosophical and visceral, on individual citizens.
"I think of a column as having a conversation with a person that it just so happens I can't see," Ms.
Quindlen said yesterday.
"It's nice to know that my end of the conversation was heard." A graduate of Barnard College, Ms.
Quindlen, who is 39 years old, joined The Times as a general assignment reporter in 1977.
She has been a City Hall reporter and the deputy metropolitan editor.
She has also written two other columns for the paper, "About New York" and "Life in the 30's." EDITORIAL WRITING  Maria Henson Lexington (Kentucky) Herald-Leader
Maria Henson, 31 years old, an editorial writer for The Lexington Herald-Leader in Kentucky, won the award for the more than 30 editorials she wrote from December 1990 o December 1991 on the problems of battered women in Kentucky.
The series, titled "To Have and to Harm," produced many reforms, including the State Legislature's recent passage of measures intended to broaden and improve the legal protections for men and women battered or threatened by their spouses or companions.
EDITORIAL CARTOONING  Signe Wilkinson Philadelphia Daily News
Signe Wilkinson is the first woman to win a Pulitzer Prize in this category.
Zachary Stalberg, editor of The Daily News, described her work as "social comment on contemporary themes." Her cartoons include a wide variety, from date rape to United States aid to the Kurds.
Ms.
Wilkinson devoted much comment to the confirmation hearings on Judge Thomas's nomination to the Supreme Court.
Ms.
Wilkinson joined The Daily News as editorial cartoonist in 1985, from the San Jose Mercury News in California.
FEATURE PHOTOGRAPHY  John Kaplan Pittsburgh Post-Gazette The Herald (Monterey, Calif.) for Block Newspapers
John Kaplan, a 32-year-old photojournalist, won the feature photography award for a series of seven photo essays depicting how 21-year-olds live across the United States.
All the essays, each accompanied by 9 to 12 photos, were published by The Post-Gazette, and some have been published in other newspapers of the Block chain, the Toledo Blade in Ohio and The Herald in Monterey, Calif., where he is currently based.
Mr.
Kaplan is founder and director of Media Alliance, a journalism consulting group in Pittsburgh.
SPOT NEWS PHOTOGRAPHY  The Associated Press staff
For the second straight year, The Associated Press was given the spot news photography award, this time for its photos of the attempted coup in Russia and the collapse of the Communist regime.
Boris Yurchenko, one of the agency's photgrphers in Moscow, who turned 55 yesterday, said, "I didn't even know that a citizen of the former Soviet Union could win the prize." The other Associated Press photographers cited are Liu Heung-Shing, Olga Shalygin, Alexander Zemlianichenko and Czarek Sokolowski.
EXPLANATORY JOURNALISM  Robert S. Capers and Eric Lipton The Hartford Courant
Robert S. Capers and Eric S. Lipton were part of a team of reporters that discovered in 1990 why a mirror crucial to the Hubble Telescope was flawed.
They followed up that story with this four-part prize-winning series, which used the bungled telescope to illustrate problems endemic to the American space program.
Mr.
Capers, 42 years old, and Mr.
Lipton, 26, spent five months reporting the series, said Lawrence Roberts, the specialty beat editor.
Mr.
Capers joined The Courant in 1978 and has served as assistant state editor and specialty beat editor, among other posts.
Mr.
Lipton covers the city of New Britain.
"I believe it's his second job in journalism," Mr.
Roberts said.
"I told him he might as well retire." SPECIAL AWARD  Art Spiegelman "Maus"
Art Spiegelman won a special Pulitzer award.
He is the founder and editor of Raw, a magazine of avant-garde comics and graphics.
He wrote two comic books, "MAUS I: My Father Bleeds History" and "MAUS II: And Here My Troubles Began," which explored the experiences of his father, Vladek, a Holocaust survivor.
One critic said Mr.
Spiegelman's portrayal of Jews as mice and the Nazis as cats did not end up trivializing the event, but served to goad the reader into looking at the event anew.
Mr.
Spiegelman lives in SoHo with his wife, Francoise Mouly, and their daughter.


Plane With Arafat Aboard Reported Missing in Libya
The Libyan radio said Tuesday night that a plane carrying Yasir Arafat, the chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization, had disappeared from radar screens as it was crossing from the Sudan into southern Libya.
The radio said the plane was approaching the Kufra air base, where it was scheduled to land, when it vanished.
Helicopters attempting to fly over the area were grounded by a severe sandstorm in the remote desert region, which is about 150 miles from the border with the Sudan, the radio said.


Microwave Cooking
THE Seder feast has always been a joyous celebration.
It usually implied days of work and large groups of people.
But families are smaller than they used to be, and modern equipment can relieve us of much work.
At such a time, it is good to know that most rabbis agree the microwave oven is a kosher way of cooking, and can be made to conform to the special requirements of Passover just as an ordinary oven can.
If you wish to do so but are uncertain about how, consult a rabbi.


Iraq Agrees to Begin Destruction Of a Nuclear Complex, U.N. Says
Iraq has told a United Nations inspection team that it will begin on Wednesday to destroy what the United Nations says is the technical heart of the Iraqi nuclear weapons program at Al Atheer, an official at the International Atomic Energy Agency said today.
"They told us they would comply, but certainly they are not happy about it," said Maurizio Zifferero, who heads an agency team investigating Iraq's nuclear program.


Yeltsin Defends Reforms to Lawmakers
President Boris N. Yeltsin vigorously defended his Government and economic reforms today before a skeptical Congress of People's Deputies and warned the lawmakers not to short-circuit Russia's transformation by diluting presidential power.
Mr.
Yeltsin and his chief economic adviser, Yegor T. Gaidar, gave strongly worded speeches that acknowledged some failures in policy and performance, but said the economy was improving and would stabilize by the end of the year.


The Pop Life
Five Days to Platinum
Record retailers are rubbing their hands together with glee: five albums released last week have created a real burst of buying.
Three of the albums -- Bruce Springsteen's "Human Touch" and "Lucky Town" and Def Leppard's "Adrenalize" -- were predictable successes.
But the other two -- Wynonna Judd's "Wynonna" (Curb/MCA), her first since the breakup of the Judds, and "Totally Krossed Out" (Columbia), a debut album by a young black pop group called Kris Kross -- were a surprise.


Mego Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


No Crisis, Yet, in Italy
No word is invoked more often in Italian political journals than
la crisi
, or "the crisis." Yet despite the periodic dissolution of fractious coalitions, not once in four decades has a national election resulted in the rejection of a sitting Government and its replacement by the opposition.
This week, in two days of voting, Italians have come within a whisker of denying a majority to their governing four-party coalition.
A genuine crisis? Not quite, not yet.


New Chairman Named By Mabon Securities
Salvatore J. Trani, an executive with a strong background in bonds, was named yesterday to be the new chairman of the Mabon Securities Corporation.
Mabon, a New York brokerage firm, deals mostly with institutional customers or acts as a broker for bond dealers.
It has been expanding its equity business and other operations and has been seeking a broader global presence since IMI Group, the Italian financial concern, bought 51 percent of the firm last May.


The Pain's Good for Russia, Parliament Is Told
President Boris N. Yeltsin's crash program of economic reform took a drubbing today from critics in the Congress of People's Deputies, with one lawmaker comparing the Yeltsin Government to a Greek in the fourth century B.C. who burned down a temple to make his name immortal.
"Our Government will go down in history all right, as the Herostratos who finally wrecked the economy of a great country," said Mikhail Chelnakov, one in a string of legislators who lined up to deliver their verdicts on the four-month-old program.


Arthur Ashe Has AIDS


Corrections
An article on Monday about five students from an El Paso high school being admitted to the Massachusetts Institute of Technology misstated the number of students admitted to and enrolled in M.I.T.'s freshman class.
M.I.T. offers admission to about 2,000 students each year and enrolls about 1,000.


Defy Disney? The Unmitigated Gaul!
As Euro Disneyland, amid enormous hoopla, prepares to open its $4.4 billion theme park and resort on Sunday in what used to be tranquil farmland near Paris, a much more modest French theme park is quietly marshaling its forces in a bid to survive Disney's onslaught.
The French intelligentsia have been taking potshots at the 4,800-acre Euro Disneyland in recent weeks, dubbing it a "cultural Chernobyl" and denouncing the "imperialism of Mickey." But the Disney park, one-fifth the size of Paris, is almost certain to be immensely popular.


Authorities Face Discipline On Inmate Housing Delays
A New York City jail official will be transferred or demoted in a disciplinary move against supervisors and guards who apparently violated a court order that requires officials quickly to provide prisoners with proper housing.
The official, Deputy Chief Hector L. Eugui, "is going to be removed shortly" from his post, said Robert Daly, the general counsel of the Correction Department, the agency that administers the city's jails.
Mr.
Daly said yesterday that the department would also "bring disciplinary action" against other supervisors and guards who city investigators said were suspected of falsifying the records of new inmates or authorizing their admissions without proper medical examinations.


Patriot Games
The Army is finally backtracking from its grossly inflated claims about the Patriot missile's effectiveness against Iraqi Scuds during the Persian Gulf war.
But military officials remain foolishly evasive about the weapon that came to symbolize, for many, the technological wizardry that helped win the war.
For the safety of American soldiers and the improvement of a critical technology, the Army needs to provide a detailed account of each Patriot missile's performance during the gulf war.
That's the only way the Patriot's flaws will get fixed.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
American Express Bank Ltd., New York, named Robert V. Sicina chief financial officer and managing director. *
CMP Publications Inc., Manhasset, L.I., a publisher of trade magazines, named Kenneth Cron executive vice president of the technology division.


BUSINESS DIGEST
THE ECONOMY
Rules to deregulate the natural gas industry further, which are expected to lead to lower prices for consumers, were approved by Federal regulators.  [ Page D1. ]
U.S. semiconductor makers may be poised for a comeback after a decade of decline.  [ A1. ]


No Charges Against Mets, Lawyer Says
The Florida State Attorney's office will announce on Thursday the results of its review of a woman's accusation that she was raped in Port St.
Lucie, Fla., last year by three New York Mets players.
According to two sources, a person close to the Mets and a lawyer familiar with the state attorney's decision, no charges will be brought and no prosecution pursued.
"The conclusion has been reached, and the three players won't have charges filed against them," said the lawyer, who has direct knowledge of the results of the state's review of the investigation by the Port St.
Lucie police department.


Joseph Patelson, 80, Owner of Music Store
Joseph Patelson, the owner of the Joseph Patelson Music House, died on Friday at the Isabella Geriatric Center in Manhattan, where he was being treated after a stroke.
He was 80 years old and lived in Manhattan.
Patelson's is known to musicians around the world, and for decades has been the source of sheet music, books and recordings for countless performers and music lovers, including Arthur Rubinstein, Isaac Stern, James Levine and Frank Sinatra.


U.S. JETS FERRIED QUAYLE FOR GOLF
With Congress and the White House dueling for the political high ground in the battle over the perquisites of high office, a Government report disclosed today that Vice President Dan Quayle used military planes several times in the last two years to take trips with Samuel K. Skinner, mostly to play golf.
Four of the trips with Mr.
Skinner, who was then Transportation Secretary and is now the White House chief of staff, were listed in the report prepared by the Government Accounting Office, an investigative arm of Congress.
The fifth created a political uproar when it was disclosed last May as the White House was struggling to answer questions about personal and political trips on military planes by John H. Sununu, Mr.
Skinner's predecessor as chief of staff.


Bridge
The recent death of "Listener" magazine in Britain, an intellectual periodical that attracted an academic audience, was generally attributed to the very specialized nature of its readership.
An extreme example was a difficult crossword puzzle, which, when solved, generated the bridge deal shown in the diagram.
The solver, assumed to be expert with cards as well as words, was asked to say what contract he would choose for the best result looking at all four hands.
Make up your mind before reading on.
One who might be expected to succeed in this dual exercise is Oxford's Inspector Morse, who makes a return appearance on the PBS "Mystery" series tonight.
His latest adventure, "The Jewel That Was Ours," is published today by Crown.
It is known that Morse did well at the Listener crossword, but the evidence for his bridge skill is indirect: His creator, Colin Dexter, is a good bridge player who admits, however, that he failed to solve the second stage of the puzzle.


William Cadbury, 82; Led Fellowship Plan
Dr.
William Edward Cadbury Jr., former executive director of National Medical Fellowships Inc. in Manhattan, died on Tuesday at his home in Kendal-at-Longwood, a retirement community in Kennett Square, Pa.
He was 82 years old and previously lived in New York and in Haverford, Pa.
His family said he died of natural causes.


Prior Incident Is Recalled in Taped-Beating Trial
A witness in the Rodney G. King beating trial blurted out in testimony today that the Los Angeles police officer who last week broke ranks with his three co-defendants had been accused of using excessive force in the arrest of a suspect in 1987.
The disclosure led the lawyer for that officer, Theodore J. Briseno, to demand a mistrial.
The motion, made outside the jury's presence, was denied after an hourlong hearing.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Pennsylvania; Quirky State Is Setting For Next Primary Battle
The Presidential candidates are now turning their attention to Pennsylvania, the next state to hold primaries, and one that has a cranky, pessimistic and unpredictable electorate.
This is the state, after all, that just last November elected its first Democrat to the United States Senate in 30 years.
Harris Wofford, a relatively unknown state official when he was appointed to fill the seat of the late John Heinz, rode a wave of anti-incumbent sentiment in a special election to defeat former Attorney General Dick Thornburgh, a Republican closely linked to President Bush's domestic policies.


Calendar: Flower Shows Aplenty
Gardening 101
New York Botanical Garden, 200th Street and Southern Boulevard
, Bedford Park section of the Bronx; (212) 220-8720.


Promotion Industry Salaries Are Rising
Salaries paid to executives who work in the promotion industry show little sign of being affected by the recession, according to the industry's third annual salary survey by Promo magazine.
Respondents reported salaries last year averaging $69,434, compared with $66,500 in 1990, and pay increases averaging 9.8 percent, compared with 7.8 percent in 1990.


Pop and Jazz in Review
David Weinstein Dance Theater Workshop
Juxtaposition, collage and creative recycling are David Weinstein's favorite tactics.
His music makes its way through the post-modern information barrage by discovering unexpected affinities and, at times, making shotgun weddings of sounds that would hardly meet otherwise.
For "Shishkapop: The Movie," an installation and concert at Dance Theater Workshop, the music came from keyboards, a computer, the guitarist Chris Cochrane and a band, Impossible Music, consisting of Mr.
Weinstein and four people with portable CD players.


U.S. Chip Makers Stem the Tide In Trade Battles With Japanese
American semiconductor manufacturers, the bedrock of the nation's high-technology industry, have stopped the Japanese erosion of their competitiveness and might be poised to make a comeback after a decade of decline, according to a growing number of industry executives and analysts.
The new assessment represents a sharp contrast from the prevailing view five or six years ago, when many executives and analysts were saying that the American producers of silicon chips were in danger of being driven to extinction by the Japanese.


Photographing Glamour Unglamorously
"I'VE got nothing against glamour," said Nick Waplington, the young British photographer whose documentary photographs of Isaac Mizrahi's collections go on exhibit tonight at the James Danziger Gallery.
"It's just not what I do."
While most fashion houses use highly stylized shots to sell their names and products -- emphasizing image instead of craft, skin more than fabric, an aura rather than a dress -- Mr.
Waplington has been going for the casual, the unposed, the naturalistic.
His color photographs, from a series of advertising campaigns for the designer, take the viewer inside Mr.
Mizrahi's showroom and backstage at his shows.


Quotation of the Day
"I am angry that I was put in the position of having to lie if I wanted to protect my privacy." -- ARTHUR ASHE, announcing he has AIDS.  [ B9:5 ]


Second Chance Possible for CBS Series
After a year of critical praise, unreserved network support and undistinguished ratings, CBS's comedy series "Brooklyn Bridge" is close to a deal to bring it back for a second season.
It is the only new CBS series likely to be renewed.
If it is, it will be made with less money and more effort to appeal to a wider audience.


Nixon's Russia Strategy
To the Editor:
Leslie H. Gelb summarizes the faults in Richard M. Nixon's memorandum on aid to Russia in "Nixon's Tricky Crusade" (column, March 13).
However, I believe he overlooks the obvious.
Mr.
Nixon is a Republican politician, one of the best in the business.
He is not in the business of bashing other Republicans despite surface appearances.
This is the first Presidential campaign in more than 50 years when the issues have related to domestic policy alone, rather than foreign policy.
From 1940 through 1988, we have always had a foreign devil.


A Writer, But Not A Black Everyman
The narrator of Darryl Pinckney's debut novel, "High Cotton" (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux), is clearly a refraction, if not a reflection, of the author.
The anonymous narrator is a young black man, like Mr.
Pinckney, raised in Indianapolis by educated parents who were the children of educated parents.
His grandfather, like Mr.
Pinckney's own, was a graduate of Brown and Harvard who became a minister.
He wears thick glasses, is a bit of an Anglophile and graduated from Columbia, like Mr.
Pinckney.
And the narrator, like the author, is in search of what being black means to him, both practically and in a way so integral it is almost genetic, but neither is looking for what being black means to anyone else.


Passion for a Quaint Old Church Blazes Forth From Its Ashes
ORRIN HUSTED has spent many hours sprucing up the grounds and filling the kerosene lamps that helped light the Middle Patent Church here, a small and tidy 19th-century landmark where congregants gathered only a few times a year but which they nonetheless considered their neighborhood church.
Today Mr.
Husted, 87 years old, stared up at the charred posts that spindled up from the building's roof line, somehow supporting a still-white clapboard cupola that his older brother, Nicholas, remembers repairing as a teen-ager.


No Promises, but Federal Mediator Will Try to Settle N.H.L. Strike
In an effort to nudge both sides toward a solution that could unlock the impasse and salvage the National Hockey League season, a Federal mediator entered the strike picture yesterday.
But even he admitted there was little he could accomplish if both sides continued to resist.
The Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service in Washington announced that John Martin of the agency's Boston office had been assigned to intervene in the dispute that has resulted in a walkout by the players.
The strike began April 1 and threatens the Stanley Cup playoffs, as well as the long-term success of the game.


School Vote Reflects Big Shifts In Hoboken
Michael Lenz does not have children yet, but when he does, he said, he wants to send them to public school.
In Hoboken, this is novel; the school system has long been considered one of the worst in the state.
Parents who can avoid it usually do.
And Mr.
Lenz, who works in the financial department of a Woodbridge real-estate firm, could afford to send his children to private school.
Instead, he ran for the Board of Education.
After getting elected last year to a fill an open seat for one year, he won a three-year term on Tuesday.
Moreover, his slate, "Choice for Change," unseated an incumbent with 37 years on the board and won two out of the three seats up for grabs this year.


Tarpley Finds a Team
ROY TARPLEY, the former Dallas Mavericks forward who was banned from the National Basketball Association for repeated substance abuse, will play this summer for the Miami Tropics of the United States Basketball League, JOHN LUCAS, the team owner, and Tarpley said yesterday.
Lucas, a former N.B.A. player and a recovering addict, bought the U.S.B.L. team last year as an extension of his aftercare treatment center in Houston.


To Let Jean Harris Go Sends Wrong Message
To the Editor:
"Marking Time," Anna Quindlen's March 11 column, treats the deterrent role of criminal punishment cavalierly and dismisses the idea of deterrence by using faulty evidence and faulty reasoning.
As a result, her recommendation of clemency for convicted murderer Jean Harris is deeply flawed and potentially dangerous.
Ms.
Quindlen quickly dismisses the deterrent role of punishment by mentioning the high rates of recidivism, the return of released criminals to their lives of crime, and the swelling prison population.
Recidivism is certainly a good argument against the rehabilitational role of punishment, but it in no way relates to deterrence.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Media; Heard by Few, Clinton Speech Shows Candidates' Quandary
About 12 minutes into his victory speech in Manhattan Tuesday night, Gov.
Bill Clinton exhorted a crowd of cheering supporters: "Tonight when you go home, when the celebration stops, when you finish looking at the numbers and reveling in the success, in the quiet moments before you go to bed, remember that nothing has yet been done to change the lives of the people, and our battle has just begun."
With this exhortation, and indeed, with his entire 14-minute prepared speech, Mr.
Clinton seemed to be trying to chart a more high-minded course for the next phase of his campaign, reviving the themes of hope and hard work with which he began the race six months ago.


Books of The Times; The Dirtiest Four-Letter Word: Nice
With Charity Toward None A Fond Look at Misanthropy By Florence King 194 pages.
St.
Martin's Press. $17.95.
Florence King has written "With Charity Toward None: A Fond Look at Misanthropy" because, she writes, she herself is a misanthrope, defined by the dictionary as "a person who hates or scorns mankind." She therefore knows what she's talking about.


Arbitration Considered By M.T.A.
The Metropolitan Transportation Authority said yesterday that it would seek arbitration to obtain a new contract with the transit workers' union if labor leaders continued to press for financial concessions.
The threat came after the two sides briefly resumed negotiations for a new contract.
The meeting -- the first since the union's 32,000 members decisively rejected a tentative contract three weeks ago -- lasted about an hour.


Japanese Stocks Plunge In Third Day of Turmoil
The plunge in Japanese share prices continued today, with the market's leading index closing below the 17,000 level in more than five years.
The Nikkei index of 225 issues fell 577.38 points, or 3.4 percent, to close at 16,598.15.
This is the third consecutive day that the market has tumbled so far.
The Nikkei is now about 22,000 points below its peak on the last trading day of 1989.


Accounts
*
Serta Inc., Des Plaines, Ill., has announced a review on its estimated $5 million to $7 million account.
The review will include Noble &amp; Associates, Chicago, the mattress manufacturer's current agency.  *
Rax Restaurants Inc., Columbus, Ohio, to Deutsch Inc., New York, for the fast-food chain's account.
Deutsch was chosen over the Martin Agency, Columbus, in a review for the $5 million to $7 million account, previously handled in-house.
A campaign is expected to begin in September.


Arrest Ends Murder Mystery And a Mother's 6-Year Hunt
Soon after the 1986 killing of 25-year-old Loni Berglund, the case seemed to be at a dead end.
There were no witnesses, just some partial fingerprints in her Queens apartment and the bullets that killed her.
But her mother, Lois, would not give up.
She constantly visited the police station house in Forest Hills for updates.
Four years later, in 1990, Mrs.
Berglund won over a young police detective who asked to work on the case and began from scratch on his own time.


Cuomo Urged to Link Election-Law Changes to Redistricting
Linking two contentious issues on lawmakers' political futures, the chairman of the now-disbanded state commission on ethics urged Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo today to veto any legislative redistricting plan unless it is accompanied by "meaningful reform" in state election law.
Mr.
Cuomo may welcome the letter because it could help justify a decision to veto the redistricting plan.
He has frequently berated the Legislature for failing to act on election-law changes, but it remains to be seen whether he will risk his political capital by turning the issue into a full-fledged confrontation this year.


Cincinnati Bridge Falls, in Parts


Dime Savings Is Sued Over Eviction Methods
The Dime Savings Bank of New York, hard hit by losses on defaulted real estate loans, is being investigated by the Massachusetts Attorney General's office for the way it is evicting tenants from buildings that it seized after borrowers defaulted.
During the building boom of the late 1980's, Dime was an active lender in Massachusetts; it now has about $235 million of mortgages in the state.
But as delinquencies have mounted -- they now account for $55 million of Dime's mortgages in the state -- Dime has been trying to recover its loans by taking possession of buildings that were collateral for defaulted loans, evicting tenants where possible, and selling the buildings.


Molloy Receives Approval
Major league club owners yesterday unanimously approved Joseph Molloy as the managing general partner of the Yankees, ending more than three months of uncertainty in which the organization operated without a permanent general partner.
The approval was granted during a telephone conference call at the meeting of baseball's ownership committee St.
Louis.
After Robert Nederlander resigned last Dec. 31, the Yankees' limited partners nominated Daniel McCarthy, Steinbrenner's tax attorney, to become the next general partner.
But Commissioner Fay Vincent disqualified McCarthy as a candidate in February so the Yankees turned to Molloy.


Review/Fashion; By Lauren: So Mannish, So Sensuous
RALPH LAUREN'S vision of eternal style as opposed to ephemeral fashion was given a good workout in the presentation of his fall and winter collection yesterday.
Celebrating his 25th year in business, he went back to his roots in men's wear.
He came up with a crisp, well-defined system of how women can dress not only next season, but for many seasons thereafter.


Corrections
An article on the Health page yesterday about nicotine patches as aids to quitting smoking misidentified the makers of two brands.
Habitrol is made by the Ciba-Geigy Corporation and Nicoderm is made by Marion Merrel Dow Inc., not the reverse.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: New York; Voter Turnout Is a Bad Omen For Incumbents
Voters turned out in New York's Presidential primary on Tuesday at the lowest rate since the present system was adopted in 1980, reflecting voter dissatisfaction that could be dangerous to incumbents in Congressional primaries in September and the general election in November.
A survey of voters leaving the polls by Voter Research and Surveys found that only 3 in 10 Democratic voters said they actually favored one of the seven candidates.
The rest had reservations or said they were voting to stop someone else's candidacy.


Events: A Lecture, Auctions and a Tour
Jewelry Auctions
Pierre Hotel, Fifth Avenue at 61st Street; (212) 265-8111.
A reception starts at 6 P.M.
Monday, followed by a jewelry auction and dinner.
Proceeds will benefit the American Foundation for AIDS Research.
Tickets are $250 or $500.
Call for reservations.


INSIDE
Bishops' Report on Women
A panel of the nation's Catholic bishops retreated from a willingness to study whether women could fill some ministerial positions.
Page A18.
Juror Blocks Noriega Verdict
The jury foreman in General Manuel Antonio Noriega's trial said one juror was blocking a verdict.
Page A13.


HEAD OF GENE MAP THREATENS TO QUIT
Dr.
James D. Watson, the co-discoverer of the structure of DNA, has told colleagues that he is threatening to resign this week as head of the Government project to map the human genome or gene set.
Dr.
Watson had intended to resign from the leadership of the gene program some time later this year, but has threatened to do so now after hearing that the National Institutes of Health was looking into possible conflicts of interest he might have because he holds stock in several pharmaceutical and genetic engineering companies.


Clovis Ruffin, 46, A Fashion Designer For Women, Is Dead
Clovis Ruffin, an award-winning fashion designer, died on Tuesday at the Cabrini Hospice in Manhattan.
He was 46 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of complications from AIDS, a family spokesman said.


Antihistamine Use in Cold Remedies Is Criticized
The antihistamines found in most cold remedies on the market may do more harm than good, medical experts said today, suggesting that they be removed from those products.
One expert said a shot or two of whisky before sleeping might be better for a cold sufferer than a nip of cold medicine.


U.S. Awaited Outcome With Mixed Feelings
When senior United States officials got word last night that Yasir Arafat's plane may have crashed in the Libyan Desert, the overwhelming sentiment was one of ambivalence.
The officials said that the possibility of Mr.
Arafat's replacement as chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization had as much potential to improve the prospects for peace with Israel as to set them back.


New Zealand and Italy Advance to Cup Finals
The America's Cup team from New Zealand secured its place in the challengers' finals today by defeating France by 3 minutes 30 seconds.
Although there is one more day of racing to go in the Louis Vuitton challengers' semifinals, both Italy and New Zealand have enough points to mathematically seal their places.
The two top syndicates have eliminated any further opportunity for either France or Japan to compete in the finals, which begin April 19.
Japan beat Italy today by 1:53, but the defeat won't change the finals lineup.
The four semifinal teams are required under racing rules to compete once more -- on Thursday -- despite the inability of either Japan or France to advance in the standing Conner Is Defeated


Ashe Received a Transfusion Before Blood Supply Was Tested for H.I.V.
In 1988, the right hand that Arthur Ashe had used to smash his way to the Wimbledon and the United States Open tennis championships suddenly went dead.
The arm was paralyzed and he hid it from the cameras during a television interview.
Ashe thought he had had a stroke, perhaps some complication of the heart disease for which he had undergone two cardiac bypass operations in 1979 and 1983.
His doctor ordered a CAT scan X-ray and even Ashe's untrained eye told him there was something drastically wrong in the left hemisphere of his brain.


Essay; How to Save Russia
Hastening to beat Bill Clinton to the foreign-policy punch, President Bush proposed to assist democracy in the former Soviet republics with a package that not even James Baker could price or explain.
As it stands, the Bush-Kohl-I.M.F. proposal seems to be a project by an international bureaucracy to prop up the Russian Government in its hour of need.
The payoff to us, under this theory, is that our aid will produce a less dangerous Russia, which will let us save money on defense.


Review/Dance; A Mark Morris Romp With Pink Pajamas
Pick a word.
No, pick several; one just won't suffice.
Here are a few from which to choose: Inventive, aggravating, constrained, glib, serious, foolish, imaginative, banal.
Some of those adjectives may seem to cancel one another out.
Nevertheless, all can be applied to Mark Morris, a choreographer blessed with talent but who can be theatrically wayward.
His strengths and weaknesses were apparent on Tuesday night when the Mark Morris Dance Group opened a two-week season at the Manhattan Center Grand Ballroom.
The company moved well and looked good in this space at 311 West 34th Street, which is seldom used for dance.


Undermanned Nets Hang On to Defeat Bullets
For the Nets, coming into the Capital Centre this season has been a no-no.
Tonight it was a no-no-no.
No Chris Morris.
No Derrick Coleman.
No Mookie Blaylock.
Yet New Jersey not only survived but also subdued the Washington Bullets, 109-103, and stayed in the thick of the playoff hunt.
"You got to hand it to the Bullets and the way Wes Unseld has them playing at this time of the year," said Coach Bill Fitch, whose Nets lost the season series, 3-2, to Washington.
"It was a game that meant nothing to them and everything to us and they never quit."


Bush Backs Wisconsin Attempt at Welfare Reform
In an effort to put substance behind President Bush's oratorical calls for welfare reform, the Administration plans on Friday to give Wisconsin the first in a series of waivers that will permit states to cut welfare benefits, Administration officials said today.
The waiver will be issued through the Administration of Children and Family, which is overseen by the Department of Health and Human Services, and will be directed at a proposal to experiment with Wisconsin's welfare law by reducing welfare benefits for women who have more children while receiving welfare.


Lucasfilm Subsidiary Loses Chief Executive
The Lucas Arts Entertainment Company said yesterday that R. Douglas Norby had resigned as president and chief executive.
A wholly owned subsidiary of Lucasfilm Ltd., Lucas Arts has products and services that include visual effects, sound and sound effects, television commercials, licensing, computer-game software, audio systems and educational multimedia products.
Lucas Arts is based in San Rafael, Calif.
Mr.
Norby, who is 56 years old, was not available for comment.
The company said only that he had determined that it was "an appropriate time to pursue other professional challenges."


Mrazek Quits Senate Race In New York
Describing the campaign as a "surrealistic, Kafkaesque nightmare," and accusations that he misused House checking privileges as a "horrifying lie," a frustrated Representative Bob Mrazek withdrew from the race for the Democratic Senate nomination in New York yesterday.
The end of his quixotic, long-shot candidacy had been expected.
The vehemence with which he denounced Congress and the press, however, was not.
Since news leaked last month that Mr.
Mrazek wrote nearly a thousand overdrawn checks at the House Bank -- more than almost any other House member -- the Democrat from Long Island said he had been virtually unable to address any other issue.


Police Shoot Two Suspects
Police officers shot and killed a robbery suspect and wounded his partner early today when the fleeing men fired at the officers, the police said.
The officers had been alerted to a robbery at 620 West 172d Street in Washington Heights about 12:15 A.M. when they spotted the suspects as they were leaving the building, said Officer Andrew McInnis, a police spokesman.
One suspect began firing, and the officers returned the fire, hitting both men, the police said.
One suspect died at the scene, while the other was taken to Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center, where he was undergoing surgery.
Neither the officers nor the victim of the robbery were injured, the police said.


Doctor Silences the Front-Runner
Gov.
Bill Clinton coughed his way through New Hampshire, rasped his way through Illinois and croaked during much of the New York campaign.
But his doctor has finally laid down the law.
No speeches and no pontificating for the Arkansas Governor for at least four days.


McDonald's Joins World Cup Effort
The McDonald's Corporation has announced its first commitment to a worldwide marketing sponsorship program, joining eight other advertisers as a sponsor of the 1994 soccer World Cup.
The agreement, signed with ISL Marketing A.G. of Lucerne, Switzerland, and the Federation Internationale de Football Association, makes McDonald's an official sponsor and the sole retail sponsor.
The company plans a range of programs from posting signs in stadiums in America where the matches will be played to supporting local youth soccer programs.


Export Curbs Will Ease, Official Says
Commerce Secretary Barbara H. Franklin said today that in her first month on the job she had begun a push to ease American controls on exports and planned to lift controls on 11 types of products, including some computer chips.
Ms.
Franklin, a management consultant and Republican fund-raiser tapped by President Bush in December, said the White House was in the final stages of reviewing her export control plan.


The Myth of the Black Vote
That African-American voters are indivisibly monolithic is the most stubborn myth of modern politics.
Are they inexorably Democrats?
Surely not.
Conservative middle-class blacks would embrace the party of Lincoln if race-baiting Republicans hadn't written them off.
As for the black Democrats, this year's primary races offer abundant evidence that they, too, are as diverse as their white counterparts.
Bill Clinton has won the support of many black voters, but by widely varied margins depending on the region -- and news of the moment.
He won at least three out of four black votes in the South; that could also be called the Southern Accent Belt, likely to favor a son of the South.


Alexander's Is Seeking Debt Payment Plan
Alexander's Inc., the troubled New York area retailer, is seeking a delayed-payment plan for about $25 million in trade debt in an effort to coax wary suppliers and their financiers to ship spring merchandise.
Several factors -- the financiers who guarantee payments to manufacturers who supply retailers -- and credit agency officials, all of whom agreed to speak only on the condition of anonymity, said Alexander's had proposed paying 10 percent of what it owes them now and paying the remainder with interest in monthly installments starting in July 1993.


Report Lists 45,000 Potential Radioactive Sites
As many as 45,000 sites nationwide might be polluted with radioactive materials, according to a draft report summarizing the first comprehensive survey of such sites undertaken by the Federal Government.
Although many of the sites might contain relatively little radioactive pollution, or even none at all, each made the list because some type of radioactive material at some time was used, stored or happened to end up there.
The report concluded that the sheer number of such sites indicates need for a coordinated cleanup program involving the military, the energy industry, and a plethora of medical, manufacturing, research and other installations.
Senate Panel to Hold Hearings


Dow Off 32.20 in 2d Straight Decline
Stocks fell sharply yesterday for the second consecutive day as institutional investors nervously watched the market tumble in Japan.
The Dow Jones industrial average dropped 32.20 points, or 1 percent, to 3,181.35, the lowest close since Jan. 2.
That brings the Dow's two-day loss to 94.14, or 2.9 percent.


Corrections
A diagram in Science Times on Tuesday about speedy checking of complex mathematical proofs incorrectly described a method that could be used to compare two lists of one million numbers each.
The numbers would be arranged in mathematical constructs called 20-dimensional arrays, not in 20-by-20 arrays.


France Suspends Its Testing of Nuclear Weapons
France announced today that it was suspending its 32-year-old program of nuclear weapons testing in the South Pacific until the end of this year and suggested that it would extend the moratorium in 1993 if other nuclear powers followed suit.
In his first address to Parliament since taking office last week, Prime Minister Pierre Beregovoy said President Francois Mitterrand had written to leaders of the other nuclear powers urging them to conclude their strategic disarmament negotiations and halt nuclear testing.
He added that France would retain its independent nuclear deterrent as "the keystone of our defense policy," but would continue to press for global arms reductions.
"In 1993, we will see if our example is followed and if common sense has advanced," he said.


Paris Journal; To Notre Dame's Rescue, Sickly Gargoyles and All
Now a cherished monument, the Cathedral of Notre Dame has not always been well treated by the citizens of Paris.
They have tried to blow it up, they have smashed its statues, they have scrubbed it clean and they have cycled through the aisles.
A less violent but perhaps more insidious form of attack, however, has left the 800-year-old Notre Dame with its outer walls damaged, its turrets and buttresses eroded and its famous gargoyles without beaks and ears.
And here the culprit is the modern enemy of medieval buildings: polluted air.


New Efforts to Replenish Bailout Agency
Lawmakers worked on preparing new bills and reviving an old one today as they sought ways to replenish the empty coffers of the Federal agency in charge of selling or liquidating savings and loans taken over by the Government.
The House voted last week not to extend an April 1 deadline for spending $17 billion left over from money authorized for the bailout in December.
For lack of money, the Government has virtually stopped closing or disposing of ailing savings and loans and is instead allowing them to continue losing money.
The Treasury estimates that if no legislation is approved by early next week, it will cost $200 million more to bail them out later.


Another Year, Another Move for Byrd
When Dennis Byrd joined the Jets in 1989 as a second-round draft choice, he played defensive end and enjoyed it.
In 1990 and 1991, he was moved to defensive tackle and enjoyed it.
This week at the Jets' minicamp, he is working at defensive end again and enjoying it.
"He's a big kid," said Jeff Lageman, the starting right defensive end, said about Byrd.
"He's like a 270-pound kid in a candy store, acting like he's playing touch football with his buddies. He loves it."


Man Is Called Key to Crown Heights Melee
A Brooklyn man charged this week in the disturbances in Crown Heights last summer was central in the eruption of street violence that led to the stabbing death of a Hasidic scholar, a prosecutor in the case said yesterday.
Though not charged with the death, the suspect, Raymond Wesley, 28 years old, of 1690 President Street, in Crown Heights, Brooklyn, "is considered the key person" in the unrest, said Michael Vecchione, an assistant district attorney in Brooklyn.


Japan's Troubles Contribute to Declines Around the World
Stock markets around the world fell sharply yesterday, with analysts saying that the spillover from this week's plunges in the Japanese and American markets unsettled investors.
The worst fall was in France, where an index of 40 blue-chip stocks dropped 3.4 percent.
Blue-chip indexes also fell more than 1 percent in Germany, Italy, Sweden and Switzerland.
The leading Hong Kong index was off 2 percent and markets in Singapore, Australia and New Zealand also fell, some hitting their lowest levels since last fall.


People
*
Cary Raffle, 34 years old, was named president at Favara, Skahan, Tabaczyk Advertising, New York, succeeding the late Jerry Tabaczyk.
He was a vice president and management supervisor at Wells Rich Greene BDDP, New York. *
Doug Raboy, 28, was named co-creative director at Smith/Greenland Inc., New York, working with Jonis Gold.
Mr.
Raboy, previously a copy supervisor at DDB Needham Worldwide, New York, succeeds Murray Klein, who retired.


Dinkins Abandons Effort With Bakery
The Dinkins administration said yesterday that it has given up hope of persuading the owners of the Taystee Bakery in Flushing, Queens, to stay in the New York City and that it would no longer do any business with its Pennsylvania-based parent company.
Mayor David N. Dinkins, making plain his anger with the company's owners, Stroehmann Bakeries, said at a news conference that the company's current $868,000 contract with the city would not be renewed when it expires in June, and that the company would not be considered for any of the $3.9 million in bread contracts the city will award later this year.


Aouita Enters Mile
SAID AOUITA of Morocco, the outdoor world record-holder in five events and the 1984 Olympic champion at 5,000 meters, has entered the mile competition of the New York Games on May 24 at Columbia's Wein Stadium.
The mile is the only middle distance in which he does not hold a world record, although he has the world's second-fastest time, 3 minutes 46.76 seconds, behind STEVE CRAM's record of 3:46.32.


In West Bank and Gaza, Joy Tinged With Tension
With many of them hurling candy in the air as a symbol of happiness, Palestinians in East Jerusalem, the West Bank and Gaza Strip marched through the streets today celebrating Yasir Arafat's survival of an emergency landing in the Libyan desert.
Israeli troops fired tear gas to break up some demonstrations and there were clashes between Palestinians and soldiers.
The celebrations, some said, indicated renewed support for Mr.
Arafat, whose leadership of the Palestine Liberation Organization has come under criticism from some people in the territories who question his political judgment and style as well as his distance from their daily lives.


Review/Theater; From London, a Celebration Of Louis Jordan and His Music
Some Broadway musicals want to make you think.
Some want to move you to tears.
Some want to make you laugh.
Some want to give you pure, mindless fun.
"Five Guys Named Moe," the London hit that opened at the Eugene O'Neill Theater last night, wants to sell you a drink.


Thomas Kirwan, 52, Insurance Executive
Thomas M. Kirwan, the executive vice president and chief financial officer of the Equitable Life Assurance Society of the United States, died on Monday at his home in Franklin Lakes, N.J.
He was 52 years old.
The apparent cause of death was a heart attack, his family said.


Fifth Avenue Accident Shows the City at Its Worst and Best
For years, he was just the blind man, the gentle unobtrusive blind man who stood on the sidewalk.
Workers and shoppers, bus drivers and tourists treated him as someone familiar but not knowable.
They thought kindly of him, occasionally dropped some coins in his cup, but hardly anyone seemed to have ever asked his name.
On Monday, a taxi ran onto the curb, suddenly upsetting the rhythms of a spring afternoon on Fifth Avenue at 57th Street and striking the blind man and his dog.
By yesterday, many in the exclusive jewelry and clothing shops and many more across the city were expressing their concerns for the blind man and his companion.


Brief Filed on Tyson
The Indiana Attorney General's office yesterday urged the state Supreme Court to keep MIKE TYSON in prison while he appeals his rape conviction.
In a brief filed with the court, the attorney general's office said the five justices should let stand lower court decisions refusing to grant Tyson bail.
Decisions on appeal bond should be made by the trial court and the state Court of Appeals, the brief said.


Preserve Us From Big Brother on the Subway
To the Editor:
Before offering encouragement to the New York City Transit Authority to upgrade its communications system, as you do in "Squawk! Another Day Wrong Footed" (editorial, March 24), you should consider what a nuisance the Transit Authority would make of a system that worked.
The 72d Street station of the Eighth Avenue IND boasts an up-to-date speaker system, and it is the bane of all who begin their commute there.
Every morning the speakers emit repeated, unwelcome ear-splitting announcements from the T.A.
As if practicing elocution lessons, a clear succinct voice in a deliberate slow cadence offers the time, the date and an inane and condescending bit of advice on how to ride the subway.


Knicks Let Celtics Move In and Get the Better of Them
The Knicks' frustration in Boston Garden grew tonight.
And their lead in the Atlantic Division shrank.
Losing their 23d consecutive regular-season game here, the Knicks dropped a 93-89 decision to the Celtics.


Trash Hauler Guilty Of Bribing Troopers
The head of a Yonkers garbage-hauling company was convicted on Tuesday of bribing New York State troopers with cash and gifts in an effort to escape penalties for operating overweight trucks, which can be $2,000 or more.
Law-enforcement officials said the bribery scheme centered on one state trooper who then sought the cooperation of other troopers by giving them expensive liquor and gourmet hams.


Prices of Treasury Securities Retreat
Weak demand at an auction of new seven-year Treasury notes and a slight recovery in stock prices from their lows for the day helped to push down prices of Treasury securities and force up interest rates yesterday.
The $9.75 billion of new seven-year notes were sold at an average yield of 7.11 percent.


Garden Q. &amp; A.
Children's Seeds
Q.
I would like to introduce my 8-year-old to gardening using some easily grown vegetable.
What do you suggest? -- Irene S. Lieberman, Brooklyn.


Mrazek Is Out of Senate Race
Representative Bob Mrazek quit the New York Senate race and denied abusing House privileges.
Page B1.


Home Video
Foreseeing Future Viewing
Ask video dealers what they expect to see more of in the future and many say laser disks.
"By the turn of the century we'll be substituting a laser technology," said Don Rosenberg, the executive vice president of the Video Software Dealers Association, a trade group.


Lone Juror Is Apparently Stalling Noriega Verdict
The jury that will determine the fate of Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega declared itself today to be deadlocked apparently because a single juror could not agree with the others.
But Judge William M. Hoeveler ordered the jurors to continue their deliberations, saying he was not yet willing to let them give up on reaching a verdict.
"We have a serious problem," the jury's foreman, Lester C. Spencer, told Judge Hoeveler this morning in a written request for guidance.
"Apparently there is a juror who testified that their mind was made up two days ago before we reached this room. We are deadlocked."


Review/Fashion; Tufts and Tacks, Bells and Beads
TODD OLDHAM'S fall collection, shown on Tuesday, was a little crazy and a lot of fun.
His theme was "Interiors," and he played it with the manic intensity of a Mark Hampton on acid.
The models emerging from behind red velvet drapery included Kate Pierson of the rock band the B-52's, the performance artist Ann Magnuson and Billy, a transvestite who gets prettier each season.


G.M.A.C. Offers 5-Year Notes
The General Motors Acceptance Corporation, a unit of the General Motors Corporation, is offering $500 million in five-year notes to the public through underwriters led by Morgan Stanley &amp; Company.
Noncallable by the company before maturity, the notes have a 7 3/4 percent coupon and are priced at 99.865 to yield 7.783 percent, or about 110 basis points above Treasury securities with a similar maturity date.


In a Store, Americana
GEORGE WASHINGTON never slept in rooms like those shown at Bloomingdale's as part of the store's "Spirit of America" promotion.
The six model rooms, which opened to the public yesterday, are strictly late 20th century: slick, pristine and dramatically lighted.
The storewide promotion of Americana celebrates the 500th anniversary of Columbus's discovery of the Americas.
"The idea of country is connected to your heritage," said Joseph Boehm, a designer at Country Home magazine, which is co-sponsoring the promotion with American Express.
In the room Mr.
Boehm designed, he created a Manhattan loft, sparsely furnished with a few country artifacts, like a 1930's porch swing which is used for dining ($795).


Corrections
An obituary on Tuesday of a retired professor of French at Haverford College misstated his first name.
He was Bradford Cook.


Asia Council Urges Burmese To Let Political Prisoners Go
The Southeast Asia council of the Association for Asian Studies has called on the military Government of Myanmar, formerly Burma, to free all political prisoners.
In a resolution circulated last weekend at the annual meeting of the association in Washington, the council called attention to "a festering situation of human rights violations within the state and a worsening pattern of ethnic and regional violence."


73.4% of New Jersey School Budgets Win Approval
In a striking retreat from their revolt against school spending in 1990 and 1991, New Jersey voters approved 73.4 percent of local school budgets on Tuesday, the highest rate of passage since 1987.
The returns, which surprised even the most optimistic state education officials, may be a sign that anti-tax sentiment is mellowing in New Jersey.
But some school superintendents suggested that the anti-tax fervor, which has gripped the state's politics since Gov.
Jim Florio pushed through a $2.8 billion tax package nearly two years ago, remained, with voters were content to focus their anger on politicians -- not school systems.


Saying Goodbye to Winter


Senators Question Proposal to Cut Reserves
In the first political skirmish over a Pentagon plan to cut 140,000 military reservist positions this year and next, senators today criticized the proposal as ill-conceived, unfair and a threat to each state's ability to respond to natural disasters.
Forgetting for the moment Congressional calls for reductions in military spending, Republicans and Democrats on a Senate Armed Services subcommittee criticized two senior Defense Department officials over details of a plan that the Pentagon announced March 26 that would eliminate or shrink 830 National Guard and service Reserve units in all 50 states.
There are a total of 1.2 million reservists.


Ruling Frees A Landlord In Contempt Over Threats
Joseph and Mara Kirsh were landlords accused of dealing harshly with unruly tenants, as many people on Elizabeth Street in SoHo remembered yesterday.
When a man on the fifth floor complained about some of the building's 130 violations, the Kirshes roamed the halls with their four snarling pit bulls, tenants said.
Dog feces were found inside the lock of the man's front door.
That was in 1987.
Last Friday, after five years of appeals, tenants thought the case was finally over when Mara Kirsh was sent to Rikers Island -- for 15 days -- on a 1988 contempt ruling for harassing residents at the Kirshes' six-story brick building, at 239 Elizabeth Street.


Renewed Hope For Black Architects
IN 1968, Whitney M. Young Jr., then the head of the National Urban League, took the American Institute of Architects to task.
He told its annual convention in no uncertain terms that the group had fostered urban blight with its "thunderous silence" and lack of black members, thereby tightening "the white noose around the central city." His speech spurred the profession and the public: architecture scholarships for minorities started flowing, the National Organization for Minority Architects was formed, and government contracts began requiring minority participation.
And there it all stopped.
In 1968, black architects made up one half of 1 percent of the A.I.A.'s 20,000 members; today, these numbers have risen to 1.2 percent of 57,000 members.
"African American Architects in Current Practice" by Jack Travis (Princeton Architectural Press, 1991) notes that architectural scholarships for minorities have now waned and that black-owned firms rely on now-scarce public commissions.


Laettner Adds Wooden To Awards Collection
CHRISTIAN LAETTNER completed a sweep of college basketball's major awards yesterday when he was honored as winner of the 16th annual John R. Wooden Award, named after the former U.C.L.A. coach.
Laettner accepted the award at the Los Angeles Athletic Club less than 48 hours after scoring 19 points in Duke's 71-51 victory over Michigan in the National Collegiate Athletic Association championship game in Minneapolis.
He spent Tuesday night back at the Duke campus in Durham, N.C.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.50
6.50
9.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
6.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.75
3.92
5.75
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.86
3.87
5.62
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.95
3.97
5.71
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.11
7.04
7.93
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.90
7.87
8.25
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.86
8.83
9.35
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.71
6.73
7.28
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


To Let Jean Harris Go Sends Wrong Message; Human Lives Wasting
To the Editor:
Re Anna Quindlen's March 11 column, "Marking Time":
I am a prisoner of New York State who would gladly give up my private parts for my freedom.
Being a first offender and after having spent 7 years of a 15-years-to-life sentence for a drug sale, I've learned my lesson well: crime does not pay.
However, I've also acknowledged that the prison system is drowning in a whirlpool of despair, with men dying of interminable sentences and AIDS, with human lives wasting away in the shadow of public apathy and cold politicians.


OTB Pays Thousands in Rent for New Branch, Before It Opens
With a little luck, a new offtrack betting branch will open this fall in mid-Manhattan.
But before the first $2 bet is placed, the Offtrack Betting Corporation will have spent $739,000 in rent for a branch that took almost two years to open.
Present and former officials of the agency clash over who is responsible for the delays in opening the branch at Seventh Avenue and 38th Street, on the site of the old Dubrow's cafeteria.
But the officials, from two OTB administrations involved in the project, agree on one point: the abnormal costs will reduce the OTB's overall profits this year and the revenues it can give the city.


For Haiti, an Invasion Is Wrong Answer
To the Editor:
"A Military Force for the Americas" (editorial, March 24), your endorsement of a military force for the Western Hemisphere, is misguided, particularly in view of the long history of failed military interventions in the hemisphere.
An inter-American military force would not advance democracy in the Americas.
The United States, as the most powerful member state of such a force, would dominate, and Latin American countries would probably feel pressured to cooperate with interventionist strategies for fear of losing United States foreign aid.


For Yankees' Johnson, It's Everything to Gain
The delirium is likely to vanish tonight and so will any lingering happiness over having toppled Roger Clemens on opening day.
For when the Yankees oppose the Boston Red Sox at Yankee Stadium in their second meeting, Boston will pitch Frank Viola while the Yankees will throw Jeff Johnson.
Enough said.
Viola makes $4.66 million a season, won the 1988 Cy Young Award and was the 1987 World Series most valuable player with Minnesota.
Johnson earns $115,000, was pitching college ball at North Carolina-Charlotte when Viola was helping the Twins win a World Series and had the third-worst earned run average in Yankee history last season at 5.95.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11  ARAFAT SURVIVES PLANE CRASH
The chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization was found in the Libyan desert nearly 12 hours after his plane crashed in a sandstorm.
Mr.
Arafat was bruised but not seriously injured.
A1
Celebrations indicated new support for Mr. Arafat.  A6
United States officials reacted to the crash with ambivalence.
A6  LESS THAN MEETS THE EYE
The aid package for Russia announced last week by the Bush Administration and some Western allies is less complete than many officials made it seem, officials in several countries said.
They said eagerness to show support for President Yeltsin before a crucial encounter with the Russian Parliament was the reason for the haste.
A1
In Moscow, Mr.
Yeltsin's economic reforms came under fire.
A11  DAY OF DECISION IN BRITAIN
Britons vote today in an election that could result in a new Prime Minister.
As campaigning ended yesterday, prospects were slim that Prime Minister Major's Conservative Government would retain its majority in Parliament.
A10  FRANCE CUTS SOME A-TESTING
Prime Minister Beregovoy said France was suspending until the end of this year its 32-year-old program of testing nuclear weapons in the South Pacific.
A5  TAKING CHARGE IN SARAJEVO
The Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina announced a state of "impending war emergency" and ordered the various ethnic militias to join together under the command of the Interior Ministry.
A9  LOSING CONTROL IN AFGHANISTAN
As rebels and dissident soldiers establish a second autonomous region in the northern part of the country, President Najibullah is becoming further isolated, losing hold of the border with the Central Asian republics of the former Soviet Union.
A3  SUPPORT FOR PERU'S LEADER
Crowds in Lima chanted in a show of support for President Fujimori, who suspended Peru's Constitution on Sunday night and took command of the legislative and judicial branches of Government.
A3  STALEMATE IN ITALY
After a national election that amounted to a vote of no-confidence in the country's leaders, Italy is in a political deadlock, with no clear alternative to Prime Minister Andreotti's coalition.
A8  American officials worry over reports of Iraqi military actions.
A7
Paris Journal: Rescuing Notre Dame from polluted air.
A4  National A12-26, D20  SO NEAR, AND YET . . .
After hard-won primary victories in New York, Wisconsin and Kansas, Governor Clinton found the Democratic Presidential nomination within his reach but not yet in his pocket.
Many voters said they had backed him reluctantly, and party leaders feared that further campaign combat before the convention would play into President Bush's hands.
A1
Will Tsongas rejoin the race? He plans to say today.  A20
The low turnout in New York could signal danger to incumbents.  A21
The next stop: cranky, unpredictable Pennsylvania.  A21  AUDIT CITES QUAYLE PLANE TRIPS
Vice President Quayle used military jets at least five times in the last two years for trips with Samuel K. Skinner, mostly to play golf, the General Accounting Office reported.
A1  THE DUO IN THE DARK
White House Memo: Paralysis at the White House?
Not at 5:55 A.M. yesterday.
That's when President Bush and the First Lady embarked on an outing to look at cherry blossoms.
Dawn had not yet broken, but the President didn't mind.
"Isn't this beautiful?" he said.
A1  GOOD NEWS FOR U.S.
HIGH TECH
After a decade of decline, American semiconductor manufacturers, the bedrock of the nation's high technology industry, have stopped the Japanese erosion of their competitiveness and may be poised to make a comeback.
A1  BISHOPS ADDRESS WOMEN'S ROLE
A committee of the nation's Roman Catholic bishops retreated from a previously stated willingness to study whether women should be permitted to engage in several ministerial roles, among them service as deacons and altar girls.
A18  TOP GENE RESEARCHER MAY QUIT
Because of questions about possible conflict of interest, the co-discoverer of the structure of DNA is threatening to resign this week as head of the Government project to map all human genes.
A26  GAY RIGHTS VS.
CRACKER BARREL
Like the civil rights protesters of the 1960's, most of the nation's homosexual rights organizations are trying to string a noose of public scorn around companies that discriminate.
And Cracker Barrel Old Country Store Inc., which has traded on traditional values to become a hot stock on Wall Street, is their No. 1 target.
A12  CLASH AT CATERPILLAR MEETING
Management and labor engaged in a tussle of words at Caterpillar's annual meeting of shareholders.
And afterward it seemed as unlikely as ever that the two sides would sit down soon to try to resolve a five-month-old strike by 12,600 union members that may cost them their jobs.
D20  Baton Rouge Journal: Hail to the King of Swing.
A12  Noriega's jurors reported a deadlock; the judge sent them back.
A13  Metropolitan Digest, B1 A BUSINESS ON THE BRINK
Residents of Port Jefferson, L.I., are abuzz since sheriff's deputies began removing new cars from John McNamara's dealership and General Motors accused him of fraud in obtaining hundreds of millions in loans from the company.
A1  Business Digest, D1 The Home Section C1-14  New hope for black architects C1  By Lauren: so mannish, but so sensuous C1  At home with Katie Couric C1  Sports B9-18  Baseball: Cardinals trounce Mets, 15-7.
B11 Yankees look to second game -- and Viola.
B11  In Atlanta, the chop is back.
B11  Columns: Berkow on Arthur Ashe.
B9  Golf: Couples gets nod from peers and fans.
B9  Hockey: Mediator to enter N.H.L. strike talks.
B9  Obituaries D21  Arts/Entertainment C15-26  Pulitzer dispute over music prize.
C17  Theater: "Five Guys Named Moe." C17  Editorials/Op-Ed A24-25  Editorials A24  Patriot games.
The myth of the black vote.
No crisis, yet, in Italy.
Karl E. Meyer: Wisconsin.
Letters A24  William Safire: How to save Russia.
A25  Anthony Lewis: "Time for a change." A25  Charles Peters: Tsongas, role model for '92.
A25  Stuart M. Gerson: When lawyers must disclose.
A25


A Pulitzer Dispute: Should Music Prize Be Left to Experts?
The decision by the Pulitzer Prize board to ignore the recommendation of its music jury and award the prize for music to the composer Wayne Peterson on Tuesday rather than to the jury's first choice, Ralph Shapey, has touched off a debate about the procedures by which the winners in specialized fields are selected.
There have been similar disputes in drama and fiction in past years, but this is believed to be the first time the music jury has been overruled.
The three-member music jury had originally submitted only one work, Mr.
Shapey's hourlong "Concerto Fantastique," and had declined to list runners-up, despite the Pulitzer rules, which state that the jurors are to submit three nominations from which the board selects the winner.
George Perle, the chairman of this year's music jury and a member of the Pulitzer music juries in recent years, said he was not aware of that provision.
When the board demanded at least one alternative, the jury submitted Mr.
Peterson's 19-minute orchestral score, "The Face of the Night, the Heart of the Dark."


Bishops Have Defended Rights of Homosexuals
To the Editor:
Assemblyman John C. Dearie (letter, March 26) must be terminally naive if he thinks the Irish Lesbian and Gay Organization "played the news media as if they were marionettes." If there were any justice in the world, the news media would take the leaderships of the Ancient Order of Hibernians and the Irish Lesbian and Gay Organization to lunch.
Mr.
Dearie maligns Roman Catholicism by attempting to pass off raw hatred as fidelity to Catholic moral teaching.
Nothing could be further from the truth.


No Vote Yet On the Sale Of Mariners
No apparent snags developed today in the proposed purchase of the Seattle Mariners by a Japanese-led group, but baseball's ownership committee ended a three-hour meeting without voting and with no clear indication of what its final decision would be.
The committee postponed any action, saying it needed additional information on a "great number of items."


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball
COMMISSIONER'S OFFICE -- Approved the nomination of Joseph Molloy as managing director of the New York Yankees.
American League
TORONTO BLUE JAYS -- Placed Derek Bell, outfielder, on the 15-day disabled list.
Recalled Jeff Kent, infielder, from Syracuse of the International League.
National League


Baton Rouge Journal; Sounding Off for the King of Swing
Unlikely fights are normal here in Louisiana's fractious state capital, but the most unlikely is happening outside the political loop on quiet Mimosa Street.
The chief strategist, general and foot soldier is Gil Glynn, a 71-year-old government retiree.
His Holy Grail: A posthumous Presidental Medal of Freedom for Benny Goodman, King of Swing.


Editors Take On Conflicts of News Staff Diversity
The nation's newspaper editors, a group overwhelmingly white and male, got some unusually frank instruction today in the complex task of communicating effectively with their increasingly diverse staffs.
"Diversity is at the soul of what we are all about," said David Lawrence Jr., publisher of The Miami Herald, who is president of the American Society of Newspaper Editors, which includes about 900 active and retired daily newspaper editors.


Growing
EVER since I had to go to the ninth-grade prom with the wrong boy, I have not been fond of orchids.
(The right boy was tall and played the tuba and had long dark eyelashes, but he liked a flute player I'd envied since second grade because her mother gave her a dime every day for an ice-cream sandwich, which she ate in a maddeningly slow way, first licking the vanilla ice cream from all four sides with her narrow little tongue, and then -- oh, never mind, I'm over it now.)


BRIEFS
DEBT *
BellSouth Telecommunication Inc., an Atlanta-based unit of BellSouth Corp., has filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for a shelf offering of up to $800 million in debt securities.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Swans Limelight
About half the audience walked out during Swans' set late Tuesday night at Limelight.
Those who stayed, however, gave the band an adoring reception for its first New York show in two-and-a-half years.


Cardinals Bombard Mets Again
Sid Fernandez left in pain.
Paul Gibson left in quiet humiliation.
Manager Jeff Torborg left in angry embarrassment.
And so the Mets left Busch Stadium in doubt about a lot for a club only three games into the 1992 season.
The Cardinals, withstanding one critical injury after another, administered their second straight demolition of the Mets tonight in a 15-7 victory.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Primaries; DOUBTS OF VOTERS TEMPER EUPHORIA IN CLINTON'S CAMP
Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas joined strikers on an Illinois picket line yesterday, with the Democratic Presidential nomination within his reach as the result of hard-won victories in three primary elections on Tuesday but not yet in his pocket.
Tempering the euphoria in the Clinton camp was the knowledge that many voters said they had backed him reluctantly as the best of a dubious lot.


Abroad at Home; 'Time for a Change'
The message coming from the Democratic primaries could not be clearer.
It is a cry of discontent -- of anger -- with things as they are.
The voters are saying, "It is time for a change."
People coming out of the polling booths in New York were asked whether they agreed with "Jerry Brown's criticisms of the political system"; 70 percent answered yes.
It was a clumsy question, because voters would have very different understandings of what "Jerry Brown's criticisms" were.
But the overwhelming answer surely showed a high level of discontent.


The Best of Golf: What 60 PGA Tour Players Say
Touring pros tend to frown on the public consensus concerning the game's best player.
Too often, they think, the masses are titillated by the longest hitter, the most striking presence, the most effectively packaged commodity, and not necessarily by the man who is the true master of his craft.
But for the moment, at least, the cognoscenti and the commoners are in harmony.
The public's clear favorite going into Thursday's opening round of the Masters is Fred Couples, who in his last five tournaments has won twice and finished second twice.
And in an informal survey of 60 PGA Tour players that was recently conducted by The New York Times, Couples was overwhelmingly judged to be the game's best player.


A Balanchine Festival in '93 At City Ballet
George Balanchine, whose choreography helped shape the ballet of the 20th century, is to be honored with an eight-week Balanchine Celebration by the New York City Ballet in spring 1993 at the New York State Theater.
Seventy-two Balanchine ballets will be performed, ranging from the 1928 "Apollo" to the 1981 Garland Dance from "The Sleeping Beauty." The festival will mark the 10th anniversary of Balanchine's death.
"What we want to do is to make you remember his variety and his profligate gifts," Lincoln Kirstein, who founded the City Ballet with Balanchine, said at a press conference on Monday night at the State Theater.
"We're not going to attempt to make an 'authentic' revival of anything. Balanchine changed his choreography from year to year in relation to the dancers. We're going to try to do what we consider he would have liked for himself."


PARENT &amp; CHILD
PAMELA CATE says the combination of going to school, working full time and raising a family was easiest when her three children were very young.
"They had an early bedtime, so I could do my homework when they were asleep," said Ms.
Cate, a former teacher who returned to school in 1983 to obtain her bachelor's and master's degrees in nursing.
She finished school last December and now works as a nurse-practitioner in Rochester.


Looking Toward His Own Campaign, Dinkins Defends Jackson


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: On the Sidelines; Tsongas II: Ex-Senator Ponders Revival
Former Senator Paul E. Tsongas was pondering a re-entry yesterday after his surprising second-place finish in New York's Democratic primary, but many Democrats said they were hard put to see how a revived Tsongas candidacy could wrest the nomination from Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas.
As a result, some of Mr.
Tsongas's aides said yesterday that they expected the former Massachusetts Senator to decide against re-entering the race, although they cautioned that he is known for last-minute and closely held decisions.


Deeply Divided House Panel Backs Limits on Cable Rates
With some Democrats in open rebellion against their own leaders, a deeply divided House subcommittee approved a bill today that would give control over cable television prices back to local governments.
But if anything, the ultimate prospects for a tough bill remained in doubt, as a majority of Democrats and Republicans on the panel made it clear that they favored a weaker measure and lawmakers from both parties predicted a long, tough fight ahead.
Congress is struggling to pass a bill that pleases consumers while somehow keeping industry interests at bay.


CHRONICLE
In 1780, John Adams and other leaders of the new American democracy chartered the American Academy of Arts and Sciences "to cultivate every art and science which may tend to advance the interest, honor, dignity and happiness of a free, independent and virtuous people."
Since then, the academy has chosen its fellows from academia, government, business, science and the arts.
The names of the newest group of 205 fellows were announced last night at the academy's headquarters in Cambridge, Mass.
They include LESLIE H. GELB, a columnist for The New York Times; SEIJI OZAWA, the music director of the Boston Symphony Orchstra; BROOKE ASTOR and PAUL MELLON, the philanthropists; JOYCE CAROL OATES, the novelist, and PAUL A. VOLCKER, a former chairman of the Federal Reserve Board.


BRIEFS
*
Airtran Corp., Minneapolis, said its board had approved a 2-for-1 stock split in the form of a 100 percent dividend. *
BankAmerica Corp., San Francisco, Security Pacific Corp., Los Angeles, and Union Bank, San Francisco, amended the agreement under which Union will acquire certain Security Pacific branches in California.


Hallmark to Sell Its Univision TV Group
Hallmark Cards Inc. said today that it had agreed to sell Univision Holdings, the nation's largest Spanish-language television network and station group, to a group headed by A. Jerrold Perenchio, a Hollywood producer, for $550 million.
The deal includes the Univision network, which is carried by local affiliates and cable systems nationwide, and 13 Spanish-language broadcasting stations, including WXTV, Channel 41, in the New York area, and KMEX-TV, Channel 34, in the Los Angeles area.


British Race Is Neck and Neck at Finish
Britain's hard-fought general election campaign ended today in a cliffhanger, with prospects uncertain that Prime Minister John Major's Conservative Government would be able to retain its majority in the 651-member Parliament that is to be elected on Thursday.
The opposition Labor Party's leader, Neil Kinnock, tired and hoarse after 8,000 miles of crisscrossing the country, sounded and acted confident that he would displace Mr.
Major from 10 Downing Street on Friday after the votes were counted.
But the Prime Minister, campaigning in south London, said he was "stone cold certain" that he would win.


G.M., Missing $436 Million, Accuses L.I. Dealer of Fraud
Life in this Suffolk County village hasn't been quite the same since sheriff's deputies began removing 700 new cars from John McNamara's sprawling dealership on Friday and General Motors accused him of fraud in obtaining hundreds of millions in loans from the company.
As a car dealer, developer, newspaper publisher, Republican Party insider and philanthropist, there was no one to match Mr.
McNamara, the "Mr. Big" of this community and a quintesentially American small-town entrepreneur.


CHRONICLE
How do you compile a list of people interested in bidding more than $1 million on a diamond-paved mask when you don't want just any millionaire on the list?
That was the situation that confronted SALLY MORRISON, the director of new program development for Amfar, the American Foundation for AIDS Research, which commissioned the mask and will auction it next week.


Progress Reported in Talks On North American Trade
The United States, Canada and Mexico have narrowed differences on issues ranging from autos to energy in negotiations on a North American free trade area, ministers of the three countries said after three days of meeting here.
The Bush Administration is hoping for a pact before November.
Despite reports from Washington that the Administration is getting cold feet because an agreement might give capital to political opponents, the United States trade representative, Carla A. Hills, said today in a meeting with reporters that the President wanted to "complete negotiations as soon as possible."


Aid for Yeltsin and Russians: A Package with Loose Ends
The Russian aid package announced last week by the Bush Administration and some Western allies is less concrete and less complete than many officials made it seem, interviews with Administration officials, American lawmakers and senior officials in Europe, Japan and Canada indicate.
The officials said eagerness to show support for President Boris N. Yeltsin before his crucial encounter with the Russian Parliament this week accounted for the hasty announcement.


Review/Dance; Nostalgia Alongside Some Harsh Present Realities
The Lar Lubovitch Dance Company's new and brief season, through Sunday afternoon, has something to say about the times in which we live.
Two of the choreographer's New York premieres look back with lively and bemused nostalgia at a supposedly more innocent America.
This vision, one suspects, is meant to contrast with the harsh reality of the present, especially as it affects creative artists in this country.
Mr.
Lubovitch is one of modern dance's most sophisticated spirits, and this new program, with various pluses and minuses, is full of surprises.


A Morning Cup of Regular
SITTING in the kitchen of her Upper West Side apartment early one afternoon recently, Katherine Couric, the 35-year-old co-anchor of NBC's "Today" show, fixed a visitor with the earnestly attentive gaze she often gives the camera and tried to explain the paradox that has become her life: she has become famous for being normal.
"I think people see me as someone they could have gone to high school with, or someone who works at the desk next to them," she said, adding an inadvertently accurate phrase: "I'm ridiculously normal."


To Let Jean Harris Go Sends Wrong Message; Family Therapy Option
To the Editor:
Anna Quindlen's March 11 column expresses the frustration of many when it states that society "has no coherent idea of the point of crime and punishment" and pays dearly for punishment that not only does not fit, but even escalates crime.
There is, however, a new option for addressing much of crime's root cause -- interpersonal family conflicts -- through the offender's own family.
Connecticut Public Law '89: 383 encourages treatment (family therapy) in lieu of incarceration for low-risk-to-society offenders.


Sports of The Times; Ashe: A Pawn Of History
SHE was dressed in a blue suit and white blouse and wore a blue velvet headband.
Jeanne Moutoussamy-Ashe took a seat just behind and to the left of her husband.
Arthur Ashe, her husband of 15 years, stepped forward and leaned on the lectern, and looked through his glasses at the large gathering of reporters and photographers for this news conference at the Home Box Office studios on Sixth Avenue.
When Ashe walked in, looking somber in dark red tie and gray suit, with several men that he would introduce as his doctors, and with the Mayor, David N. Dinkins, and Ashe's wife, it appeared that something very important, very serious, graver than some tennis news, was at hand.
The men stood behind him.


White House Memo; Accused of Drift, Bush Steers Into Gentler Seas for a Day
It's morning again in the White House.
At 5:55 A.M. today, during a week in which the Administration is scrambling to dispel the notion that it is drifting aimlessly, President Bush took his wife to look at the cherry blossoms.
In the dark.


An Emotional Ashe Says That He Has AIDS
Arthur Ashe, the former United States Open and Wimbledon champion and a pioneer in sports and social issues, said yesterday that he had contracted AIDS, apparently from a blood transfusion, and that he had known about his condition for more than three years.
Although he had told several close friends about his condition, Ashe said he decided to disclose his illness publicly only after learning that a newspaper was preparing an article about it.


To Let Jean Harris Go Sends Wrong Message; Women in Prison
To the Editor:
Anna Quindlen, writing about Jean Harris in "Marking Time" (column, March 11), asks how many others are in prison "wasting our money while doing their time." The answer is very simple -- Too many!
The United States incarcerates a higher percentage of its population than any other country in the world.
Women are the fastest-growing segment of that population.
In the last decade, women in prison in New York have increased fivefold.


Where You Are What You Wear; At the Sunglass Hut, Selling Image and Status by the Pair
A stylish woman swept past Kristian Matz at the mall.
"Christian Dior, $275," he said.
He meant the sunglasses.
He would.


Subway-System Heroes Cited for Their Courage
Last November, just as a D train was pulling into the 170th Street subway station in the Bronx, Troy Anderson rescued an old man who had been thrown onto the tracks by a mugger.
Then the mugger came after Mr. Anderson and they grappled on the subway platform.


UMass Coach Stays Put
JOHN CALIPARI is staying on as the University of Massachusetts coach under a new, four-year deal officials said yesterday is worth up to $700,000.
There were fears that the 33-year-old Calipari might be wooed to a higher-profile program after leading the team to a 30-5 record and into the third round of the N.C.A.A. tournament.


Conrail Rating Is Upgraded
Moody's Investors Service yesterday upgraded the long-term debt and commercial paper rating of Conrail, the big Northeast freight railroad.
It said the Philadelphia-based carrier's successful efforts last year toward cost effectiveness were sustainable, which should result in a more stable financial performance than had previously been expected.


Bush Fights Long-Term Change in Jobless Benefits
The Bush Administration today opposed Congressional efforts to make permanent changes in the unemployment insurance system and urged instead prompt enactment of a third temporary extension of benefits to the long-term jobless.
Labor Secretary Lynn Martin called for the extension, under which jobless workers could collect up to 59 weeks of benefits.
She called for bipartisan efforts to move the legislation quickly and wrote Congressional leaders, "I am prepared to work immediately with you and your colleagues in the Congress to develop and enact an extension."


CUNY and SUNY See 1,000 Dismissals
New York State's two public university systems say they will have to dismiss close to 1,000 faculty and staff members in the next year unless they get relief from the Legislature.
At the City University of New York, the Chancellor, Dr.
W.
Ann Reynolds, plans to ask trustees later this month to declare a financial emergency, university officials say.
Such a declaration would allow the presidents of the university's 13 four-year colleges and graduate and professional schools to dismiss employees, including tenured faculty members.


Dinkins Defends Political Ties to Jackson
On the morning after one election, Mayor David N. Dinkins looked forward yesterday to another -- his own -- suggesting that his long friendship with the Rev.
Jesse Jackson should not hurt him, and he complained that some Jews seemed unwilling to forgive Mr.
Jackson's reference to New York as "Hymietown."
Asked about voter surveys that showed that half the Democratic voters in New York's Presidential primary had an unfavorable view of Mr.
Jackson and that suggested that Edmund G. Brown Jr.'s pledge to make Mr.
Jackson the Vice-Presidential nominee had hurt his standing with Jewish voters, Mr.
Dinkins said: "I don't know that the analysis is a valid one. Exit polls can be very tricky."


Masters to Start Without Snead
Sam Snead, injured on Tuesday in a car accident on his way to the Masters, will have to pass up his role as an honorary starter for the first round on Thursday, tournament organizers said.
Snead, a three-time Masters champion who turns 80 years old next month, was taken to University Hospital after he arrived at Augusta National Golf Club with blood on his face and shirt and refused treatment at the club.
He underwent X-rays for a possible shoulder dislocation and was released.


Corrections
An article on Jan. 12 about immigrants in New York City who have developed special niches in business misstated the monthly profit of the gas stations owned by Parmjit Singh.
As Mr.
Singh's lawyer explained in a recent letter, it is $3,000 a month total, not $4,000 at one station.
Because of an editing error, a picture caption with the article misstated the number of gas stations Mr.
Singh now owns.
It is two.


Italian Voters, Fed Up With Old Guard, Are Deeply Divided
After a national election that amounted to a vote of no- confidence in the country's leaders, Italy is locked in political stalemate, with its coalition caretaker Government bereft of majority support but facing no formal obligation or challenge to step down.
Two days of balloting, which ended on Monday, left no clear alternative to Prime Minister Giulio Andreotti's four-party coalition, and the deadlock produced calls for a new election to heal the political splintering that the voting seemed to exacerbate.


Third Suspect Arrested in Officer's Slaying
A third suspect in the Jan. 31 killing of an off-duty police officer during an attempted robbery was arrested yesterday in Washington, New York City police officials said last night.
The suspect has been identified as Juan Martinez, 20 years old, of New York City, said Officer Andrew McInnis, a spokesman for the New York City Police Department.


Union Leader Takes Case To Caterpillar Shareholders
The management of Caterpillar Inc. engaged in a tussle of words with a top official of the United Auto Workers at the company's annual shareholders meeting here today.
And by the end of the tense meeting, it seemed as unlikely as ever that the two sides would sit down soon to try to resolve a five-month-old strike by 12,600 union members that may cost them their jobs.
Bill Casstevens, secretary treasurer of the union, appeared at the meeting, seeking to address the stockholders in response to a long presentation given by the company on the labor dispute.


Taxable and Tax-Free Funds Post Mixed Yields in Week
Yields on money market funds monitored by IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report were mixed in the last week.
After posting gains the week before, tax-exempt money fund yields reversed direction and fell significantly.
However, analysts noted that even with the decline, tax-exempt yields were still about 25 to 30 basis points, or hundredths of percentage points, higher than they were about a month ago.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the New Jersey Congressional delegation referred incorrectly to former Representative Peter W. Rodino Jr. in some editions.
He is alive and a member of the faculty of Seton Hall University Law School at Newark.


Bosnia, Awash in Violence, Reins In Militias
The Government announced today a state of "impending war emergency" and ordered the various ethnic militias to join together under the command of new republic's Interior Ministry.
"Those militias that will not join will be treated as enemies," said Mirsad Srebrenikovic, the Assistant Interior Minister.
Each of the ethnic groups that make up Bosnia and Herzegovina -- Serbs, Croats and Muslim Slavs -- has its own militia.
"It will be the same for any renegade units, be they Serbs, Croats or the Green Berets," the official said, using the popular name for the Muslim Slav militia.


CHRONICLE
The film "Casablanca" conjures up romantic images of doomed wartime love, but PIA LINDSTROM, a daughter of Ingrid Bergman, now reports that the mood on the movie's set was more cross than star-crossed.
"My mother was somewhat prickly about this movie," Ms.
Lindstrom told a crowd of 700 Tuesday evening at the Museum of Modern Art, where a party and screening of the film were held to celebrate its 50th anniversary.


G.M. Chairman Is Given Board's 'Full Support'
The director of the General Motors Corporation who led the board's move to more closely monitor management acted yesterday to play down widespread speculation that the G.M. board planned an expanded role in the daily operations of the company.
In his first statement since the board announced a series of executive changes on Monday, John G. Smale, the former chairman of the Proctor &amp; Gamble Company, said yesterday, "Neither I nor any of the other outside members of the General Motors board of directors intend to involve ourselves in the day-to-day business of G.M."


Editorial Notebook; How Jerry Brown Fell Flat
Asked in Milwaukee last week if his trip to Wisconsin indicated that he was conceding New York, Jerry Brown said, "No, I'd like to be in both places, but I haven't yet achieved bilocation." But on the stump in the Badger State, he achieved a comparable feat by turning the strong wine of his flat-tax proposal into skim milk.
Mr.
Brown bounced into Wisconsin saying his campaign was "simple" and his proposals "easily understandable," like his plan to institute a flat 13 percent income tax with few deductions and a 13 percent value-added or sales tax.
Some predicted a Brown sweep, given misgivings about Bill Clinton even among senior Democrats.


Plan for Revised Air Fares Is Confirmed by American
An American Airlines official confirmed yesterday that the carrier would announce today "a fundamental shift in the way that we look at our business." He added that the carrier planned "more than a simple fare action."
The official, who insisted on not being named, would not elaborate on today's announcement.
But travel industry executives said that the airline would likely lower some unrestricted fares -- the higher fares used mostly by business travelers -- and increase some advance-purchase fares -- the lower fares used mostly by leisure travelers.


New Rules Set for Gas Pipelines
Federal regulators approved a sweeping set of new rules today that will further deregulate the natural gas industry and likely lead to lower prices for consumers.
The new rules will end the regulated monopoly that pipelines have had to sell natural gas to local utilities and other buyers by allowing the buyers to bargain directly with producers.
The monopoly had been eroding since the mid-1980's under efforts by the Government to deregulate the industry.


Arafat Is Found Safe in Libyan Desert After Crash
Yasir Arafat was found alive in the Libyan Desert early today, nearly 12 hours after his Russian-built private airplane crash-landed in a sandstorm, officials of the Palestine Liberation Organization said here.
Three of the 13 people aboard the plane were killed in the crash.
The dead were identified as two Palestinian pilots and a technician.


Market Place; Japan's Bad News Is World's, Too
The rapid fall in Japanese stock prices has stirred worries of global financial problems and shaken the complacency that world markets could remain unaffected.
The apparent loss of market confidence in Japanese banks, whose share prices have suffered much more than other stocks, has increased the fears of investors about the global ramifications of deflating Japan's "bubble economy." That is the term the Bank of Japan has used to describe an economy where prices of many assets including stocks and real estate rose to unreasonably high levels.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  CUNY AND SUNY THREATEN LAYOFFS
The City and State Universities of New York say they will have to dismiss close to 1,000 faculty and staff members in the next year unless they get relief from the State Legislature.
At the City University, the Chancellor plans to ask the trustees to declare a financial emergency, which would allow college presidents to inform employees of their impending dismissals.
At the State University, officials on at least seven campuses have sent out layoff notices to workers, and officials say that more are likely to follow suit.
B3. 'THE KEY PERSON' IN CROWN HEIGHTS


Defections Deepening Kabul's Isolation
With the establishment over the last week of a second autonomous administration in northern Afghanistan, President Najibullah has lost control of the country's border with what was formerly Soviet Central Asia, Administration officials and area experts said today.
According to experts, firm rebel control over nine provinces, about a third of Afghanistan, has further isolated President Najibullah, who is being forced to grapple with shortages of food and essential supplies in Kabul after a cutoff of aid from Moscow.


Review/Theater; 'Forbidden Broadway' Gives Its Regards to Itself
Isn't it 'Grim Hotel" and not "Grand Hotel" that moved from the Martin Beck to the Gershwin? People come, people go, people move chairs, and "Forbidden Broadway" may be eternal. This is the gleeful message of "The Best of Forbidden Broadway," a retrospective look at the last 10 years in the New York theater and at the first 10 years of Gerard Alessandrini's cabaret revue.
Pretension, pomposity and sheer star power are always ready for a comeuppance, as demonstrated by a vintage crop of spoofs in this anniversary anthology.
Whenever possible, Mr.
Alessandrini has added a veneer of timeliness to his recycled songs.
There are also rude topical remarks, such as the suggestion that Tony Randall's repertory company is "proof that art should not be subsidized."


Yes, You Can Get a Toaster Repaired
BUSINESS has been good lately at Riverside Housewares in Manhattan, and Stanley Stern, the owner, cannot decide whether the recession or concern for the environment is the reason.
Mr.
Stern, in business for 45 years, repairs small appliances like toasters, percolators, hair dryers, blenders, vacuum cleaners and fans.
"I think the use-it-and-throw-it-away philosophy is changing," he said, standing by a shelf of rehabilitated waffle irons from the 1940's and 50's.
"People are more willing to have old things repaired."


Pop and Jazz in Review
Sarah McLachlan Union Square Theater
Sarah McLachlan, a 23-year-old singer and songwriter from Canada, has a taste for brooding, introspective music and oracular pronouncements.
For the final encore of her concert at the Union Square Theater on Tuesday evening, she cheerfully introduced a solo acoustic version of the Billie Holiday favorite, "Gloomy Sunday," as "one of the most depressing songs ever written." Performing "Gloomy Sunday" in a high, sweet voice that had a heart-tugging catch, she showed that this suicidal reverie could work just as well as a spare folk lament as it does when dressed up with jazz-torch instrumentation.


Record WNET Fund Drive
Channel 13, New York's primary public television station, announced yesterday a $65 million capital campaign, the largest fund-raising effort ever attempted by a public broadcasting station.
The campaign is intended to create a permanent endowment for WNET, which will celebrate its 30th anniversary on the air this year.
Henry R. Kravis, the chairman of WNET's board, said: "Like other educational and cultural institutions, we must have an endowment that allows us to plan for the future. We can't meet the challenges of the 21st century with this hand-to-mouth existence."


He's Offering Some Hope To Agencies
DESCRIBING himself as "positive, in a cautiously optimistic way," Alex Kroll said he believed that the advertising industry's severe recession was ending.
And that is largely because "the industry's leadership has righted itself and gotten back to its fundamental mission," Mr.
Kroll, the outgoing chairman of the American Association of Advertising Agencies, said in an interview before the group's 74th annual meeting opened yesterday in Naples, Fla.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Two Nice Girls  Bottom Line
Two Nice Girls is a band of several different mindsets.
At one moment, it's a ferocious loud-rock outfit, with screeches of guitar feedback and a tough backbeat; at another, it's a neo-folkie ensemble, with beautiful three-part harmonies sung with exquisite timing and grace.
In "I Spent My Last $10 (on Birth Control and Beer)," this female quartet from Austin, Tex., delivers a hilariously barbed send-up of heterosexuality; in "Definitions," they recite poetry to a surreal, thumping rhythm.
Three members -- Kathy Korniloff, Gretchen Phillips and Meg Hentges -- are songwriters, singers and multi-instrumentalists.
At the Bottom Line on Monday night, so many ideas and so much talent were floating around the stage that the band sometimes didn't seem to know what to do with it all.


Gay Rights Groups Take Aim at Restaurant Chain That's Hot on Wall Street
Cracker Barrel Old Country Store Inc. offers "good country cookin' " in its 118 restaurants and giftware made to look like antiques.
On Sundays, particularly, families wait in line for dishes like "country ham n' biscuits n' taters" for $4.89, while many tables stand empty at nearby Burger King and McDonald's restaurants.
And on more and more Sundays, other people have been showing up at Cracker Barrel outlets and have been arrested for various forms of civil disobedience.
On a recent Sunday, 90 people occupied a Cracker Barrel near Fredericksburg, Va., and 50 picketed the restaurant here off Interstate 20, just east of Atlanta.


Catholic Bishops Retreat On the Roles of Women
After nine years of sometimes bitter debate, a committee of the nation's Roman Catholic bishops yesterday issued a draft of a pastoral letter on women's issues that hews to the Vatican line by condemning sexism but refusing to open the priesthood and other ministerial roles to women.
The letter, which will now be debated by the full National Conference of Catholic Bishops, condemns sexism as "a moral and social evil" and follows the Vatican's dictates denying women ordination to the priesthood, condemning abortion and banning the use of artificial contraceptives.


Earl Doolin, 86, Dies; Co-Founded Frito Co.
Earl Bernard Doolin, a co-founder of the Frito Company, died April 1 at the South Place nursing home in Athens, Tex.
He was 86 years old and lived in on his ranch near Montalba in East Texas.
He died of a stroke and a heart attack, his family said.


Peruvians Backing Leader's Actions
President Alberto K. Fujimori walked the streets of the capital today, accepting handshakes and pats on the back from people who seemed to approve enthusiastically of his seizure of near-dictatorial powers on Sunday.
Buoyed by the support, Mr.
Fujimori proclaimed in a speech tonight that his measures had "ruptured the chain of corruption in Peru," and that "the people understand totally that the only thing we are looking for is the restoration of true democracy."


HOME IMPROVEMENT
MOST basements show the worst signs of moisture when rain and the spring thaw saturate the soil and cause water tables to rise.
If your basement has moisture problems, here is what to do about them.
Active leaks -- water entering through cracks in the foundation -- can be repaired with hydraulic cement, available as a powder to be mixed with water.


Mechanics Reject Plan to End Bus Strike in Bergen and Rockland
A proposed contract to end a nine-day bus strike in Bergen and Rockland Counties was rejected by only three votes last night.
Three of the striking union's four membership groups voted to accept the contract, which would have ended a strike that has inconvenienced about 8,000 commuters.


New Jersey Blue Cross Sues to Get Rate Increases
Blue Cross and Blue Shield has gone to court in another round of its fight to increase insurance premiums for 475,000 individual customers.
The company filed suit in Superior Court on Wednesday, asking that the state's Insurance Commissioner be ordered to allow a scheduled $42.7 million rate increase to proceed.


British Industry Group Names Director General
The Confederation of British Industry said yesterday that it had named Howard Davies, controller of Britain's Audit Commission, as its director general.
He succeeds Sir John Banham for a five-year term, beginning July 1.
Mr.
Davies, 41, plans to divide his time between the Audit Commission and the confederation.
The Audit Commission is responsible for monitoring the economy and the efficiency and effectiveness of local services.


Not That You Notice, but Everyone's Noticing You
IT starts to gnaw on the stomach, a pea-sized pit of fear that grows to melon-size, turning legs limp, feet numb, hands cold.
Coherent speech is impossible.
Bladders react.
So do sweat glands and palms.
As the time nears, confidence melts like April's snow.
The fear spreads inexorably into the brain, erasing the memory of just about everything useful except how to flee.
This malady is, of course, stage fright.
It's the familiar fear of imminent disaster, an ill-defined catastrophe we have all awaited since that nursery terror tale about the ill-defined consequences when the bough breaks.
The awful thing likely lurks within that audience of silent faces out there united in one common thought: I'm glad it's not me up there.


Desert Palm, Calif., Is Selling Bonds
The Financing Authority of Desert Palm, Calif., is tentatively offering $100 million of tax-exempt tax-allocation revenue bonds through Miller &amp; Schroeder Financial Inc., the senior manager of the financing.
Underwriters said the bonds were in serial form with yields ranging from 4 percent for an issue due in 1993, 5.5 percent in 1997 and 6.2 percent in 2002.
Longer maturities in 2012, 2018, 2022 and 2023 were not offered to the public.


The Voters, Yes. But Which Ones?
Paul Tsongas honored principle and not just reality yesterday when he said "no, thanks" to the Democratic Presidential race for the second time.
The first time, in March, he suspended a candidacy he had launched himself.
The one he gave up yesterday was created subsequently by The Voters.
By declining now to pursue a candidacy that would inevitably look personally opportunistic, Mr.
Tsongas keeps attention fastened on his sober economic message and recognizes the perils of flattering self-deception.


Explorers of Amazon Branch Retrace Roosevelt Expedition
Members of an expedition that retraced Theodore Roosevelt's route along a Brazilian river said today that the area has changed so little in the intervening 78 years that they felt they were experiencing it much the way the former President and adventurer did.
In the more than four weeks it took to wind their way down the 930-mile-long Amazon tributary, once called the River of Doubt and now named for the 26th United States President, who nearly lost his life on the original expedition, the explorers said they found thousands of insects and hundreds of plant and fish samples, many of which had not been catalogued by outsiders.


Blood Testing for Illegal Drugs Gains Support
In a dramatic shift from the position held by many American track and field athletes in the last few years, a growing number of them now favor blood testing as a supplement to urine testing in an effort to eliminate the use of performance-enhancing drugs in their sport.
The group includes Renaldo Nehemiah, the former world-record holder in the high hurdles; PattiSue Plumer, a leading middle-distance runner; and the Santa Monica Track Club, whose members include Carl Lewis and Leroy Burrell, the world's leading sprinters.


Hong Kong Police Faulted in Fatal Refugee Riot
When a riot broke out in a Vietnamese detention camp here in February, the police fled the scene for more than an hour, leaving men, women and children to fend for themselves during a brawl that left 24 people dead and 119 injured, according to findings of an inquiry issued today by the Government.
The High Court justice who conducted the independent investigation, Michael Kempster, concluded that "the initiative was not swiftly seized or held by the police" during the clash between northern and southern Vietnamese refugees at the Shek Kong Detention Center on Feb. 3.


Drug Panel to Hold Hearing on Acne Medicine
A panel of advisers to the Food and Drug Administration will recommend to the agency today whether the nation's top-selling acne medicines should be allowed to remain on the market while tests are conducted to determine if a crucial ingredient, benzoyl peroxide, promotes the growth of cancer.
Benzoyl peroxide is now considered a safe and effective ingredient for treating acne by the F.D.A.
But recent studies showing that it caused skin tumors in rats have prompted the agency to review its status.


Democratic Senators Challenging Cost and Risk of 'Star Wars' Plan
With the Stealth bomber and the Seawolf submarine apparently canceled or sharply curtailed, Democratic senators today challenged the military's most costly remaining program, the scaled-back anti-missile defense system.
The space-based shield against Soviet missiles that President Ronald Reagan initially proposed in 1983, which was dubbed "Star Wars," has been steadily whittled down.
The less grandiose plan that Congress approved last year now emphasizes ground-based missile defenses, specifically, a single site near Grand Forks, N.D., with 100 anti-missile rockets, by about 1996.


The Art Market
Two Leading Candidates
The list of candidates to succeed J. Carter Brown as director of the National Gallery of Art in Washington is getting shorter.
After the initial round of interviews ended last week, the two favored names seem to be John Walsh Jr., director of the J. Paul Getty Museum in Malibu, Calif., and Earl A. Powell 3d, director of the Los Angeles County Museum of Art, a number of museum officials say.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
American Airlines said it would scrap the convoluted system of fares that has evolved over the past decade.
It announced a simplified system that includes only 4 kinds of fares instead of 16 and would mean lower prices for many travelers.  [ Page A1. ]


Pop/Jazz; Before God Took Over, Coming Close to the Devil
In the 1950's, before he became an ordained minister, Claude Jeter was singing a style of gospel that veered dangerously close to the devil's music.
Records like "My Rock" and "He Won't Deny Me," cut with his group, the Swan Silvertones, for the Specialty label, had the kind of close-knit four-part harmonies that were echoed on city street corners in the form of doo-wop.
Although the Silvertones had minimal instrumental accompaniment, the group wasn't above using a guitar or subtle drum snap to help step up the rhythm.
Mr.
Jeter's wispy falsetto vocals had the soulful purity that singers like Sam Cooke were bringing to the pop charts.
The only thing standing between Mr.
Jeter's gospel and the secular music of the day was God.


A Hard Sell: Students Try to Market Themselves; 5,000 Attend City University Job Fair With Their Hopes High and Expectations Low
Michael Pollicino had a crisp new gray suit on, 60 freshly copied resumes stashed in a bright blue folder and very low expectations as he stood 16th in line yesterday afternoon to talk to representatives of McGraw-Hill at a job fair run by the City University of New York.
Asked what kind of job he was hoping to get, he paused.
"Some type of editorial kind of work, I guess." Another pause.
"Actually, I guess whatever they'd want me to do."


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows, performances and art exhibitions in the New York metropolitan region that will be closing soon: Closing This Weekend
"BERT SEES THE LIGHT," a comedy, written and directed by R. A. White, based on Bertolt Brecht's years in Hollywood.
At the 45th Street Theater, 354 West 45th Street, Manhattan.
Today at 8 P.M., tomorrow at 3 and 8 P.M., and Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $18 and $22.
Information: (212) 279-4200.


Dr. Herman F. Mark Dies at 96; A Pioneer in Polymer Chemistry
Dr.
Herman F. Mark, a chemist who was a leader in research on polymers, giant long-chain molecules used in plastics and other materials affecting nearly all facets of life, died Monday in Austin, Tex.
He was 96 years old and moved to Texas two years ago from Brooklyn, where he was dean emeritus of Polytechnic University.
Dr.
Mark died after a brief illness at the home of his son, Dr.
Hans M. Mark, chancellor of the University of Texas system, a statement from the university in Austin said.


None of Us Needs Other People's Fears
DO we need to know that Arthur Ashe has AIDS?
The question, perhaps journalistically incorrect, bubbled up on Wednesday afternoon during his news conference.
My first answer to myself was an emotional No.
Here was a man whose public life has been about fairness, responsibility, respect and self-control.
For the last three years he had tightly gripped the fraying corners of his life.
Now they were being torn from his hands.


Congress Getting Cold Feet About Cutting Weapons Programs
After pressing the Bush Administration to make deeper cuts in military spending after the cold war, Congress is now having second thoughts about immediately canceling costly weapons like nuclear-powered submarines and fighter jets.
The pressure to hold the line against job losses in the weapons industry during a recession-plagued election year is intertwined with the military's needs, declining Pentagon budgets and a growing debate over preserving the design and construction skills to build America's complex weaponry.


Down From Hopeless, to Hilarious
THE English air is chill, the sky without color even when the sun is out.
The wallpaper in the old council house is of a ghastly, faded busy-ness that is emphasized by the knickknacks, which include a grouping of china fawns on a table top.
The recently built blocks of flats are no more cheerful.
Though inhabited, they look worn out.
The elevators are unreliable, like the tenants they're supposed to serve.
The houses in the so-called new towns are, in fact, new but barren.
Love dies quickly here.
This is what one first sees in the films of Mike Leigh: a world that is pinched and without horizons.
Yet Mr.
Leigh, the most innovative of contemporary English film makers, is also the most subversive.
He has radically changed the socially conscious English cinema from the tradition established by the shapely, poetic working-class films made in the 1950's and 60's by Tony Richardson, Karel Reisz and Lindsay Anderson.


Bush and Baker Press Aid to Russia but Meet Worries About Costs
The Bush Administration began a campaign to win public and Congressional support for its aid package for Russia.
But some lawmakers, who weeks ago had been urging the Administration to do more for Russia, expressed worries today about the costs of the program.
President Bush and Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d used separate public appearances to make their most spirited and forceful argument yet in favor of American taxpayers' helping Russia achieve a free-market democracy, with Mr.
Bush terming it "the most important foreign policy opportunity of our time."


Hammer's Dance Floor Favored in Blue Grass
A large field of 11 colts entered the $500,000 Blue Grass Stakes today, with Hammer's Dance Floor installed as the favorite to win the race Saturday and establish himself as the East's ranking challenger to Arazi in the Kentucky Derby three weeks later.
Dance Floor further enhanced his chances when he drew the No. 6 post position in the middle of the track while his chief rival, the Willis Family Stable's Pistols and Roses, drew the 11th and last slot on the outside.
The third choice, John H. Peace's Colony Light, will start in the No. 10 lane and will also be forced to make an extra effort to move toward the inside.


De-Icing Report on Crash Plane Was Ignored; Not Airport's Fault
To the Editor:
My highest priority is the safety of travelers using La Guardia Airport and the other major metropolitan airports.
I was at the scene of the crash of USAir Flight 405 on March 22.
I saw firsthand the horrors of that crash.
My deepest sympathies are with those who lost people dear to them and to those who survived.
The issues Jeffrey Goodell raises in "How to Make La Guardia Safer" (Op-Ed, March 28) are serious, and the Port Authority has been addressing them.
Mr.
Goodell favors building the proposed 460-foot runoff area at the end of Runway 13-31.
The Port Authority agrees.
The project is in design, and money has been set aside for construction.


American Air Cuts Most Fares In Simplification of Rate System
American Airlines, the nation's largest carrier, said yesterday that it would scrap the convoluted system of airline fares that has evolved over the last decade.
It announced a simplified system that includes only four kinds of fares instead of 16, and will mean lower prices for most business and leisure travelers.
Other carriers quickly announced similar overhauls; the changes will take effect Monday.


House Votes to Raise Social Security Earnings Cap
The House of Representatives voted overwhelmingly tonight to increase the maximum that Social Security recipients could earn and still collect full benefits.
The measure, reflecting the power of older Americans in an election year, would nearly double, to $20,000, the amount that workers between the ages of 65 and 70 could earn before losing any Social Security benefits.
The vote of 340 to 68 came after the White House lined up support for the measure from recalcitrant Republicans who had wanted the earnings ceiling eliminated entirely, as the Senate had done in its version of the measure last fall.
Today's House action was an effort to reconcile its bill with the Senate version.


Xerox Is Offering 10-Year Notes
The Xerox Corporation yesterday offered to the public $200 million in 10-year notes yesterday through J. P. Morgan Securities.
The issue was priced to yield about 75 basis points more than Treasury securities with similar maturities.
Noncallable before maturity, the Xerox notes have an 8.125 percent coupon and are priced at 100, accruing interest from the settlement date of April 20.


Frank Clair, 90, Dies; Circle Line Co-Founder
Frank P. Clair, a co-founder of the Circle Line boat excursions for Manhattan and the Statue of Liberty and Ellis Island ferry company, died on March 31 at his home in Port Salerno, Fla.
He was 90 years old.
He had been in declining health and had suffered several heart attacks, his family said.


Residential Complex For Brighton Beach In Progress, Again
After twice failing to win city approval, a developer has begun a new effort to secure the right to build a large residential complex on the site of the historic Brighton Beach Baths.
In a meeting Wednesday night, members of Brooklyn's Community Board 13 voted 31 to 3 in support of zoning changes that would allow 1,600 units to be built in five towers, ranging in size from 22 to 29 stories.


Review/Film; Children's Animated Tale With Political Messages
"Ferngully: The Last Rain Forest" bears a conspicuous resemblance to "The Little Mermaid," although it lacks that film's prodigious parent appeal.
What "Ferngully" has instead are politically correct attitudes about conservation, pollution and junk food, subjects that may not be entirely riveting for children but that are ostensibly close to parental hearts.
In that regard, this animated feature would be a shade more admirable if it didn't also have a coquettish, turquoise-eyed heroine who is referred to as a "bodacious babe."
An uncertain blend of sanctimonious principles and Saturday-morning cartoon esthetics, "Ferngully" tells of pert, insect-size Crysta (with the voice of Samantha Mathis), who lives in a lush, dramatically drawn rain forest that is the film's most appealing feature.
Warned by her elders that she must "never, never fly above the canopy," this tiny, winged sprite goes exploring all the same.
She discovers the outside world, just as Ariel the mermaid did, and becomes smitten with Zak (Jonathan Ward), a human hunk who is unfortunately engaged in razing the endangered rain forest.
Crysta casts a spell on Zak, making him fairy-size, and sets out to show him the error of his ways.


Peru's Leader Impeached by Congress He Dissolved
The Peruvian Congress, meeting secretly this afternoon at the home of one of its members, voted to impeach President Alberto K. Fujimori.
One hundred thirty-seven members of the 240-member Congress voted to name Carlos Garcia-Garcia, Peru's Second Vice President, as the new head of state.
The action comes four days after Mr.
Fujimori dissolved Congress, took over the country's judiciary, suspended the Constitution and detained more than a dozen lawmakers, primarily of the opposition Apra Party.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about the American reaction to early reports that Yasir Arafat's plane was missing referred incorrectly to the land that the Palestinians claim.
It is historic Palestine, not biblical Palestine.


At the Movies
A Film Called 'Ruby'
"We don't claim to be revisionists," said Danny Aiello.
"We're not attempting to change history. We're giving you a drama we hope you'll enjoy."
In the aftermath of Oliver Stone's "J. F. K.," there is John Mackenzie's "Ruby," the new film about the Dallas nightclub owner who shot and killed Lee Harvey Oswald, the man named by the Warren Commission as the lone assassin of President John F. Kennedy.


Serb-Backed Guerrillas Take Second Bosnia Town
As Yugoslav Army tank units stood idly by, a Serb-backed guerrilla force today captured its second key Bosnian town in a week in what officials here described as a blatant attempt to seize lands for a future Serbian state.
The guerrillas of the Serbian Volunteer Guard pummeled Zvornik, an important river crossing near the Serbian border, for hours before routing the defenders of the predominantly Muslim community.


Art in Review
Margrit Lewczuk  Pamela Auchincloss Gallery 558 Broadway (near Prince Street) SoHo Through Wednesday
The weaknesses of Margrit Lewczuk's abstractions are apparent.
She paints in an overly old-fashioned manner, and her work has too many precedents, from Max Mecknann and Marsden Hartley to Bill Jensen, the painter to whom she is married.
But Ms.
Lewczuk's strengths are gaining on her weaknesses, and as a result this is her best show to date.


Inaction Bars Cash For S.&amp;L.'s
Efforts to get more money for the savings and loan bailout collapsed today amid partisan finger pointing over who was to blame for the delay -- Congressional Democrats or the White House.
With the lawmakers leaving for a two- week recess, the failure to act could cost the taxpayers up to $200 million, according to Administration estimates.
Democrats contended today that President Bush and Treasury Secretary Nicholas F. Brady deliberately allowed the legislative deadline to pass so as to blame Congress for inaction on another issue and avoid the politically unpopular step of disposing of more failed savings and loans.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  No. 230 Bounces Becker  Boris Becker, playing in a clay-court tournament for the first time since June, was beaten by 230th-ranked Jordi Burillo, 1-6, 7-6, 6-4, yesterday in the Conde de Godo tournament in Barcelona, Spain.
Becker, who has never won a tournament on clay and often struggles on the slow surface, took control early, but then lost his touch.
Burillo, a 19-year-old native of Barcelona, was playing in his second ATP Tour event.
He had to qualify, and then defeated Carl-Uwe Steeb in the first round.
Second-seeded Ivan Lendl, fifth-seeded Sergi Bruguera, seventh-seeded Alberto Mancini and eighth-seeded Magnus Gustafsson all won to advance to the quarterfinals. (AP) Edberg and Courier Advance: Stefan Edberg of Sweden and Jim Courier of the United States, locked in a tight battle for the world's top ranking, advanced to the quarterfinals of the Japan Open in Tokyo.
Edberg, ranked No. 1, relied on his serve to beat 15th-seeded Wally Masur of Australia, 6-3, 6-3.
Courier, who is trying to regain the top ranking, which he held in February, defeated 16th-seeded Gianluca Pozzi of Italy, 6-3, 6-3. (AP) Graf Moves to Quarterfinals: Brenda Schultz has always admired Steffi Graf's game.
She thought that respect cost her a chance to upset the top-seeded player in the Bausch &amp; Lomb Championships at Amelia Island, Fla.
Graf advanced to the quarterfinals of the clay-court tournament with a 6-2, 6-2 victory over Schultz in a match that was closer than indicated by the final score.
Graf, seeded first in the tournament, broke Schultz in the sixth game to go up, 4-2, in each set, then didn't have much difficulty finishing off her opponent from the Netherlands.
Barlow missed a 4-foot birdie putt on No. 18 at the Hattiesburg Country Club, missing a chance to take sole possession after the first round of the $300,000 event.
Instead, he settled into a tie at the top of the leader board with Mark Carnevale and Greg Twiggs at five-under-par 65. (AP)


Jackson Told to Repay U.S. Funds
The Federal Election Commission today ordered the campaign committee for Jesse Jackson's 1988 Presidential race to repay the Treasury $310,000 of the Federal matching funds it received because an audit found that the campaign could not account for about $808,000 in spending.
The commission's audit staff also reported that the campaign improperly used some of its Federal matching funds to help pay penalties for late payment of state taxes.


Why Arthur Ashe Kept It Secret
Arthur Ashe was understandably upset and angry when forced to reveal at a hastily called press conference Wednesday that he is suffering from AIDS.
But he aimed his barbs at the wrong target when he complained about the person who "ratted" on him to a newspaper.
The real villainy lies in the cruel and benighted public attitudes that compelled Mr.
Ashe to keep his disease secret for three years.
What a sad day for America when even an icon like Arthur Ashe can't reveal his AIDS affliction for fear that he or his family will suffer adverse consequences.
There are few more respected individuals in American sport than this scholarly, dedicated man -- the most prominent black male tennis player in history, author of a three-volume history of African-American athletes, strong advocate for human rights and longtime friend of President and Mrs.
Bush.


Oratorios, Cantatas And Other Long Works
Here is a sampling of
full-program works in New York City. Admission is free unless otherwise noted. Today
CARNEGIE HALL.
Bach's "Passion According to St. John"; Louise Wohlafka, soprano; Trudy Weaver, alto; Robert Guarino and Thomas Allen, tenors; William Metcalf, baritone; Trudy Weaver, alto; ; Kevin Deas, bass; St.
Cecilia Orchestra and Chorus; Susan C. Anthony, organist; David Randolph, conductor. 8 P.M.
Tickets: $10 to $35.
Information: (212) 247-7800.
RADIO CITY MUSIC HALL, "Easter Show," the 60th anniversary of the show, with music, dancing, a parade and the Rockettes; Scott Salmon, director and choreographer, 7:30 P.M.
Through April 23.
Tickets: $25 to $33.
Show times and other information: (212) 247-4777 or (212) 307-7171.
Tomorrow
CARNEGIE HALL.
Bach's "St. Matthew Passion"; Musica Sacra Chorus and Orchestra; Elizabeth Futral, soprano; Judith Malafronte, mezzo-soprano; Charles Bressler and Frederick Urrey, tenors; William Parker, baritone; Wilbur Pauley, bass; Richard Westenburg, conductor, 8 P.M.
Tickets: $10 to $30.
Information: (212) 247-7800.
Palm Sunday
CALVARY CHURCH (Episcopal), Park Avenue at 21st Street, Manhattan.
Parishioners' procession of palms, accompanied by bagpipe music, from Gramercy Park the half-block to the church, where there will be a reading of the Passion according to St.
Luke and music by Billings and others; Harry Huff, director, 11 A.M.
Information: (212) 473-2877.
GREEK ORTHODOX ARCHDIOCESAN CATHEDRAL OF THE HOLY TRINITY (Greek Orthodox), 319 East 74th Street, Manhattan.
Rachmaninoff's "Vespers" ("The Night Vigil"), a 1915 setting for tenor and a cappella chorus; Richard Fracker, tenor; the Metropolitan Singers/Greek Choral Society; Dino Anagnost, conductor, 6 P.M.
Tickets, $18, $25 and $75.
Information: (212) 704-2100.
ST.
PAUL'S CHAPEL (Episcopal), Broadway at Fulton Street, lower Manhattan.
Bach's "Passion According to St. John"; choir and orchestra conducted by Owen Burdick, 4 P.M.
Tickets: $10.
Information: (212) 602-0873.
Monday
CARNEGIE HALL.
Handel's "Messiah," conducted by Robert Shaw; Orchestra of St.
Luke's, Atlanta Symphony Chorus and soloists; Penelope Jensen, soprano; Marietta Simpson, mezzo-soprano; Jon Humphrey, tenor, and Victor Ledbetter, bass, 8 P.M.
Tickets: $12 to $50.
The performance is sold out, but returned tickets may be available one hour before the performance.
Information: (212) 247-7800.
Maundy Thursday
CATHEDRAL OF ST.
JOHN THE DIVINE (Episcopal), Amsterdam Avenue at 112th Street, Manhattan.
World premiere of Nora Gibson's "Women at the Cross," a musical work with dance; Elaine Russell, soprano; Sherrie Carman, mezzo-soprano; David Dusing, tenor; Albert de Ruiter, bass; Cathedral Chorus; Bruce Fifer, conductor; Omega Liturgical Dance Company; Allan Tung and Sandra Rivera, choreographers, 9 P.M.
Information: (212) 316-7540.
CHRIST AND ST.
STEPHEN'S CHURCH (Episcopal), 120 West 69th Street, Manhattan.
"This Is My Body," a silent re-creation of the Last Supper, created by Estella Conwill Majozo, with communion service music by Merbecke; featuring the St.
Genesius Guild, directed by Kathleen Swann, 6 P.M.
Information: (212) 787-2755.
Good Friday
CALVARY BAPTIST CHURCH, 123 West 57th Street, Manhattan.
Handel's "Messiah"; choir and soloists; Paul Liljestrand, organist and music director, 7:30 P.M.
Information: (212) 975-0170.
CATHEDRAL OF ST.
JOHN THE DIVINE (Episcopal), Amsterdam Avenue at 112th Street, Manhattan.
Staged presentation of the medieval drama "Planctus Mariae"; Elaine Russell and Rachel Rosales, sopranos; Karen Krueger, mezzo-soprano; David Smith, tenor; under the direction of Bruce Fifer, noon.
Staged presentation of Schutz's "Seven Last Words of Christ," Palestrina's "Stabat Mater" and Allegri's "Miserere"; choir and soloists; Rachel Rosales, soprano; Johnson Flucker, counter-tenor; Wilbur Pauley and William Joyner, baritones; Albert de Ruiter, bass, and Ms.
Rosales, 8 P.M.
Admission: $10.
Information: (212) 316-7540.
CHURCH OF OUR LADY OF POMPEI (Roman Catholic), 25 Carmine Street, Manhattan.
Rossini's "Stabat Mater"; Patricia Dowell, soprano; Katherine Benfer, mezzo-soprano; Robert Van Valkenburg, tenor; William Swain, bass; choir; conducted by Michael Haubrich-Visconti, 7 P.M.
Information: (212) 989-6805.
CHURCH OF ST.
JOHN THE EVANGELIST (Roman Catholic), 340 East 55th Street, Manhattan.
Victoria's "Passion According to St. John" and "Improperia"; Bach's "Here Bide We Still"; Gregorian chants; Anaik Berneche, soprano; David Squires, tenor; Luiz Faria, bass; Peter Basch, organist and director, 3:15 P.M.
Information: (212) 753-8418
CHURCH OF THE EPIPHANY (Roman Catholic), Second Avenue at 22d Street, Manhattan.
Schubert's "Stabat Mater"; Barbara Shirvis, soprano; Kathleen Smith, mezzo-soprano; Eric von Bleicken, tenor; William Dyszel, bass; choir; conducted by Gail Archer. 7:30 P.M.
Information: (212) 475-1966.
CORPUS CHRISTI CHURCH (Roman Catholic), 529 West 121st Street, Manhattan.
Byrd's "Passion According to St. John" and works by Victoria, Morley and Richard Dering; choir; Robert Kuehn, narrator; Louise Basbas, conductor, 6:30 P.M.
Information: (212) 666-9350.
GRACE CHURCH (Episcopal), Broadway at East 10th Street, Manhattan.
Bach's "Passion According to St. John"; with members of the Orchestra of St.
Luke's and soloists; Frank Cedric Smith, conductor, 7:30 P.M.
Admission: $12 ($6 for students and the elderly).
Information: (212) 533-4653.
PARK AVENUE CHRISTIAN CHURCH (Disciples of Christ), held at St.
Ignatius Loyola Church, Park Avenue at 84th Street, Manhattan.
Pergolesi's "Stabat Mater"; Christina Casellato, soprano; Gwendolyn Jones, mezzo-soprano; women's chorus; Walter Hilse, organist; McNeil Robinson, conductor, noon.
Information: (212) 288-3246.
ST.
CLEMENT'S CHURCH (Episcopal), 423 West 46th Street, Manhattan.
Improvisational dramatic presentation of "The Passion According to St. John"; with Braulio Thorne, percussionist, 6:30 P.M.
Information: (212) 246-7277.
ST.
MALACHY'S CATHOLIC CHURCH, THE ACTOR'S CHAPEL (Roman Catholic), 239 West 49th Street, Manhattan.
Vizzini's "Stations of the Cross"; Smith's "Service of the Shadows," and Hopson's "O Come and Mourn." Duane Eggleston, tenor; Rick Costa, dancer; choir; conducted by Maureen Morgan. 12:15 P.M.
Information: (212) 489-1340.
ST.
PETER'S CHURCH (Lutheran), Lexington Avenue at 54th Street, Manhattan.
Bach's "Passion According to St. Matthew"; Rosalind Rees and Judith Otten, sopranos; Elsa Larssen, alto; Arthur Krieck, tenor; Rhys Ritter, bass; choir and orchestra; Thomas Schmidt, conductor.
Noon.
Information: (212) 935-2200.
ST.
THOMAS CHURCH (Episcopal), Fifth Avenue at 53d Street, Manhattan.
Victoria's "Passion According to St. Matthew"; King John IV of Portugal's "Crux Fidelis"; Lassus's "Adoramus Te Christe"; choir; Gerre Hancock, organist and director, 5:30 P.M.
Information: (212) 757-7013.
Holy Saturday
CHURCH OF THE EPIPHANY (Roman Catholic), Second Avenue at 22d Street, Manhattan.
Haydn's Mass No. 7, "Paukenmesse"; Barbara Shirvis, soprano; Kathleen Smith, mezzo-soprano; Eric von Bleicken, tenor; William Dyszel, bass; choir; Gail Archer, conductor. 7 P.M.
Information: (212) 475-1966.
MADISON AVENUE PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH, Madison Avenue at 73d Street, Manhattan.
Paschal Vigil Service, with soloists and orchestra and more than 50 actors and musicians. 9 P.M.
Information: (212) 288-8920.
Easter Sunday
BROADWAY UNITED CHURCH OF CHRIST (Congregational), 225 West 99th Street, Manhattan.
Parker's "Easter Cantata"; soloists, choir, harpist, organist and percussionist; Claudia Dumschat, conductor, 5 P.M.
Information: (212) 316-5700.
CATHEDRAL OF ST.
JOHN THE DIVINE (Episcopal), Amsterdam Avenue at 112th Street, Manhattan.
"Peregrinus," a medieval drama about Christ and his disciples; David Smith, tenor; Wilbur Pauley and David Ludwig, baritones; Frank Nemhauser, bass; Dorothy Papadakos, organist; Cathedral Singers; Bruce Fifer, music director. 7 P.M.
Information: (212) 316-7540.
CHURCH OF ST.
MARY THE VIRGIN (Episcopal), 145 West 46th Street, Manhattan.
Bach's Easter Oratorio; Mozart's Missa Brevis in F; Tallis's "Dum Transisset Sabbatum"; excerpt from Widor's Fifth Symphony; Kyler Brown, conductor and organist, 11 A.M.
Information: (212) 869-5830.
CHURCH OF THE EPIPHANY (Roman Catholic), Second Avenue at 22d Street, Manhattan.
Haydn's Mass No. 7, "Paukenmesse"; Barbara Shirvis, soprano; Kathleen Smith, mezzo-soprano; Eric von Bleicken, tenor; William Dyszel, bass; choir and orchestra; Gail Archer, conductor. 11:15 A.M.
Information: (212) 475-1966.
FIFTH AVENUE PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH, 7 West 55th Street, Manhattan.
Part III of Handel's "Messiah"; choir, orchestra and soloists; Terence J. Flanagan, organist; Richard Westenburg, conductor, 4 P.M.
Information: (212) 247-0490.
GRACE CHURCH (Episcopal), Broadway at 10th Street, Manhattan.
"Hallelujah Chorus" from Handel's "Messiah"; choir with trumpets and timpani; Frank Cedric Smith, director, 11 A.M.
Information: (212) 533-4653.
HOLY TRINITY LUTHERAN CHURCH, Central Park West at 65th Street, Manhattan.
Bach's Easter Oratorio; Phyllis Clark, soprano; Jacqueline Pierce, mezzo-soprano; James Archie Worley, tenor; Peter Stewart, baritone; Frederick Grimes, director and organist, 5 P.M.
Information: (212) 877-6815.
PARK AVENUE CHRISTIAN CHURCH (Disciples of Christ), Park Avenue at 85th Street, Manhattan.
Haydn's "Jurgendmesse" and motets by Senfl, Robinson and Handel; Cristina Casellato and Oksana Crovicka, sopranos; Walter Hilse, organist; McNeil Robinson, conductor, 11 A.M.
Information: (212) 288-3246.


Nets' Iron Man Stands Alone In Midst of Injured Teammates
At different periods over the last month, the Nets have had to make do without four of their five starters, everybody but Drazen Petrovic.
Petrovic, New Jersey's shooting guard, has not missed a game all season: 76 games, 76 starts.
But among the other starters this season, power forward Derrick Coleman has missed 15 games, center Sam Bowie 11, point guard Mookie Blaylock 10 and small forward Chris Morris 5.


Many Fear Measles Tagged Along With Student
After a day of studies at Island Trees High School, where he has won $100,000 in engineering scholarships from 10 different colleges for next year, Peter Grizzaffi wanders through the winding streets and close-built frame houses of his neighborhood, delivering the newspaper.
And when that doesn't keep him busy, he helps out at the Key Club, a student service group, where he worked behind the food counter at a wrestling exhibition on Sunday.


Programs Offered in New York's Churches and Halls
This is a list of some of the musical presentations planned for
Holy Week and Easter Sunday at churches and concert halls in
New York
City. All are free unless otherwise noted; donations are accepted at churches.
This selection, compiled by Bernard Holland, represents what caught this critic's eye and aroused his expectations.
Today
ST.
JEAN BAPTISTE CHURCH (Roman Catholic), 184 East 76th Street, Manhattan.
Gluck's "De Profundis," Salieri's Mass in D minor, and Haydn's Missa Beatissimae Virginis Mariae; Amor Artis Chamber Chorus and Orchestra and soloists; Cynthia Richards Hewes, soprano; Alexandra Montano, alto; Mukund Marathe, tenor; John Ostendorf, bass; Jane Hettrick, organist. 8 P.M.
Tickets: $15.
Information: (212) 874-4513.
Palm Sunday
CHURCH OF OUR SAVIOUR (Roman Catholic), Park Avenue at 38th Street, Manhattan.
Conte's "Hosanna," Carter's Handbell Procession, Darke's Service in F, and Casals's "O Vos Omnes"; Will Carter, conductor, 10:50 A.M. and 12:30 P.M.
Information: (212) 678-8166.
CHURCH OF ST.
IGNATIUS LOYOLA (Roman Catholic), Park Avenue at 84th Street, Manhattan.
Weelkes's "Hosanna to the Son of David," Leighton's "Drop, Drop Slow Tears," Victoria's "O Quam Gloriosum" and "Vere Languores Nostros"; Gregorian chant: "Passion According to St. Luke" with choir and soloists; Kathy Theil, soprano; Charles Robert Stephens, baritone; Philip Anderson, tenor; Kent Tritle, conductor, 11 A.M.
Information: (212) 288-3588.
CHURCH OF ST.
JOHN THE EVANGELIST (Roman Catholic), 348 East 55th Street, Manhattan.
Gregorian chant: "Passion According to St. Luke," Handel's "Since by Man Came Death" from the "Messiah," Schubert's German Mass; choir and soloists; Peter Basch, organist and choirmaster, 10:30 A.M.
Information: (212) 753-8418.
CHURCH OF ST.
LUKE-IN-THE-FIELDS (Episcopal), 487 Hudson Street, Manhattan.
Weelkes's "Hosanna to the Son of David," Poulenc's "Tenebrae Factae Sunt," de Velasco's "Christus Factus Est," and Sheppard's "In Manus Tuas"; choir; David Shuler, director and organist, 11:15 A.M.
Information: (212) 924-0562.
CHURCH OF THE HOLY APOSTLES (Episcopal), temporarily at the General Theological Seminary, 175 Ninth Avenue, at 20th Street, Manhattan.
Bach's organ partita "Sei gegruesset," Victoria's "Pueri Hebraeorum" and "Una hora," Santo's "Hosanna Filio David," excerpts from Bach's "Passion According to St. John," Handel's "Haste, Ye Souls," and Dufay's "Vexilla Regis"; Susan Iadone, violinist and recorder player; Donald Joyce, director, 11 A.M.
Information: (212) 807-6799.
CHURCH OF THE INCARNATION (Episcopal), Madison Avenue at 35th Street, Manhattan.
Aks's "Hosanna Filio David," and Bach's "Crucifixus" and "Into Thy Hands I Commit My Spirit"; choir; Jon Gillock, director and organist, 11 A.M.
Information: (212) 689-6350.
CORPUS CHRISTI CHURCH (Roman Catholic), 529 West 121st Street, Manhattan.
Gregorian chant: "Passion According to St. Luke," Durante's "Christus Factus Est," Palestrina's "Improperium," Kuhnau's "Tristis Est Anima Mea," and Lotti's "Crucifixus"; choir; Robert Kuehn, baritone; Louise Basbas, director, 11:15 A.M.
Information: (212) 666-9350.
DUFFY SQUARE, 47th Street and Broadway, Manhattan.
A blessing of the palms with the congregation of St.
Luke's Lutheran Church, followed by a procession to nearby St.
Malachy's Church, 10:30 A.M.
Information: (212) 489-1340.
FIFTH AVENUE PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH, Fifth Avenue at 55th Street, Manhattan.
Mozart's "Grabmusik," "Ave Verum Corpus," and "Laudate Dominum"; choir, soloists and chamber orchestra; Richard Westenburg, conductor; Terence J. Flanagan, organist, 4 P.M.
Information: (212) 247-0490.
METROPOLITAN-DUANE UNITED METHODIST CHURCH (Methodist), 201 West 13th Street, Manhattan.
Messiaen's "O Sacrum Convivium," Faure's "Palms," excerpts from Poulenc's "Stabat Mater," Mendelssohn's "Elijah," Barber's "Hermit Songs," Gounod's "Gallia" and Stainer's "Crucifixion"; choir and soloists; Marie Bogart, soprano; Beth Stone, mezzo-soprano; David Browning, tenor; Ray Wenzel, bass; Ernest Lehrer, director, 10:45 A.M.
Information: (212) 243-5470.
ST.
GREGORY THE GREAT (Roman Catholic), 144 West 90th Street, Manhattan.
Liszt's "Via Crucis," and excerpts from Bach's "St. Matthew Passion," Rossini's "Stabat Mater," and Menotti's "Saint of Bleecker Street"; with the Georgian Chorale and soloists; Theresa Cincione, Marlene Doran, Mark Smith and Mark Peters; Larry Mendes, conductor and organist, 4 P.M.
Information: (212) 724-9766.
ST.
JAMES'S CHURCH (Episcopal), 865 Madison Avenue, at 71st Street, Manhattan.
Music by Weelkes, Lotti and Allegri; choir; Judith Hancock, director and organist, 9:15 and 11:15 A.M.
Information: (212) 288-4100.
ST.
MALACHY'S, THE ACTORS' CHAPEL (Roman Catholic), 239 West 49th Street, Manhattan.
"Prepare Ye the Way" from Schwartz's "Godspell" and "Pie Jesu" from Lloyd Webber's Requiem; choir with soloists; Lou Ann Pavelin and Josie Foster, sopranos; Maureen Morgan, director, 11 A.M.
Information: (212) 489-1340.
ST.
PETER'S CHURCH (Lutheran), Lexington Avenue and 54th Street, Manhattan.
Gregorian chant: "Passion According to St. Luke," Praetorius's "Hosanna to the Son of David," excerpts from Bach's Cantata 182 and Schutz's "Was Hast du Verwirket"; Walter Hilse, director and organist, 11 A.M.
Information: (212) 935-2200.
Tuesday
ST.
THOMAS CHURCH (Episcopal), Fifth Avenue at 53d Street, Manhattan.
"Ploran Ploravit in Nocte" from Tallis's "Lamentation of Jeremiah," and an anonymous early 13th-century English Mass; choir; Gerre Hancock, organist, 5:30 P.M.
Information: (212) 757-7013, extension 303.
Maundy Thursday
CATHEDRAL OF ST.
JOHN THE DIVINE (Episcopal), 1047 Amsterdam Avenue, at 112th Street, Manhattan.
Byrd's Mass for Four Voices, Gesualdo's "O Vos Omnes" and Papa's "Crux Fidelis"; Cathedral Choristers; Johnson Flucker, conductor; Dorothy Papadakos, organist, 7 P.M.
Information: (212) 316-7540.
CHURCH OF ST.
IGNATIUS LOYOLA (Roman Catholic), Park Avenue at 84th Street, Manhattan.
Josquin's Pange Lingua Mass, Durufle's "Ubi Caritas" and Tallis's "O Sacrum Convivum"; choir; Kent Tritle, conductor; Chris Creaghan, organist, 7 P.M.
Information: (212) 288-3588.
CHURCH OF THE ASCENSION (Episcopal), Fifth Avenue at 10th Street, Manhattan.
Messiaen's "Banquet Celeste" and "O Sacrum Convivium," Durufle's "Ubi Caritas" and "Tantum Ergo" and Gregorian chant; Dennis Keene, organist and choirmaster, 6 P.M.
Information: (212) 254-8553.
CHURCH OF ST.
JOHN THE EVANGELIST (Roman Catholic), 348 East 55th Street, Manhattan.
Schubert's German Mass, Mozart's "Ave Verum Corpus" and Gregorian chant; choir and soloists; Peter Basch, organist and choirmaster, 5:30 P.M.
Information: (212) 753-8418.
CORPUS CHRISTI CHURCH (Roman Catholic), 529 West 121st Street, Manhattan.
Praetorius's Mass in Eight Parts, Schutz's "Unser Herr Jesus Christus" and "Calicem Salutaris"; choir; Louise Basbas, director, 6:30 P.M.
RIVERSIDE CHURCH (interdenominational), Riverside Drive at 122d Street, Manhattan.
Mozart's "Ave Verum Corpus," motets by Martini, Kuhnau, Bach and Sowerby and the spiritual "Were You There"; John Walker, director; John Morrison, tenor, 8 P.M.
Information: (212) 222-5900, extension 220 or 223.
EPISCOPAL CHURCH OF THE HOLY TRINITY, 316 East 88th Street, Manhattan.
Works by Mozart and Boulanger; Stephen Hamilton, music minister, 7 P.M.
Information: (212) 289-4100.
ST.
IGNATIUS CHURCH (Episcopal), West End Avenue at 87th Street, Manhattan.
Josquin's Pange Lingua Mass and Durufle's "Ubi Caritas"; choir; Dr.
Harold Chaney, music director and organist, 6:30 P.M.
Information: (212) 580-3326.
ST.
JEAN BAPTISTE CHURCH (Roman Catholic), Lexington Avenue at 76th Street, Manhattan.
Music by Carissimi, Viadana, Mozart, Bach and Gluck; choir; Ray Pellerin, director and organist; Bonita Lubinsky, flutist; John MacMaster, cantor, 7:30 P.M.
Information: (212) 288-5082.
ST.
THOMAS CHURCH (Episcopal), Fifth Avenue at 53d Street, Manhattan.
Excetre's Sanctus and Benedictus, Olyver's Agnus Dei and "Facti Hostes Eius in Capite" from Tallis's "Lamentations of Jeremiah," 12:10 P.M.
Kodaly's Missa Brevis, Durufle's "Ubi Caritas" and "Tantum Ergo" and Poulenc's "Vinea Mea Electra"; choir; Gerre Hancock, organist and choirmaster, 5:30 P.M.
Information: (212) 757-7013, extension 303.
TRINITY CHURCH (Episcopal), Broadway at Wall Street, Manhattan.
Gesualdo's "Tristis Est Anima," Tallis's "Verily, Verily, I Say Unto You"; choir; Dr.
Owen Burdick, director, 6 P.M.
Information: (212) 602-0873.
Good Friday
CHURCH OF THE HOLY APOSTLES (Episcopal), temporarily at General Theological Seminary, 175 Ninth Avenue, at 20th Street, Manhattan.
Byrd's "Passion According to St. John," Lassus's "Improperium," Pitoni's "Christus Factus Est," King John IV of Portugal's "Crux Fidelis" and Josquin's "Ave Christe"; Donald Joyce, director, noon.
Information: (212) 807-6799.
ST.
JEAN BAPTISTE CHURCH (Roman Catholic), Lexington Avenue at 76th Street, Manhattan.
Tallis's "Lamentations of Jeremiah," Gluck's "De Profundis," Martin's Agnus Dei, excerpts from Litaize's "Suite en Forme d'une Messe Basse" and motets by Victoria and Farrant; Amor Artis Chamber Choir; Johannes Somary, director; Bernadette Fiorella, soprano; Ray Pellerin, counter-tenor and organist; John MacMaster and Patrick Romano, tenors; Richard Holmes, bass, noon.
Information: (212) 288-5082.
Easter Sunday
ALL SAINTS CHURCH (Episcopal), 230 East 60th Street, Manhattan.
Byrd's Mass for Five Voices, Hurd's Easter Antiphon, Near's "Victimae Paschali Laudes" and Josquin's "Regina Celi Letare"; choir; David Hurd, director and organist; Marshall Farr, trumpet player, 11 A.M.
Information: (212) 758-0447.
CALVARY EPISCOPAL CHURCH, Park Avenue South at 21st Street, Manhattan.
Festival Eucharist with music for choir, bass, timpani and organ by Hampton, Hoiby and Bruce Saylor; and motets by Vaughan Williams and Thompson, 11 A.M.
Information: (212) 473-2877.
CATHEDRAL OF ST.
JOHN THE DIVINE (Episcopal), 1047 Amsterdam Avenue, at 112th Street, Manhattan.
Palestrina's Missa Papae Marcelli, di Lasso's "Christus Resurgens," Byrd's "Haec Dies" and Tallis's "O Sacrum Convivium"; choirs; Paul Winter, saxophonist; Bruce Fifer, conductor; Dorothy Papadakos, organist, 11 A.M.
Information: (212) 316-7540.
CHRIST AND ST.
STEPHEN'S CHURCH (Episcopal), 120 West 69th Street, Manhattan.
Easter music for brass; Meridian Arts Ensemble, 10:40 A.M.
Peeter's "Entrata Festiva," Wyton's "This Joyful Eastertide," Russell's Festival Mass, Handl's "Haec Est Dies," Rorem's "All Glorious God" and "Toccata" from Widor's Fifth Symphony; Robert Russell, director; Kenneth Hamrick, organist, 11 A.M.
Information: (212) 787-2755.
CHURCH OF NOTRE DAME (Roman Catholic), 405 West 114th Street, Manhattan.
Haydn's Missa St.
Johannis de Deo, excerpts from Handel's "Rezurrezione," Viadana's "Haec Dies" and Victoria's "Vidi Aquam"; choir and strings; David Schofield, director, 10 A.M.
Information: (212) 866-1500.
CHURCH OF ST.
IGNATIUS LOYOLA (Roman Catholic), Park Avenue at 84th Street, Manhattan.
Dirksen's "Christ Our Passover," Byrd's "Haec Dies," White's "Hymn of the World's Creator," Taverner's "Dum Transisset," Palestrina's Missa Brevis, the "Toccata" from Widor's Fifth Symphony and the world premiere of an untitled work for organ and brass by Nancy Wertsch; choir, soloist and brass ensemble; Karen Krueger, mezzo-soprano; Kent Tritle, conductor; Chris Creaghan, organist, 11 A.M.
Information: (212) 288-3588.
CHURCH OF ST.
LUKE-IN-THE-FIELDS (Episcopal), 487 Hudson Street, Manhattan.
North American premiere of Franz Tuma's Missa in G, di Lassus's "Resurrexi," Bassano's "Dic Nobis Maria" and Sheppard's "Dum Transisset" and music by Gabrieli and Frescobaldi; choir with the New York Cornet and Sacbut Ensemble and the Orchestra of the Old Fairfield Academy of New Canaan, Conn.; David Schuler, director and organist, 11:15 A.M.
Information: (212) 924-0562.
CHURCH OF ST.
JOHN THE EVANGELIST (Roman Catholic), 340 East 55th Street, Manhattan.
Gabrieli's Missa Brevis; Haydn's Trio No. 1 in C and Trio No. 3 in G, Bach's "Air," Mawby's "Alleluia," Cambini's Trio in A and Gregorian chants; choir, soloists and the Encore Chamber Players; Peter Basch, organist and conductor, 10:30 A.M. and noon.
Information: (212) 753-8418.
CHURCH OF ST.
MARY THE VIRGIN (Episcopal), 145 West 46th Street, Manhattan.
Gibbons's "Magnificat and Nunc Dimittis," Hassler's "Cantate Domino," Dubois's "O Salutaris," Titcomb's "Ave Verum," Franck's "Tantum Ergo" and Brown's "Laudate Dominum"; Kyler Brown, director and organist, 4 P.M.
Information: (212) 869-5830.
CHURCH OF THE ASCENSION (Episcopal), Fifth Avenue at 10th Street, Manhattan.
Bach's Prelude and Fugue in E Flat, William's "Festival te Deum in F," "Worthy Is the Lamb" from Handel's "Messiah," Monteverdi's Mass in F and "Toccata" from Widor's Fifth Symphony; choir, brass and timpani; Dennis Keene, organist and choirmaster, 11 A.M.
Information: (212) 254-8553.
CHURCH OF THE GOOD SHEPHERD (Episcopal), 240 East 31st Street, Manhattan.
Easter music of the Renaissance; wind ensemble and choir; Arthur Lawrence, organist and director, 11 A.M.
Information: (212) 689-1595.
CHURCH OF THE HOLY APOSTLES (Episcopal), at General Theological Seminary, 175 Ninth Avenue, at 20th Street, Manhattan.
Bach's "Toccata in C," Senfl's "Resurrexi," Friedell's "This Is the Day," Morales's "Regina Caeli," Hurd's Intercession Mass, Neswick's "On This Day" and Crocker's "Tuba Tune"; Donald Joyce, director, 11 A.M.
Information: (212) 807-6799.
CHURCH OF THE HOLY FAMILY (Roman Catholic), 315 East 47th Street, Manhattan.
Dvorak's Mass in D and Franck's "Laudate Dominum" and "Panis Angelicus"; choir with strings, bass, and timpani; Christopher Babcock, director and organist, noon.
Information: (212) 753-3401.
CHURCH OF THE INCARNATION (Episcopal), Madison Avenue at 35th Street, Manhattan.
Billings's "Easter Anthem," Williams's "Communion Service in D Minor," Brahms's "Magdalena" and Messiaen's "Meditation on Blissful Eternity"; choir; Jon Gillock, organist and director, 11 A.M.
Information: (212) 689-6350.
CHURCH OF THE INTERCESSION (Episcopal), Broadway at 155th Street, Manhattan.
Zabel's "Easter Proclamation," Hurd's "Gloria" and "Sanctus" from the Intercession Mass, Dirksen's "Christ Our Passover," Peeters' "Entrada Festiva" and "Worthy Is the Lamb" and the Hallelujah Chorus from Handel's "Messiah"; choir; Harlem Festival Brass Ensemble; W. Randolph Jr., organist and director, 10 A.M.
Information: (212) 283-6200.
CHURCH OF THE TRANSFIGURATION (Little Church Around the Corner, Episcopal), 1 East 29th Street, Manhattan.
Hassler's Missa Octo Vocum, Handl's "In Resurrectione Tua, Christe" and other music; choir and New York Kammermusiker; Ilona Pederson, director, 11 A.M.
Information: (212) 684-6770.
CORPUS CHRISTI CHURCH (Roman Catholic), 529 West 121st Street, Manhattan.
Scarlatti's Missa Quatuor Vocum, Charpentier's "O Filii a Voix Pareilles" and "Haec Dies," Moulinie's "Verbum Caro" and excerpts from Bach's "Orgelbuechlein"; choir and soloists; Marion Beckenstein and Ruth Cunningham, sopranos; Cynthia Stewart, mezzo-soprano; Lawrence Lipnik, countertenor; John Olund and Paul Solem, tenors; Thomas Baker, Phillip Gleason and Robert Kuehn, basses; Louise Basbas, director; Harvey Burgett, organist, 11:15 A.M.
Information: (212) 666-9350.
FIFTH AVENUE PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH, Fifth Avenue and 55th Street, Manhattan.
Earnest's "Son Has Risen," Bairstow's "Promise Which Was Made," Pfautsch's "Fanfare for Easter," Leisring's "Ye Sons and Daughters of the King"; choir, soloists and brass ensemble; Richard Westenburg, conductor; Terence J. Flanagan, organist, 9:30 and 11 A.M.
Information: (212) 247-0490.
HOLY TRINTIY LUTHERAN CHURCH, Central Park West at 65th Street, Manhattan.
Eccard's "Christians Rejoice," Brahms's "Here on Earth Have No Continuing Place," Dirksen's "Hilariter," Andrea Gabrieli's "Maria Magdalene," Tournemire's "Victimae Paschali" and "Toccata" from Widor's Fifth Symphony; choir and soloists with brass, timpani and organ; Frederick Grimes, organist and director; Phyllis Clark, soprano; Jacqueline Pierce, mezzo-soprano; James Archie Worley, tenor; Peter Stewart, baritone, 11 A.M.
Information: (212) 877-6815.
IMMANUEL LUTHERAN CHURCH, Lexington Avenue and 88th Street, Manhattan.
Bach's "Alleluia! For Christ the Lord Is Risen," Aichinger's "Lord Is Risen" and music by Bach and Samuel Scheidt; Charles W. Schramm Jr., director, 11 A.M.
Information: (212) 289-8128.
MADISON AVENUE PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH, Madison Avenue at 73d Street, Manhattan.
Excerpts from Handel's "Messiah," di Lasso's "Jubilate Deo," Byrd's "Ave Verum," Scarlatti's "Exultate Deo" and "Toccata" from Widor's Fifth Symphony; choir and Madrigal Singers of the Upland California High School; John Weaver, director and organist; Bruce Rogers, director of the Madrigal Singers, 9:15 and 11 A.M.
Information: (212) 288-8920.
MARBLE COLLEGIATE CHURCH (Reformed Church in America), Fifth Avenue at 29th Street, Manhattan.
"Toccata" from Widor's Fifth Symphony, the Hallelujah Chorus from Handel's "Messiah," Mulet's "Carillon-Sortie," Vulpius's "Christ Is Arisen," Williams's "Cantate Domino" and Wright's "Christ Is Being Raised From the Dead"; Kevin Walters, director, 9:15 and 11:15 A.M.
Information: (212) 686-2770.
NEW SCHOOL FOR SOCIAL RESEARCH, 66 West 12th Street, Manhattan.
Haydn's "Seven Last Words of Christ": Alexander Schneider and Isidore Cohen, violinists; Steven Tenenbom, violist; Laurence Lesser, cellist, and Schuyler Chapin, narrator, 2 P.M.
Tickets: $5 (free for students).
Information: (212) 229-5689.
ST.
BARTHOLOMEW'S CHURCH (Episcopal), Park Avenue at 50th Street, Manhattan.
Hindemith's "Morgenmusik," Gabrieli's Canzona per Sonare, Sweelinck's "Or Sus Serviteurs du Seigneur" and Langlais's "Mors et Resurrectio," 10:30 A.M.
Casciolini's "Angelus Domini," Brahms's "Magdalena," the Hallelujah Chorus from Handel's "Messiah" and "Toccata" from Widor's Fifth Symphony, 11 A.M.; Bach's "Christ Lag in Todesbanden" and Fantasia and Fugue in G minor; Peeters's "Entrata Festiva," Dirksen's "Christ Our Passover," Sumsion's Magnificat and Nunc Dimittis in G, Byrd's "Haec Dies" and Walton's "Coronation Te Deum," 4 P.M.; choir; James Litton, organist and director.
Information: (212) 751-1616.
ST.
IGNATIUS CHURCH (Episcopal), West End Avenue at 87th Street, Manhattan.
Byrd's Mass for Three Voices and "Terra Tremuit"; choir; Dr.
Harold Chaney, director and organist, 11 A.M.
Information: (212) 580-3326.
ST.
JEAN BAPTISTE CHURCH (Roman Catholic), Lexington Avenue at 76th Street, Manhattan.
Music for organ, brass and timpani by Pachelbel, Charpentier, Telemann and Coperario.
Choral music by Aichinger and Gabrieli; choir; Ray Pellerin, director and organist; John MacMaster, cantor, 10:30 A.M.
Information: (212) 288-5082.
ST.
PATRICK'S CATHEDRAL (Roman Catholic), Fifth Avenue at 50th Street, Manhattan.
Widor's "Festival, Alleluia," Copland's "Fanfare for the Common Man," Haugen's "Gloria, Mass of Creation," Proulx's Community Mass, excerpts from Handel's "Messiah" and other works; choir; John-Michael Caprio, director and choirmaster; Donald Dumler, organist, 10:15 A.M.
Easter music; St.
Patrick's College Choir, Dublin, Ireland; Dr.
Colum O'Cleirigh, director, 4:45 P.M.
Information: (212) 753-2261.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Front-Runner; Like Voters, Superdelegates Have Doubts About Clinton
Even though Bill Clinton won four primaries on Tuesday, even though Paul E. Tsongas announced today that he would not re-enter the race for the Democratic Presidential nomination, even though many of them concede there is probably no stopping Mr.
Clinton now, dozens of Democratic senators and representatives remain reluctant to endorse him.
Senator Jay Rockefeller of West Virginia scheduled a news conference for Friday to announce his backing.
Senator Tom Daschle told news organizations in his home state, South Dakota, that the moment had come to rally around Mr.
Clinton.
But beyond that there was little movement.


Black Sea Fleet Dispute Cools
President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia and President Leonid M. Kravchuk of Ukraine stepped back today from a confrontation over control of the Black Sea Fleet, and agreed to set up a commission to work out a plan for its redistribution.
After two telephone calls, the two Presidents decided to suspend decrees, issued this week, in which each had laid claim to the fleet, Mr.
Yeltsin told members of the Russian Parliament today.
The moves had caused a crisis between the two Slavic states that was threatening to split the Commonwealth of Independent States and open up the bitter question of the future of the Crimea, a prized peninsula in the Black Sea that now belongs to Ukraine.


Philip Morris Work to Y.&amp;R.
Young &amp; Rubicam Inc. got back into the tobacco business yesterday when Philip Morris U.S.A. announced that it had awarded the agency several assignments.
Until last summer, when it lost the Camel cigarette account, Y.&amp; R. had been an agency of Philip Morris's archrival, the R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, for six years.
Y.&amp; R. is already an agency of Kraft General Foods, which, like Philip Morris, is owned by the Philip Morris Companies in New York.


Topics of The Times; Accident on Fifth Avenue
A runaway cab mowed down a blind man and his guide dog, a black Labrador, on Fifth Avenue in New York City the other day.
The man is at Bellevue, the dog is at the Animal Medical Center and both are described as being seriously injured and "in shock." So, if the phone calls pledging support for both are any guide, are countless New Yorkers.
They know them.
For 20 years the man, who sold pencils, and his dog, who lay at his feet, have been fixtures on Fifth.
Like the buildings people see every day and the breakfasts they buy from corner carts, the man and the dog have been part of daily life.


Circle K Sale Plan Is Fought
The Circle K Corporation bondholders began legal action yesterday to oppose a proposed sale of the bankrupt convenience store chain to an investor group for $425 million.
The bondholders are owed $450 million, but would only receive about $25 million under the proposed sale.
In documents filed in United States Bankruptcy Court in Phoenix yesterday, the bondholders asserted that Circle K management had violated an agreement detailed in a Feb. 26 letter that the company would soon disclose plans for an independent re-organization to bring it out of nearly two years of bankruptcy.


North Korea Assembly Backs Atom Pact
After six years of delay, the North Korean Parliament ratified an agreement today to allow international inspectors into nuclear installations, starting the clock on a 90-day deadline to open up the plants where the Communist Government is believed to be developing atomic weapons.
Parliament's action, reported today by North Korea's official news agency, came with an assurance from Choe Hak Gun, the Minister of Atomic Energy Industry, that his country will now "accept nuclear inspection without delay."


Review/Art; Contrapuntal Paintings From Elizabeth Murray
The work of Elizabeth Murray seems to grow richer with each show.
Her latest paintings, seven of which are on view at Paula Cooper in SoHo, do not signal big changes, but their diversity of form and subtler, more somber palette suggest that Ms.
Murray continues to refine and deepen her idiosyncratic art.
As before, the paintings, composed of multiple shaped canvases, straddle the border between abstraction and representation, slowly, almost surreptitiously revealing forms like the cartoonish shape of a shoe embedded in the interlocking canvases of "Clock" or the corner of a room within the undulating, pocked surface of "Wishing for the Farm."
It is not that she plays tricks or is trying to turn her works into puzzles like those find-the-object games in children's magazines.
Her art remains remarkably free of irony or cant or pretension, although it partakes of the 1980's preoccupations with everyday imagery and large scale.
Her accomplishment is to make works that can be read on different levels at once, each level enhancing the others without canceling them out.


Falcons Waive Rozier
Atlanta Falcons running back MIKE ROZIER, who underwent arthroscopic knee surgery in January, was waived yesterday by the team.
The Falcons obtained Rozier in 1990 from the Houston Oilers in a $100 waiver deal.


Change Comes to the Top at Ogilvy
The advertising agency that created "the man in the Hathaway shirt" is now being run by a woman.
Ogilvy &amp; Mather Worldwide in New York announced yesterday that Charlotte Beers, the former chief executive of Tatham/RSCG, is now its chairwoman and chief executive.
Ms.
Beers, 56 years old, succeeds Graham Phillips, 53, who had held that post since Ogilvy was acquired by the WPP Group in a hostile takeover in 1989.


Books of The Times; A Mystery and More: The Inner Lives and Drives
The End of the Pier  By Martha Grimes 230 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $20.
La Porte, the fictional backdrop for Martha Grimes's latest mystery, is one of those small American towns that seem caught in a time warp.
As the local sheriff, Sam DeGheyn, observes, "Some of the La Porte townspeople were stuck back in the 50's somewhere, watching reruns of 'Father Knows Best' and surprised to hear Liberace had been dead for all these years." Unlike nearby Belle Harbor, a snobbish summer retreat for wealthy summer people from New York, La Porte is basically an unassuming community, the sort of "nonhappening place" that teen-agers long to escape from and strangers drive through quickly on their way to someplace else.


At the Bar; Beyond confrontational law: the feel-good approach.
Not long ago, the bar of Middlebury, Vt., watched with bemusement as Bill van Zyverden hung his shingle, or more accurately, his awning, over his new law office, in what was formerly the men's wear department of Abram's Department Store.
"Holistic Justice Center," it states.
"What are you practicing, wimpy law?" a local lawyer sneered, undoubtedly anticipating the reaction of most conventional practitioners.


Tories Remain in Power in Britain; Major Sees 'Magnificent Victory'
British voters returned the Conservative Government of Prime Minister John Major to office Thursday by a narrow margin over the Labor Party opposition, nearly complete returns indicated.
"We've won tonight a magnificent victory, a victory that many people thought was beyond our grasp," Mr.
Major told cheering supporters at party headquarters this morning.


De-Icing Report on Crash Plane Was Ignored; Ground-Based Cameras
To the Editor:
Re the March 22 crash at La Guardia Airport: Wouldn't it be a good idea to have ground-based videocameras record each takeoff and landing?
The tapes could be reused if nothing unusual happens.
Keeping the tape separate from the camera would insure preservation of the recording even if the camera is struck by the plane.
RANDOLPH HERR Forest Hills, Queens, March 26, 1992


A Parade of Musical Offerings for Easter Week
EASTER'S musical offerings this year seem not quite so grand as in the recent past: fewer extended works, fewer orchestras and extra musicians.
It is not always pleasing when sacred-music programs and economic realities intertwine, but in an imperfect world, they do.
Times have been tough, and this year's Easter presentations may reflect smaller music budgets.
The situation probably means a little less work for freelance professional musicians.
Big, ambitious doings are not absent, however.
Radio City Music Hall's 60th-anniversary "Easter Show" opens tonight and runs through April 23.
Rockettes and Easter bunnies are less Christian statements than old pagan rites with a little glitz thrown in: New York show-business versions of nature reawakened and life in bloom.
Mankind has been doing things like this for thousands of years, so why not at Radio City?


In Reporter's Libel Suit, Unexpected Is the Norm
Years before Barry Switzer, the former football coach of the University of Oklahoma, said Jack Taylor Jr. was involved in a scheme to plant cocaine on a player, Mr.
Switzer had already said that he was once so angry at the investigative reporter that he wanted to punch him through a plate glass window.
Mr.
Taylor, who was a reporter at The Dallas Times Herald when Mr.
Switzer coached the Oklahoma Sooners football team, had written occasional unflattering stories about Mr.
Switzer's stormy, but successful leadership of one of the nation's powerhouses in the sport.
Mr.
Switzer's tenure ended with his resignation two years ago.


Lawmakers Approve Money for the Police
The New York City Council yesterday approved modifications to the city's budget that will put 200 more police officers on the street and 60 new security guards in city schools and prevent the closing of a Brooklyn fire battalion.
In a 46-to-3 vote, the Council restored $434,000 that the Dinkins administration had planned to cut from the Police Department's Safe Streets-Safe City program.
The money will allow the Police Department to hire civilians to free about 200 police officers for patrol duty.
The Mayor had sought to scale back the program.


Review/Film; A Terrorist Rock Farce Set in a Rhode Island Club
Morris Brock (Stanley Matis), the narrator of James Wolpaw's ma niacally zany comedy "Complex World," is a sad-sack folk singer who looks a lot like the young Woody Allen and sings his own ludicrous protest songs in a rock club in Providence, R.I., the Heartbreak Hotel.
Morris does not go in for political correctness.
One of the numbers he performs asks, "Why do we feed the broads when we could feed the whole damn world?" Another is a series of ranting epithets directed at the state of New Jersey.
His performances invariably inspire hails of abuse and garbage.
For reasons too silly to go into, Morris also belongs to a group of political terrorists who have planted 100 pounds of plastique in the club's cellar.
It is set to explode if a ransom is not paid by 1 A.M. on a certain night.
Coincidentally that's the same night the mayor has paid a motorcycle gang to tear up the place.


New Group At Times Co.
The New York Times Company has formed a custom publishing group that will enable it to put out a variety of special publications, including magazines and "one shot" publications, sports-events programs, special supplements and "advertorials," which are all-advertising inserts or sections.
The new group, called NYT Custom Publishing, will serve all of the Times Company's divisions, including the Regional Newspaper Group, as well as outside customers.
It will have no connection with the news or editorial departments of The New York Times.


Hooray for the Hollywood That Cares
To the Editor:
Hollywood gets a bad rap for movie portrayal of lesbians and gay men.
As a gay man who is H.I.V.-infected, I want to applaud the movie industry.
It was impossible to watch the 64th annual Academy Awards (news article, March 31) without noticing the red ribbons worn by presenters, award recipients and nominees to indicate solidarity with people with AIDS.
It was wonderful to have Billy Crystal explain the meaning of the ribbons, as well as Richard Gere's call for increased compassion and funds for AIDS research.
The broadcast followed by a day "Something to Live For: The Alison Gertz Story." This made-for-television movie broadened the face of AIDS, while poignantly dealing with issues of discrimination, health insurance, condom use and the need for compassionate education.


Report of Ashe's Illness Raises an Old Issue for Editors
Arthur Ashe's reluctant admission, under pressure from USA Today, that he has AIDS has once again raised a persistent question for the nation's news organizations: When does the public's need for important information legitimately overrule a person's right to privacy?
On Tuesday, USA Today contacted Mr.
Ashe and told him that it had received information that he had AIDS and asked him if it was true.
Mr.
Ashe declined to confirm the report or to deny it.
USA today told Mr.
Ashe that it would not publish any allegations that he had AIDS without an on-the-record source for the information but that it intended to seek independent confirmation of the report.
USA Today did not obtain sufficient confirmation to publish the article in Wednesday's paper.


TV Weekend; The Hard Times and Happy Feet of 1939 Harlem
The scene is Harlem and the year is 1939.
The times aren't easy, especially for black people.
Most of the women seem to be working in white folks' kitchens.
Many of the men have no jobs at all.
Temporary escape is usually found at the Savoy Ballroom -- "home of the happy feet" -- on Lenox Avenue.
And that's where four young black women, long best friends and roommates, spend as much time as they can.
Their intertwined stories are told in "Stompin' at the Savoy," the CBS movie on Sunday at 9 P.M.
Here's a rare television bird, a drama with music, and it flies beautifully.
An exceptionally fine cast has an opportunity to strut splendidly, and sometimes literally, under the direction of Debbie Allen.
Lynn Whitfield ("The Josephine Baker Story") is Esther, ambitious and a bit too calculating because she knows "there's money to be made and I'm going to get some of it" if she can only open her own beauty shop.
Vanessa Williams plays Pauline, aiming to be a singer but seemingly doomed to being a maid or hat-check girl.
Jasmine Guy ("A Different World") is the gentle, romantic Alice, something of an eternal victim.
And Vanessa Bell Calloway is wary Dorothy, caught up in a difficult interracial relationship.


State Attorney Says 3 Mets Will Not Face Criminal Charges
The three New York Mets players who were accused of raping a woman here last year will not face criminal charges, a state prosecutor said today, because the case lacks corroborating evidence and comes down "to the word of a victim against that of three individuals."
Bruce H. Colton, the state attorney of the 19th Judicial Circuit of Florida, said the case against the players, Dwight Gooden, Daryl Boston and Vince Coleman, was not strong enough to bring before a jury with much likelihood of success.


A Call for Discipline In the Airline Industry
The move by Robert L. Crandall, chairman of American Airlines, to overhaul the carrier's convoluted fare system is not only aimed at persuading more people to fly.
It is also intended to discipline the airline industry, which has been cutting deals with corporations for lower fares, and at stopping a growing rebellion among business travelers.
Mr.
Crandall, who was instrumental in introducing frequent-flier programs and "super saver" discount fares, is once again using his position atop the nation's largest airline to force a drastic change on the industry.


Suit Says School Bus Ban Constitutes Housing Bias
A Westchester County condominium development that caters to older families was charged by the Justice Department yesterday with discriminating against younger families by refusing to permit school buses on its private roads.
A civil suit filed in Federal District Court in White Plains charges that the development, Heritage Hills in Somers, violated the Fair Housing Act.


Mexican Unit To Bombardier
One of Canada's fastest-growing conglomerates, Bombardier Inc., bought Mexico's biggest manufacturer of railway rolling stock from the Government, the Treasury Department announced today.
The Montreal-based company paid about $68 million for Concarril, outbidding three other consortiums, the announcement said.


False Fears About Japan's Crash
When the Japanese stock market plummeted 10 percent earlier this week, fear struck Wall Street.
The Dow Jones industrial average plunged nearly 100 points in two days and Americans wondered whether Main Street would be next.
The answer to such fears, to use the reigning cliche from the movie "Wayne's World," is, NOT!
For starters, Japanese stock prices have been falling steadily since 1989 with little discernible impact outside Japan.
Indeed, the Japanese economy continues to grow.
And even if falling stock prices force Wall Street prices down, the impact on U.S. production won't be noticeable.


U.S. Nun Returns to Guatemala to Tell of Rape
An American Roman Catholic nun who says she was raped and tortured by members of the Guatemalan security forces led court officials this week on a step-by-step re-creation of her abduction more than two years ago.
The re-enactment on Wednesday came on the second day of court appearances by Sister Diana Ortiz, a 31-year-old member of the Ursuline Sisters of Mount St.
Joseph, a religious order based in Maple Mount, Ky.
Sister Diana returned to Guatemala on Sunday to give evidence in the case.


New York's Supreme Court, Everyone Agrees, Needs Diversity
To the Editor:
I must disagree with Elizabeth McCaughey's assertions that the New York State Task Force on Judicial Diversity, assembled at the behest of Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, "is pressing to have judges elected on the basis of race" (Op-Ed, March 23).
The report of the independent task force calls for no such thing.
What it does call for is giving members of minorities a fairer opportunity to sit as justices on the New York State Supreme Court -- an opportunity that the task force and Ms.
McCaughey agree is not available on an equal basis now.


Paul Havens, 80; Was a Researcher Of Viral Hepatitis
Dr.
W.
Paul Havens Jr., a medical professor and researcher of viral hepatitis and cirrhosis, died Monday at his home in Haverford, Pa.
He was 80 years old and died of heart disease, his family said.


Bob Evans Farms To Hold a Review
Bob Evans Farms Inc., a restaurant and food-products company in Columbus, Ohio, has invited five agencies to participate in a review for its $17.7 million account.
The agencies are: W. B. Doner in Southfield, Mich.; Eire Partners in Chicago; Noble &amp; Associates in Chicago; Tatham/RSCG in Chicago, and J. Walter Thompson Detroit.


Bush's Son to Rescue
In the latest and clearest sign of political alarm in the Oval Office, President Bush has summoned his son George, who helped dispatch John H. Sununu four months ago, to review White House speechwriting, domestic policy and scheduling.
Article, page A27.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.50
6.50
9.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
6.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.50
3.87
5.71
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.67
3.86
5.54
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.75
3.95
5.65
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.99
7.11
7.94
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.85
7.90
8.25
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.80
8.86
9.33
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.70
6.71
7.28
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Dinkins, at Synagogue, Defends Handling of Crown Heights Clash
Mayor David N. Dinkins went to a Brooklyn synagogue, whose doors had been smeared with swastikas, to condemn anti-Semitism yesterday and ended up confronting questions that have simmered among some Jews over his handling of the Crown Heights racial violence last summer.
In the sort of appearance he often makes around the city, he stopped by the Ocean Avenue Jewish Center of Congregation Pri Eitz Chaim in Sheepshead Bay to denounce as "despicable" the spray-painting of several pale-blue squiggly swastikas on the building last month and to press again for passage of a state law that would increase the penalities for hate crimes.
No arrests have been made in the vandalism of the building.


Reviews/Fashion; An Undimmed Trigere
The first standing ovation of the New York fall and winter fashion showings came at the end of Pauline Trigere's show.
After two traditional wedding dresses -- one with a back-dipping hemline, the other with a lace tunic over a pleated skirt -- the designer appeared on the tiny stage in her Seventh Avenue showroom.
Flanked by models in red, black and gold evening dresses, she was greeted with waves of applause.
The designer, in a knee-length white suit, had opened the show by announcing her policy on skirt lengths.
It was hardly astonishing.
"We're going to stay short," she said.
"It's younger. It's nicer. And all the women who have bought short dresses -- they want to wear them."


Chief of Operations Appointed at Convex
The Convex Computer Corporation yesterday promoted Terrence L. Rock to the new post of chief operating officer, putting him in charge of daily operations.
In his new role, Mr.
Rock, 45 years old, will take over many responsibilities handled by Robert J. Paluck, chairman, president and chief executive of the Richardson, Tex., company, which makes small supercomputers.


Economic Scene; The Many Fears Of the Electorate
THOUGH the recession appears to be ending, the voters remain anxious and angry, as this week's primaries showed once again.
What explains their mood?
Daniel Yankelovich, president of the Public Agenda Foundation, said in an interview that the unusually high level of voter anxiety stemmed not from current economic conditions but from fears about the economy's future.
Usually, he said, the American people look at a recession like a traffic jam; they expect that as soon as the jam is broken they will soon be speeding along the highway as before.
But this time, people are afraid that something has gone terribly wrong with the system, and their future and their children's future are in real trouble.


Accounts
*
McVitie's Group, Islesworth, England, to Leo Burnett Europe, London, for the biscuit maker's advertising across Continental Europe.
Leo Burnett bested the incumbent agency, Publicis, London, in a review.
Billings were not disclosed. *
Pfizer Inc., New York, to Partners &amp; Shevack Inc., New York, for its estimated $10 million Visine eye-drops advertising account, previously handled at Backer Spielvogel Bates, New York.
Other finalists that participated in the review were Calet Hirsch Spector, New York, Grey Advertising, New York, and Warwick Baker &amp; Fiore, New York.


Restaurants
The planners of Zoe, the rakish new grill restaurant in SoHo, left no stone unturned in catering to contemporary tastes.
The kitchen features a wood-burning oven, wood-burning grills, a sizzling rotisserie, a wood-fueled pizza oven, a smoker, Chinese woks, steamers: every au courant technique short of a campfire for suckling pig.
At first impression, all this may seem a bit too stagy, too calculated.
But as three recent visits revealed, there is considerable substance supporting the style.
Zoe is the creation of Thalia and Stephen Loffredo, both of whom come from the hotel industry.
The young chef, John DiLeo, worked under Christian Delouvrier at both the Maurice in the Parker Meridien Hotel on West 57th Street and the new Nikko Essex House on Central Park South.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
AEG Corp., Basking Ridge, N.J., an international high-technology company and a unit of AEG A.G., named David L. Armstrong president. *
Excelsior Income Shares Inc., New York, a mutual fund company, named Townsend Brown 2d president, chief executive and director.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: White House; Bush's Son Rides Into Town to Review the Campaign
In the latest and clearest sign of political alarm in the Oval Office, President Bush has summoned his son George, who helped dispatch John H. Sununu four months ago, to review White House speechwriting, domestic policy and scheduling, Bush aides said today.
The mere presence of the 45-year-old Mr.
Bush, after complaints from the President about his political operation, was an implied threat because it was George W. Bush who rode into town last November from his home in Dallas to confront Mr.
Sununu with the message that he must resign as White House chief of staff.


Topics of The Times; A Phone Vote for Libraries
America's libraries are much more than places in which one can borrow books.
They're where generations of immigrants have introduced themselves to English.
Where countless children have introduced themselves to Mother Goose and Dr.
Seuss and the Brothers Grimm.
Where job-hunters scour help-wanted ads, the curious read the out-of-town papers and the lonely take comfort in joining a community of readers.
And right now libraries need everybody's help.
Many have had to shorten their hours, reduce book purchases and staff and cancel special services like bookmobiles and literacy programs.
That is why the American Library Association and Friends of Libraries USA are hoping that Americans will pick up a phone this week and call 1-800-530-8888 to offer their support.
In return they'll receive a brochure on how to help their local library -- for instance, by enlisting legislative support.


Sounds Around Town
Trio on the Green
John Bunch Trio featuring Bucky Pizzarelli, Tavern on the Green, Central Park at West 67th Street, (212) 873-3200.
The room in Tavern on the Green where the pianist Eddy Duchin rose to fame 50 years ago is now presenting a series of well-known contemporary pianists leading their own trios in weeklong engagements.
The Chestnut Room, as it is now known, offers these pianists an opportunity to play on a nine-foot Steinway Hamburg Grand.
This weekend the polished hands of John Bunch will be at the keyboard as he leads a trio that includes the celebrated guitarist Bucky Pizzarelli and the bassist Steve LaSpina.
They play from 10 until 2 tonight and tomorrow.
There is no music charge.
The minimum for food and drinks is $10.
An Actor's Life
Michael Moriarty Jazz Quintet, Fat Tuesday's, 190 Third Avenue, at 17th Street, Manhattan, (212) 533-7902.
Michael Moriarty's career, which mingles acting and music, is now putting the spotlight on his music even as he continues in the role of the district attorney Ben Stone in the television series "Law and Order." Mr.
Moriarty is playing piano and singing with a quintet that includes the singing bassist Jay Leonhart and Mr.
Leonhart's son, Michael, a trumpeter who won a Grammy Award this year.
The group also includes Igor Buttman on tenor saxophone and the drummer Dennis Mackrel, a veteran of Count Basie's orchestra.
Performances tonight and tomorrow at 9 and 11 P.M. and Sunday at 8 and 10 P.M.
There is a $15 cover and a $7.50 minimum for food and drink on all days.
Seems Like Old Times
Karen Akers, the Ballroom, 252 West 28th Street, Manhattan, (212) 244-3005.
Karen Akers, fresh from recording (at long last) the original cast album of "Grand Hotel," is back at one of the favorite stomping grounds of her earlier years, the Ballroom.
To mark the occasion, her program includes a first performance of a new Craig Carnelia song, "Flight," combined with an old Carnelia song, "I Met a Man Today." She is also performing a rarely heard Noel Coward song, "Matelot," as well as songs from her newly released album, "Unchained Melodies," her first recording in five years.
Backed by a quartet led by the pianist Mike Abene, she gives two shows tonight and tomorrow at 9 and 11 P.M.
Tickets are $30 (at ringside) or $20, with a two-drink minimum.


Art in Review
Mary Carlson  Max Protetch 560 Broadway (at Prince Street) SoHo Through tomorrow
In Mary Carlson's spare, haunting show, the human form is represented by eight body stockings.
Made of a variety of soft, pliable or fragile materials, they are either hung from the wall, folded up or dropped in desolate little heaps on the gallery floor.


Digital Posts Huge Deficit; Intel Net Off
The Digital Equipment Corporation yesterday announced a record $294 million loss and sharply lower sales for its third fiscal quarter, which ended March 28, and blamed the continuing global economic slump.
The Intel Corporation announced increased sales but lower profits, reflecting one-time charges.
Following are the details of the two companies' results: Digital Equipment
Digital's loss, in contrast to a profit of $117 million in the corresponding quarter last year, was far more severe than Wall Street analysts expected, and Digital's stock fell $5.25, or nearly 10 percent, to $48.25, in trading on the New York Stock Exchange.


Review/Art; Social Commentary in Works by Willie Birch
The long and illustrious influence of folk art on 20th-century American art has yet to be thoroughly chronicled.
It stretches (at least) from Elie Nadelman and Florine Stetheimer, Marsden Hartley and William H. Johnson to postwar artists like William King and Red Grooms and, in more recent years, Jim Nutt, Roger Brown and Faith Ringgold.
To this fragmentary list must be added the name of Willie Birch, a Brooklyn resident who is having a large and impressive solo exhibition of painting and sculpture at Exit Art in SoHo.
Mr.
Birch, who was born in New Orleans in 1942, was educated in the ways and means of late modernism at the Maryland Institute in Baltimore.
He began his career as an abstract painter in the Color Field manner, but in the late 1970's he shifted to a figurative style, inspired by folk art, that places equal stress on the documentary and the decorative.





Art in Review
Robert Heinecken  Pace/MacGill Gallery 32 East 57th Street Manhattan Through May 2
Robert Heinecken's barbed investigations of contemporary sexual mores, particularly as presented in advertising and the mass media, have given him a reputation as one of photography's bad boys.
The bratty humor that characterized much of his earlier work manifests itself here in a series of altered cardboard cutouts of the sort used as advertising displays.
Mr.
Heinecken gives a sexual edge to the grinning, wholesome figures in these displays by painting over parts of them and pasting on bits of other photographs.
In one, a shapely woman in a bathing suit proffers a package of condoms, while in another a cutie in tight shorts cheerfully makes an obscene gesture.
Mr.
Heinecken has worked over a number of these figures extensively, but the jokes in them don't improve much.


Short-Term Interest Rates Plunge
The decline in the important Federal funds rate yesterday surprised and delighted skittish financial markets.
Prices of long-term bonds rose and short-term interest rates fell to their lowest levels in nearly 20 years.
The move by the Federal Reserve Board was its first effort to cut interest rates since Dec. 20 and came in the wake of recent reports suggesting to some analysts that the economic recovery, which appeared to be building during the winter, was losing momentum.


Young Stays In by Staying in Complete Control
Sinker, slider, fastball.
Slider, fastball, sinker, change.
Anthony Young had all of his pitches working, one after the other, combination after combination, inning after inning.
"Absolutely in charge," said Manager Jeff Torborg.


Heat Rallies Round Depressed Burton
"Unfortunately in this business there are a lot of ups and downs," Miami Heat center RONY SEIKALY said yesterday in answer to questions about the depression that has ended the season of his teammate WILLIE BURTON during the playoff drive.
Burton, a second-year forward, will continue his treatment for the condition in an unidentified medical center, Miami officials said.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the restoration of the Cathedral of Notre Dame in Paris misstated an aspect of its history.
French kings were not crowned or buried there.


The Noriega Verdict; 'Appalling Chapter' Ends for Panama
President Guillermo Endara of Panama said today that the conviction of Panama's former strongman, Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega, on drug-trafficking charges "closes an appalling chapter in the history of Panama."
But many other people here gave only passing attention to the outcome of the trial in Miami.


&gt;Georgia Agency Prices an Issue
A $130.6 million tax-exempt financing by the Municipal Electric Authority of Georgia was tentatively priced yesterday through underwriters led by the First Boston Corporation.
The maximum yield for the revenue bonds is about 6.618 percent for an issue due in 2020.


Rev. Robert Taylor, 87, Bible Society Ex-Head
The Rev.
Robert T. Taylor, a former general secretary of the American Bible Society, died on Sunday at Westminster Gardens Health Center in Duarte, Calif.
He was 87 years old and lived in Duarte.
Mr.
Taylor worked at the society's national headquarters in Manhattan from 1949 until he retired in 1969.
He was in charge of fund raising, administration and promotion, including a project that sent 10 million Bibles to Japan after World War II.


The Long and Short of It (and the Wild and Elegant, Too)
If you're longing for a walk down the wild side of Carnaby Street, circa 1968, Anna Sui can take you there.
If you have a yen to break out into riotous color, Zang Toi is your man.
If the idea of mixing the feminine-masculine equation has appeal, look to Randolph Duke.


P.L.O. Panel Delays Confrontation With Arafat
The Palestine Liberation Organization decided today to postpone a crucial meeting of its 94-member Central Committee that was expected to challenge the policies of Yasir Arafat, the P.L.O.'s charismatic leader, who narrowly escaped death in an air crash in the Libyan Desert two days ago.
Supporters and opponents of Mr.
Arafat's policies agreed to suspend the P.L.O.
Central Committee meeting indefinitely until Mr.
Arafat is able to attend and decides to reconvene it.


McCann Executive To Move to AC&amp;R
Paul Cappelli has been appointed executive vice president and executive creative director at AC&amp;R Advertising Inc., in New York.
His appointment takes effect on May 1, the agency said yesterday.
Mr.
Cappelli, 36 years old, had been senior vice president and deputy creative director on the Coca-Cola account at McCann-Erickson, which he joined in 1985.


Quotations of the Day
"Today we welcome you as the man who closed the book of apartheid." PRESIDENT IBRAHIM BABANGIDA, welcoming President F. W. de Klerk to Nigeria.  [ A11:1 ]
"History has kept us apart for many reasons, for many decades. Tonight we can say that the barriers of history have been broken down." PRESIDENT DE KLERK  [ A11:1 ]


Net Up 19.3% At Fannie Mae
The Federal National Mortgage Association reported a 19.3 percent increase in first-quarter earnings today, reflecting a soaring amount of transactions from the refinancing boom.
"In addition to a record earnings performance, the first quarter saw us far surpass our previous high in business volume," said James A. Johnson, chairman of the Government-sponsored company, known as Fannie Mae.


4 Ex-Polish Officials Accused By U.S. of Dealing in Arms
Ten men, including four former Polish Government officials, have been indicted in Brooklyn on arms-dealing charges after a sting operation by the United States Customs Service, Federal officials announced yesterday.
The defendants are accused of plotting to sell more than 100,000 assault rifles, 9,000 grenade launchers, 1,000 missiles, some MIG-29 fighter planes and possibly some parts for nuclear weapons to Iraq.
The arms were to come from Poland and Russia.


The Early Masters Are Wadkins and Sluman After 65's
Lanny Wadkins, riding confidence built over two years of nearly winning at this golfing shrine, and Jeff Sluman, riding the momentum from a historic hole-in-one, both fired sizzling seven-under-par 65's today to tie for the first-round lead at the Masters.
On Augusta National greens that have yet to reach top speed, calm and sunny conditions brought out optimum scoring.
A total of 18 players broke 70, shattering the previous Masters first-round record of 12.
There were 35 rounds under par, breaking the first-round tournament record of 33 set in 1965.
The scoring average of 72.05 is the lowest ever posted on a single day in the first two rounds.


Dow Rebounds 43.61 on Rate Move by Fed
Stocks rebounded yesterday, as anxiety eased, at least for a day, over a market downturn and weakness in Tokyo.
After the Federal Reserve moved to ease interest rates, the Dow Jones industrial average recovered nearly half the 94 points it lost the two previous days.
The Dow drifted upward at the opening, and suddenly vaulted more than 30 points just before noon.
It floated to a peak at 2 P.M., and remained well above 3,200 for the rest of the day, closing at 3,224.96, up 43.61, or 1.4 percent.


Riley Stands His Ground After Calls Don't Sit Well
The door to Pat Riley's office was closed today, but that was not enough to conceal the clamoring made by the Knicks' coach and a group of his assistants, all of whom were watching a replay of the 93-89 loss to the Celtics at Boston Garden on Wednesday night.
"Oh, come on!"


Lynn Krominga, Executive, Wed
Lynn Krominga, the president of the licensing division of Revlon, and Amnon Shiboleth, a founding partner of the Israeli law firm Shiboleth, Yerushalmi, Roberts, Yisraeli &amp; Zissman, both in New York, were married yesterday.
Associate Justice Richard W. Wallach of the Appellate Division of State Supreme Court, First Department, officiated in his chambers in Manhattan.


AIDS Policy Coodinator Named by Mayor Dinkins
Acknowledging that New York City needs to do more for people with AIDS, Mayor David N. Dinkins yesterday appointed Ronald S. Johnson, a well-known advocate for AIDS causes, to the new position of city coordinator for AIDS policy.
Mr.
Johnson, who is executive director of the Minority Task Force on AIDS and a frequent critic of the city's policies on AIDS, said publicly for the first time yesterday that he has tested positive for the virus that causes the disease.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Signed Craig Worthington, third baseman, to a minor league contract with Colorado Springs of the Pacific Coast League.
NEW YORK YANKEES -- Signed Shawn Hillegas, pitcher, to a minor-league contract.
SEATTLE MARINERS -- Signed Eric Gunderson, pitcher, to a contract with Jacksonville of the Southern League.
National League
ST.
LOUIS CARDINALS -- Placed Bryn Smith, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list.
Recalled Rheal Cormier, pitcher, from Louisville of the American Association.
Purchased the contract of Donovan Osborne, pitcher, from Arkansas of the Texas League.
Basketball  Continental Basketball Association
OMAHA RACERS -- Announced the resignation of Mike Miller, equiptment manager.
Football  National Football League
ATLANTA FALCONS -- Waived Mike Rozier, running back. Canadian Football League
OTTAWA ROUGH RIDERS -- Signed Scott Campbell, quarterback. College
BROWN -- Named Matt Kredlich women's swimming coach.
CANISIUS -- Named John Beilein men's basketball coach.
DAYTON -- Agreed to terms with Jim O'Brien, men's basketball coach, on a three-year contract.
INDIANA -- Suspended Pat Knight, guard, from the basketball team, for public intoxication.
LIVINSTON -- Named Billy Slay athletic director, effective June 1.
LOYOLA MARYMOUNT -- Announced the resignaton of Mike Normand, men's volleyball coach, effective at the end of the season.
UC RIVERSIDE -- Named John Masi athletic director.
YALE -- Named John Stuper baseball coach.


Officer Shoots Partner in Mishap
A police officer was shot once in the arm last night when his partner's gun accidentally discharged as they struggled with a man whom they had followed into a Manhattan bodega, the police said.
The officer was not seriously hurt, the police said.
The two officers had pursued the man into the grocery store at 2374 Amsterdam Avenue, in Washington Heights, after seeing him slip a gun inside his waistband when he was about a block away, at the corner of West 177th Street and Audubon Avenue, said Inspector Eamon P. Gonzalez, the commander of the 5th Division Patrol.


Review/Film; Inside Hollywood: An Impious Tale
Robert Altman has not really been away.
Yet his new Hollywood satire titled "The Player" is so entertaining, so flip and so genially irreverent that it seems to announce the return of the great gregarious film maker whose "Nashville" remains one of the classics of the 1970's.
Taking Michael Tolkin's clever and knowing screenplay, which Mr.
Tolkin adapted from his own novel, Mr.
Altman has made the kind of "in" Hollywood film that will be comprehensible to just about anybody who goes to movies or who simply reads about them.


Uncertainties Stall New U.S. Warning to Iraq
Uncertainty over the foreign policy of the next British Government and hesitation by Turkey are holding up the Bush Administration's plan to warn President Saddam Hussein to stop attacks against Iraqi Kurds or possibly face an allied air strike, diplomats here say.
After reports that Iraq has moved Soviet-made antiaircraft missiles to the northern city of Mosul and is massing forces close to Kurdish enclaves, American officials have said they want Britain and France to join in telling Baghdad to withdraw the missiles, stop flying combat aircraft and refrain from attacks on Kurdish-held areas.
There would be an implicit threat of military action if Iraq refused.


De-Icing Report on Crash Plane Was Ignored; Perils of Takeoff Line
To the Editor:
About five years ago, I was on a T.W.A. jumbo jet waiting to take off from La Guardia Airport under similar conditions to USAir Flight 405, which crashed March 22 (news article, March 23).
The plane was fully loaded, and we sat locked inside for two hours, while the plane was de-iced, taxied out, came back for a second de-icing and got in the takeoff line again.
After we had waited about a half-hour, the wind shifted, and we had to go to the other end of the runway, with ice all the while building up on the wing, next to my window.
However, after all this time, to de-ice again would mean losing our place in line and another hour's wait.


Corrections
An article in The Home Section on March 12 about the Eighth International Cat Show misidentified the producer of the show.
The show was produced and presented by INCATS of Austin, Tex.


Ex-Chief of United Way Vows to Fight Accusations
William Aramony, the ousted president of the United Way of America, intensified his counterattack today, saying he had been denied access to evidence that would disprove accusations that he manipulated the organization's finances for questionable purposes and billed personal expenses to the charity.
Hinting that he might sue the charity's governing board for defamation, Mr.
Aramony warned: "They're not going to crush this guy. No way. I want justice." But he also backed away from earlier assertions that the board had approved of all his activities.


It's Easy to 'Pig Out' at This Buffet
When ESPN needed a guerilla sloganeer to push its pro football package, it turned to the irrepressible adman, George Lois, the man behind "I Want My Maypo." He devised the elegant rallying cry: "Pig Out."
Lois has now turned to pithily capturing ESPN's buffet platter of 156 baseball games and emerged with this tasteful effort: "In Your Face."
The slogans are interchangeable, but "Pig Out" more accurately caught Monday's opening day tripleheader (truncated to two in New York because its broadcast of the Mets-Cards game was blacked out).


Threat of Strike in Euro Disney Debut


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  DINKINS NAMES AIDS CHIEF
Acknowledging that New York City's efforts to assist people with AIDS need improving, Mayor Dinkins appointed Ronald S. Johnson, a well-known AIDS advocate, to the new position of city coordinator for AIDS policy.
At a news conference called to announce the appointment, Mr.
Johnson, a frequent critic of city AIDS policy, said publicly for the first time that he had tested positive for the HIV virus.
B3.
CHANGES AT 110 LIVINGSTON
New York City Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez announced some important staff changes in an effort to get speedier action on some of his instructional ideas, including his plans for lengthening the school day.
Mr.
Fernandez called the moves a reorganization though some in the city's educational community discerned the marks of a shake up.
B3.
CONDEMNATION AND QUESTIONS


De Klerk Is Given Red-Carpet Welcome in Nigeria
Nigeria greeted President F. W. de Klerk of South Africa with a red-carpet welcome today on the first visit by a South African head of state to black-ruled Africa's most populous and wealthiest nation.
The visit represents the most significant stride forward for Pretoria in its campaign to win acceptance from the rest of the continent.
Mr. de Klerk flew into this newly established capital at the invitation of President Ibrahim Babangida, who made the gesture after South Africa's whites voted in a referendum three weeks ago to support Mr. de Klerk's efforts to dismantle the nation's apartheid system of strict racial segregation and pursue negotiations to grant South Africa's black majority a share of power.
Mr.
Babangida has been a leader in black-ruled Africa's campaign against Pretoria for its racial policies.


Transition To HDTV Is Outlined
The Federal Communications Commission outlined a broad regulatory framework today for introducing high-definition television, which promises pictures as crisp as those in a movie theater.
And the agency proposed that today's transmission technology be phased out entirely by the year 2008.
Under the plan, companies that own ordinary television stations would be given a second channel to broadcast programs in the new high-resolution format.
This two-channel arrangement would be maintained during a 15-year transition in which consumers would have a choice between watching shows on one of today's sets or on the next generation of screens.


Ford Cut Pay Of Its Chief to $1.14 Million
The Ford Motor Company's chairman, Harold A. Poling, took a 6.6 percent pay cut in 1991, earning $1.14 million in salary and other compensation, the company disclosed yesterday.
While the base salary for the top five officers of the No. 2 auto maker did not change in 1991 from 1990, cuts were made in non-salary compensation like allowances for overseas assignments and club memberships.


Writers Honor Johnson
MAGIC JOHNSON is the winner of the J. Walter Kennedy Citizenship Award selected by the Professional Basketball Writers Association of America.


Corrections
A picture caption in Science Times on Tuesday about the asteroid Gaspra misstated its size.
It is approximately 8 miles wide and 12 miles long.


Liquid Diet Leaves Mayor Yearning to Chew
A month after he was hospitalized for an abscess on his colon, Mayor David N. Dinkins is still on a liquid diet, and he said yesterday that he was fed up with it.
"I don't want to see Jell-O again in life," the Mayor told reporters at City Hall who inquired about his health.
"And the broth, the chicken broth, most of it is very bland. The best I've ever had I think was some people from Hadassah brought me some to the hospital. It was absolutely delicious."


Japan Fears Decline in Stocks Will Undermine Its Economy
The plunge in share prices here has grown so unnerving in the last week that a number of Japan's top Government officials and business leaders have begun to say the market's deepening malaise may soon start dragging down the Japanese economy and weakening the financial system.
It has long been an article of faith here that the stock market ultimately hewed to the dictates of powerful Government bureaucrats, and that the heart of the economy, manufacturing and industrial corporations, was little influenced by market ups and downs.


Crimson Scores Again
To the Editor:
Allan H. Kalmus ("Beat the Bulldog," letter, March 29) includes Gerald Ford (Yale Law) in his list of Yale graduates who became United States Presidents.
By the same reckoning, he could have added to the Harvard-educated Presidents (two Adamses, two Roosevelts and John F. Kennedy) Rutherford B. Hayes (Harvard Law).
ORMONDE DE KAY New York, March 30, 1992


Review/Rock; So Smooth, So Smiling, So Nasty
The Beautiful South's show at Tramps last Friday night was a party -- the very British, very T. S. Eliot sort.
The music was dapper and cheerful, but the talk had an undercurrent of nastiness and depression.
Topics included love, death, literature and severed heads.
Drinking was discussed, and drink was drunk.
Horns belted bright, polite bursts.
Witticisms flew.
The stage, crowded with three singers, three horn players, a guitarist, a bassist, a drummer and a disgruntled-looking pianist, was a mass of bobbing heads, and so was the audience.
Like a London bus, the Beautiful South's music is double-decker.
On one level it's bright, glistening pop, with influences from soul, cocktail jazz, even a dab of new-wave.
But the lyrics are wry-to-scathing notations on relationships and modern times.
The band's 1990 second album, "Choke" (Elektra), reads like an 11-chapter novella from a criminally sane mind.
One song on the album, "My Book," is the diary of a failure; another one, "I Hate You (but You're Interesting)," is a suicide note from a contemporary J. Alfred Prufrock.


Bugno Enters Tour
The world's top-ranked bicycle racer, GIANNI BUGNO, of Italy and the top-ranked team, Gatorade-Chateau d'Ax, also of Italy, entered the Tour Du Pont, yesterday.
America's major race, the 1,000-mile Tour will be run May 7-17 through Delaware, Maryland, Pennsylvania, Virginia and Washington, D.C.


House Adopts Major Changes in Its Management
After hours of partisan wrangling, the House tonight approved Democratic proposals to put its day-to-day administration under new management, with Republicans given an unheard-of veto on the hiring of two new high-ranking officials.
Republicans, seeking to exploit Democrats' embarrassment over the House bank scandal and charges of drug-dealing at the House post office, said these concessions were not enough and refused to agree on a package drawn up by a bipartisan study group.


F.C.C.'s Call Charging Plan
In a move that should please harried business travelers, the Federal Communications Commission proposed rules today to simplify making long-distance credit card calls from a pay telephone.
Under the proposal, local telephone companies would maintain a data base of long-distance credit card numbers and be able to link customers to their correct long-distance carrier as soon as they have dialed their credit card numbers.
At present, a customer must generally first dial a toll-free number to reach his or her long-distance carrier, followed by the number he or she is trying to call and the credit card number.


ABC Reports Drugs Used at Brown Home
ABC News, quoting unidentified police officers, reported last night that Edmund G. Brown Jr. tolerated the use of cocaine and marijuana at parties at his home in Los Angeles while he was Governor of California in the late 1970's.
ABC said its sources were four men who were on Mr.
Brown's state police security detail.
Two of them agreed to be interviewed on camera, but their faces were disguised and they were not identified.


Relief, but Few Smiles to Be Found
As the Mets and the Cardinals were completing a four-game series today, Dwight Gooden, Vince Coleman and Daryl Boston were informed of the Florida state attorney's decision not to prosecute the three players.
Less than an hour later, the three Mets, unsmiling, filed into a makeshift news conference in an unused locker room at Busch Stadium.
There followed declarations of exoneration, of anguish, of gratitude.
Questions that suggested the state attorney's precise wording of his decision was far more ambiguous than outright exoneration were disregarded.


Sports of The Times; Long John's Long 71 Has Crowd Oohing
AS his drive soared off the first tee at the Masters, the gallery stared upward as if watching a rocket launching.
After what seemed like several minutes of flight, his ball descended into the middle of the fairway far beyond the bunker at the top of the slope, bounced a few times and rolled through the chalked crosswalk that is supposed to be unreachable.
"That's at least 320 yards," a marshal said. "Nobody ever hit it there before."


U.S. JURY CONVICTS NORIEGA OF DRUG-TRAFFICKING ROLE AS THE LEADER OF PANAMA
Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega, the former leader of Panama, was found guilty of eight counts of cocaine trafficking, racketeering and money laundering today, marking the first time in American history that a jury has convicted a foreign head of state of criminal charges.
The jury of nine women and three men, which deliberated for five difficult days and had previously described itself as deadlocked, acquitted the deposed Panamanian leader of two cocaine trafficking charges.


Art in Review
Richard Gerstl and Oskar Kokoschka  Galerie St.
Etienne  24 West 57th Street Manhattan Through May 9
This exhibition is both an admirable achievement and a missed opportunity.
It brings together more paintings by Richard Gerstl, a talented Viennese artist who took his life in 1908 at the age of 25, than have ever been seen in an American museum or gallery.
Unfortunately, these 21 paintings and 5 drawings -- nearly a third of Gerstl's surviving works -- are crowded together with 42 additional drawings and paintings by his contemporary Oscar Kokoschka, whose achievement is far more familiar.


Iqaluit Journal; The Day the Eskimos Were Cast Into Darkness
Martha Flaherty, Larry Audlaluk and John Amagoalik were children when it happened nearly 40 years ago, but the events related to the relocation of indigenous families in the high north are burned in their memories.
"The Government really abused us," Ms.
Flaherty said.
"They just dumped us, without facilities, without housing, without food. They pulled families apart."


On Stage, and Off
Father Knows Best?
Macaulay Culkin may be home alone more than he expected this spring, now that "Sam I Am," the Off Broadway show in which he was scheduled to star, has told him "no thanks."
It seems as if Macaulay's father, Kit Culkin, a former child actor himself, has seen "Gypsy" once too often.
Billy Hopkins, the show's director, and Keith Reddin, the playwright, both say Mr.
Culkin demanded rewrites of the script in the form of threats.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Challenger; BROWN STRUGGLES TO HONE CAMPAIGN
Even as he insists that he can still wrest the Democratic nomination from Gov.
Bill Clinton, Edmund G. Brown Jr. is sounding less combative, more defeated and altogether unsure how to move his Presidential campaign forward.
During two days of speeches and in several interviews since his third-place finish Tuesday in New York, Mr.
Brown resisted attacking Mr.
Clinton, acknowledged that his "Take Back America" message had not broken through to enough voters and described his campaign as if it were a movement.


Advertisers Urged to Battle Practice of Trade Promotion
THE advertising industry, already fighting foes ranging from recession to mediocre creative output, is being urged to battle another villain, one portrayed as a masterful pickpocket.
At the 74th annual meeting of the American Association of Advertising Agencies here yesterday, Robert L. James, chairman and chief executive of McCann-Erickson Worldwide in New York, sought to stir his colleagues with a call to arms against a practice known as trade promotion.


Officer Shoots Driver of Cab In Manhattan
A novice cabdriver who was apparently unaware that his two passengers were robbery suspects on the run was shot and critically wounded yesterday morning by a police officer in Greenwich Village, after the cab had been stopped and one of the passengers arrested, the police said.
A half-dozen witnesses to the shooting, which took place shortly after 9 A.M. on West 14th Street in front of the Salvation Army's Greater New York headquarters, gave conflicting accounts of the incident, but all of them agreed that one shot was fired and that the victim's hands were raised near or on the roof of the cab when the police officer fired.
The police said that just before the man was shot, he had been protesting to officers because his cab had been stopped.


Mother Is Bludgeoned to Death
In the 10 years that he lived with his mother in a spacious Washington Heights apartment, Darren Lee was an unobtrusive, if familiar presence, best known to his neighbors for swaying to the silent beat of his headphones and toting a large valise he said carried his artwork.
But Wednesday night in a rage that stunned residents of his well-kept building at 330 Wadsworth Avenue, the 25-year-old man bludgeoned his mother, Gloria Lee, 53, to death with a hammer in the apartment they shared, the police said.
Mr.
Lee was charged with murder yesterday.


Review/Dance; Tremendous Life Struggle Built of Small Details
O.D.C./San Francisco, which opened a two-week season at the Joyce Theater on Tuesday night, was founded in 1971 as the Oberlin Dance Collective of Ohio.
Five years later, the company moved to San Francisco, where it established a theater and is an important dance producer.
O.D.C. has also put together an impressive roster of artists, writers and composers with whom its three resident choreographers collaborate in dances for the troupe itself and for other major dance companies.
Given all this, one might expect a certain stodginess or disdain for risk.
But on the evidence of the opening night program, O.D.C. is more alive and is kicking harder than in its early Oberlin days.
The company's 10 dancers have a bracing way of moving, as if the terrain before them were to be shot through in brisk turns and soft looping tabs and high, stretched jumps.
Dynamos, they stop and start on a dime but do so with considerable eloquence.
"Force of Circumstance," a dance by the company's founder, Brenda Way, that is set to a vigorous modular score by Paul Dresher, is a pure-movement dance in which lines and wedges of dancers plow the stage space in carefully constructed choreography.
But the overall effect is of tremendous life struggle.
Careful scrutiny of any single dancer's role reveals small, quick gestures and odd lifts and falls that are freighted with unspecified emotions.
"Force of Circumstance" was performed by Shannon Mitchell, Mae Chesney, Lizanne McAdams, Ney Fonseca, Robert Moses and Richard Chen See.
David K. H. Elliott created the strong lighting here and throughout the program.
Ms.
Way is a choreographer of almost willful nerve, intelligence and curiosity.
For "Loose the Thread," set to an evocative score by Mr.
Dresher, she has chosen the life of Virginia Woolf and the Bloomsbury group as her subject.
George Herriman's comic strip, "Krazy Kat," is the subtext for "Still Krazy/Kat," danced to music by Jelly Roll Morton, Charles L. Roberts and William Bolcom, with taped cartoon voices by Geoff Hoyle.
It is a measure of Ms.
Way's success that one is left wanting more in each case, but the hunger is principally for a sharper focus.
The choreographer creates an intensity of atmosphere and a feeling of layered imagery in the first piece that are reminiscent of Woolf's writing.
Ms.
Way suggests the fastidiousness of Bloomsbury passions, and the condescension.
Her final image strikingly captures Woolf's struggle to maintain her psychic equilibrium.
But surely the group must have been preoccupied by more than the constant changing of sexual partners, real and fantasized?
"Loose the Thread" was danced by Ms.
Mitchell as Woolf, Patricia Jiron as Vita Sackville-West, Ms.
Mc Adams as Woolf's sister, Vanessa, and Mr.
See, Brian Fisher, Ms.
Chesney, Mr.
Fonseca, K. T. Nelson, Mr.
Moses and Kevin Ware.
The handsome costumes were by John and Sandra Woodall, with scenic design by Mr.
Woodall.
Leslie Scalapino served as literary collaborator.
A full appreciation of the ambitious, sprawling "Still Krazy/Kat" probably depends on knowing the Herriman characters well (or not at all).
The piece is otherwise fun but somewhat confusing, for all the splendor of the sets by Wayne Thiebaud, the costumes by Eleanor Coppola and the cartoonlike, nervy angularity and tumbling pace of the choreography.
Ms.
Nelson, Mr.
See and Mr.
Moses led the cast as the wide-eyed and lovable Krazy, the belligerent Ignatz Mouse and the scheming Offissa Pup, respectively.
Ms.
Nelson, a boldly compelling actress, is the creator of "The Velveteen Rabbit," which will be performed next week at the Joyce, 175 Eighth Avenue at 19th Street.


Man Is Charged in Disappearance of Child
The police arrested the operator of a Brooklyn yeshiva and charged him with kidnapping a 13-year-old former student whose whereabouts were still unknown as of this morning.
Sgt.
Tina S. Mohrmann, a Police Department spokeswoman, said the man, Rabbi Schlomo Helbrans, 35, of 2245 Beach 45th Street in Coney Island, took the youth away because he disapproved of the way the child's parent were raising him.


Art in Review
Paul Cadmus  Midtown Payson Galleries 745 Fifth Avenue (near 58th Street) Through April 18
Another lesson in the counter-productivity of censorship is served up by this large exhibition of Paul Cadmus's paintings and drawings.
The show's centerpiece is "The Fleet's In!," the canvas that brought the artist his first measure of fame in 1934 when an offended Navy official ordered it removed from an exhibition of painting and sculpture commissioned by the Federal Government's Public Works of Art Project, at the Corcoran Gallery of Art in Washington.
The order, of course, only had the opposite effect of drawing attention to the canvas, which was widely reproduced in newspapers under headlines like The Daily News's "Artistic? Or Disgraceful?"


Albany Reports a Rise in Crime In All Areas but New York City
Reported crime declined in New York City last year, but increased everywhere else in the state, according to statistics released today.
State officials said the trend might be caused in part by the migration of criminal activity from New York City to suburban and upstate communities.
New York City still accounted for 65 percent of the crimes reported in the state in 1991, according to the figures, which were released by the State Division of Criminal Justice Services.
But while crime in the city fell in 1991 by about 4.4 percent compared with 1990, it rose by 3.9 percent everywhere else.


Chip Indicator Drops Slightly
Orders for computer chips reached a record high in March, but were balanced by a strong increase in shipments, which caused the semiconductor industry's leading indicator to decline slightly, a trade group reported today.
The Semiconductor Industry Association, based in San Jose, Calif., reported a book-to-bill ratio of 1.08 for the three-month period that ended in March, down from a revised figure of 1.11 in February and 1.09 in January.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: On the Sidelines; TSONGAS DECLARES HE WON'T RE-ENTER DEMOCRATIC RACE
Paul E. Tsongas announced today that he would not re-enter the 1992 Presidential race, despite his surprisingly strong showing in the New York primary Tuesday.
The former Massachusetts Senator, who pulled out of the campaign three weeks ago after losing to Gov.
Bill Clinton in Illinois and Michigan, said he believed he could have raised enough money and reassembled a big enough staff to have resumed a limited campaign.


4A's Spotlight On Political Ads
With elections in both Britain and America this year, the American Association of Advertising Agencies has a spotlight on political advertising at its 74th annual meeting in Naples, Fla.
And a featured speaker yesterday morning, as Britain went to the polls, was Margaret Thatcher, the former British Prime Minister, who called political advertising "a very specialist kind of advertising, very different from your normal experience." The reason, she added, is that in product advertising "you can't say someone else's product is absolutely terrible."


On My Mind; Missile-Mongering
First, fellow students of journalism, I want to thank the truth squad of military specialists, outside and inside the Pentagon, who helped me achieve victory over the mighty column-writing team of Evans and Novak.
You will, I trust, remember my investigative reporting on a column by Rowland Evans and Robert Novak.
Their story was that the Israelis were trying to sell to China an Israeli air-to-surface missile called STAR.


New Charges Against Man In Child Case
Kodzo Dobosu, who was indicted in October on charges of sexually abusing three of his adopted children and endangering eight others, was indicted in Manhattan yesterday on charges of stealing $11,500 in city child-care money intended for a child who was no longer under his care.
The new charges were the latest filed against the 51-year-old Mr.
Dobosu, who once gained national prominence and "Father of the Year" acclaim in 1983 for adopting dozens of troubled and handicapped children.


De-Icing Report on Crash Plane Was Ignored
To the Editor:
The USAir crash at New York City's La Guardia Airport that killed 27 people (news article, March 23) was senseless and avoidable.
The Federal Aviation Administration and USAir are clearly to blame.
An interim report from a Canadian crash inquiry involving a Fokker F28 on March 10, 1989, was sent to the F.A.A. and all major airlines in December 1990 (news article, March 27).
That report recommended longer-lasting Type II anti-icing fluids on the wings; holding planes at gates to minimize departure delays on the runways, and de-icing equipment on runways.
The Fokker F28 is particularly susceptible to icing problems on its wings.
Why was this information ignored by the F.A.A. and USAir?


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Saturday about Chilean wineries misstated the name of Chile's largest vineyard.
It is Concha y Toro.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Congress; Campaign Spending Bill Is Passed by the House
The House passed a measure today that would limit spending in Congressional elections, but Republicans denounced it as an incumbent-protection bill and said President Bush would veto it.
Democrats, eager to claim the banner of reform, said the bill would limit the influence of money on politics, replacing "the foot race of financing with a competition of ideas," as Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri, the House majority leader, put it.


Wall St. Gives the Nikkei a Break
The rally on Wall Street appears to have given the Japanese stock market a respite.
Share prices soared today after two weeks of relentless declines.
The Nikkei index of 225 stocks ended the week at 17,850.66, up 1,252.51 points, or 7.6 percent, on the day.
Volume was about 380 million shares.
For the week, the index fell 709.05, or 3.8 percent.


Fed Moves Again to Spur Growth And the Markets Respond Briskly
Amid concern that the economic recovery remains dangerously weak, the Federal Reserve moved today to stimulate growth by pushing down an influential interest rate.
The Fed pumped more money into the nation's banking system to reduce the Federal funds rate -- the rate at which banks lend each other money overnight -- to 3.75 percent from 4 percent.


Market Place; Mexican Stock's Underpinnings
THE largest construction company in Mexico became a hot new stock issue in the United States yesterday, largely on the basis of profits that will not be realized for many years, if ever, but that were reported as having been earned last year.
Empresas ICA Sociedad Controladora went public at $17 per American depository share.
That was above the range of $14 to $16 that the company said it would seek when it filed to go public last month, but it did not begin to describe the investor interest in the company, commonly known as ICA.
The shares traded as high as $20.625 in New York Stock Exchange trading, before dropping back to $19.75.


Art in Review
Donald Lipski  Galerie Lelong 20 West 57th Street Manhattan Through April 11
Donald Lipski has a Surrealist's eye for bringing found objects to life by joining them in odd combinations.
As far back as the 1970's he was covering gallery walls with tiny sculptures composed of studio ephemera -- pencils, bits of scrap paper, screws -- bound together with thread and rubber bands.
He includes a similar installation in his current show, though the hybrid objects have grown larger, and most of them now share the function of holding wax candles.
One, for instance, is inserted in the bowl of a pipe; another protrudes from the front of an oxygen mask; two or three are lined up in a cigarette pack, etc.


Diner's Journal
Un Deux Trois Chef Goes Solo
Chai Wattana, the chef for 11 years at Cafe Un Deux Trois on West 44th Street in Manhattan, has ventured out on his own to open Le Max just around the corner at 147 West 43d Street.
Housed in a space that has seen three short-lived restaurant runs, Le Max aims for a more upscale mood.
It has a mural-covered ceiling, stenciled walls, painted columns, fancy chandeliers and lots of mirrors.
The bistro theme is reinforced with paper-draped tables.
The only incongruent elements are a television set over the bar and the funky pop music that is piped in.


Review/Theater; A Different Kind of Irish Conflict
From "The Iceman Cometh" to "Conversations With My Father," the bar has been a place where characters can bare their secrets and even their souls.
On the other hand, a bar play can simply be an excuse to bring opposites together, as is the case with "A Terrible Beauty." Watching Kevin Breslin's play, one remembers Harry Hope's line in "The Iceman Cometh": there's "no life or kick" in the booze.
The intention is to be timely.
"A Terrible Beauty," which opened last night at the Provincetown Playhouse, deals with this year's St.
Patrick's Day parade and the conflict between die-hard Irish conservatives and gay and lesbian demonstrators.
One would have learned far more about that battle from reading the newspapers.


Critic's Choice/Dance; Inner Landscapes Manifested in Motion
Christopher Beck's "Inscapes 2," to be presented tonight through Sunday at the Gowanus Arts Exchange in Brooklyn, offers a good opportunity to get acquainted with a cozy and adventurous dance center not far from the Brooklyn Academy of Music, a fine performer turned choreographer and the group of appealingly individualistic dancers who have inspired Mr.
Beck's latest solos.
Something of Mr.
Beck's outlook on people and dance can be gleaned from his comments about those performers, colleagues and friends whom he rightly describes as beautiful dancers of compelling presence.
They range in age from the 12-year-old Jessi Phillips to Irving Burton, a former teacher of Mr.
Beck and a performer of antic charm and earthiness who is in his late 60's.
Miss Phillips will dance to Mozart, Mr.
Burton to a poem by Mani Leyb, spoken by the performer in its original Yiddish.


Art in Review
John Pfahl  Janet Borden Gallery 560 Broadway (at Prince Street) SoHo Through May 9
John Pfahl's style of landscape photography might be called the deadpan picturesque.
Mr.
Pfahl is best known for gorgeous color landscapes in which nasty little details like nuclear power plants intrude on the otherwise idyllic scenes.
In many of the photographs of waterfalls shown here, Mr.
Pfahl's wit is equally pointed.
Several pictures, printed in a grandiose panoramic format, present spectacular scenery in a more or less straightforward way.
Niagara Falls is depicted with bright puffs of mist billowing up at its base while imposing pewter-colored clouds fill the sky.
Mr.
Pfahl employs familiar devices of landscape photography to heighten the picturesqueness of his scenes.
In a picture of Shoshone Falls, Idaho, he includes not only a tiny rainbow cast by the tumbling waters, but also an observer, perched on a rock at one side of the frame, who recalls similar figures that appear in 19th-century landscape paintings and photographs.


De-Icing Report on Crash Plane Was Ignored; Use a Heating Device
To the Editor:
One wintry day some years ago, the front door on my greenhouse would not close.
Suspecting ice, I examined both sides of the doorjamb.
No ice was apparent, or any other kind of obstacle.
I took off a glove and ran my fingers up and down both sides of the jamb and still detected no ice.
I fetched a propane torch and blasted the wood with a blue flame, just to see what would happen.
To my amazement, water flowed off the jamb on the hinge side.
After I gave the door the propane treatment, it closed as easily as on a summer day.


Corrections
A report in the Book Notes column on Wednesday misstated JohnHuey's position at Fortune magazine.
He is a senior editor.


Court Order Is Sought To Allow Film's Distribution
A coalition of film makers and civil rights groups sought an order in Federal District Court in Manhattan yesterday to allow the distribution of "Damned in the U.S.A.," an English documentary about censorship in the arts that is under legal attack by the Rev.
Donald E. Wildmon, the anti-pornography crusader.
Theaters and film festivals that planned to show the 1991 international Emmy Award-winning film next month in New York and other cities have said they would not show the film under threat of a lawsuit filed by Mr.
Wildmon in Federal District Court in northern Mississippi.


Peoria Journal; Dreams and City's Image Are Threatened in Strike
From the barbershops and health clubs to the banks and bowling alleys, the talk of this quiet Midwestern city has been the Caterpillar strike.
Everyone, it seems, in this city of 113,000 people, knows someone who is walking the picket line at Caterpillar Inc., the construction machinery company whose workers have been on strike since November.


Review/Music; Transience Attending A Sense Of Place
Perhaps there is somewhere a parallel between the confusing variegations of 20th-century music and the wanderings of its creators.
The two poles of Arthur Lourie's career are almost comical in their distance from each another: first in Moscow as Soviet commissar for music in 1918 and some 40 years later in Princeton, N.J., as a tweedy professor in the midst of American academe.
There were stops in between, Paris among them.
Lourie found different music everywhere he went, and it found him.
Indeed, listening to snippets from his opera "The Blackamoor of Peter the Great" at Carnegie Hall on Wednesday night, one pictured a refugee of style, a passenger on a train headed who-knows-where, watching the landscapes of Scriabin, Stravinsky, Prokofiev and Schoenberg slip by.


COMPANY BRIEFS
*
American Software Inc., Atlanta, announced the formation of a French subsidiary, Amlog S.A., based in Paris. *
Dow Chemical Co., Midland, Mich., plans to invest $250 million in Czechoslovakia by the turn of the century, the Prague newspaper Mlada Fronta Dnes said.


Congress and White House Continue Sparring Over Privileges


The Spoken Word
POETRY READING, St.
Mark's Church in the Bowery, Second Avenue and 10th Street, Manhattan.
Nicole Breedlove, Dana Bryant, Cynthia Nelson, Veronica Webb and others will read from their works.
Tonight at 10:30.
Admission: $5.
Information: (212) 674-0910.
WALT WHITMAN POETRY READING, Queens College Theater, 65-30 Kissena Boulevard, Flushing.
Readings of Whitman's poetry by the Galway Kinnell, a poet, and David Little, an actor.
Sunday at 2 P.M.
Free.
Information: (718) 997-3626.


CHRONICLE
Add MILTON GLASER to the list of people about whom nice things will he said.
He is to receive the Fulbright Award for Individual Achievement at a dinner to be given by Metro International on Monday evening in the United Nations delegates' dining room.
Metro International provides cultural programs for Fulbright scholars and other international students in the New York region.


Money Fund Assets Up
The assets of the nation's 591 money market mutual funds increased by $13.71 billion, to $500.34 billion, for the week ended Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
The assets of the 215 institutional funds increased by $11.69 billion, to $173.89 billion.
Those of the 285 general-purpose funds were up by $958.8 million, to $179.62 billion.
The 91 broker-dealer funds increased by $1.07 billion, to $146.83 billion.


A Plan to Expand MacArthur Incites Critics
When Peggy Gaultieri moved into her home in Holbrook near Long Island MacArthur Airport more than 20 years ago, town officials assured her that only prop planes would use the runways and that the field, surrounded by scrub pine, would never become a major airport.
Now, town officials are planning to expand the airport's two major runways, citing safety requirements.
And Ms.
Gaultieri and other residents of communities near the airport envision jumbo jets rumbling overhead.


Knight Bans His Son
Indiana Coach BOB KNIGHT has kicked his son off the Hoosier team after the arrest of PATRICK KNIGHT on alcohol-related charges.
Knight, a 21-year-old sophomore who sat out last season as a redshirt, was arrested on charges of public intoxication and disorderly conduct at about 1 A.M.
Wednesday outside a Bloomington, Ind., bar after he swore at an officer, the police said.


Tartabull And Kelly Come Through
The Boston Red Sox came to town with vaunted pitching and had every right to harbor thoughts of kick-starting their season most impressively behind capable efforts by Roger Clemens and Frank Viola.
Only problem is, the Yankees had other plans.
And, in a perfect if not improbable start to their season, the Yankees won out against both former Cy Young award winners, finishing a two-game sweep with a 3-2 victory over Viola last night.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Finances; For Democratic Candidates, Deficits Are the Rule
All of this year's Presidential candidates routinely deplore the Federal budget deficit.
But for most of them, running their campaigns on a deficit has been a way of life.
Even the Democratic front-runner, Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas, is currently carrying a debt of nearly $800,000, aides said.
It is widely assumed that his recent strong showings in primaries in New York and elsewhere will make him a magnet for enough donations to wipe out his deficit.


CHRONICLE
No sooner did an announcement appear in the February issue of Essence that the magazine would present its fifth awards tonight in festivities at Madison Square Garden than the event sold out.
"We never even got to send out invitations," said SUSAN L. TAYLOR, editor in chief of the magazine.
"There was an incredible scramble for seats, and the Paramount Theater there seats 5,000."
The demand may have been due, at least in part, to the fact that OPRAH WINFREY and DENZEL WASHINGTON are to be the hosts for the evening.
The winners have drawing power, too: MAYA ANGELOU, the poet and author; MARIAN WRIGHT EDELMAN, founder and president of the Children's Defense Fund; BERTHA GILKEY, a tenants' rights activist in St.
Louis who obtained nearly $40 million in financing for housing projects; GEORGIA L. McMURRAY, founder and first commissioner of the New York City Agency for Child Development; DEBBIE ALLEN, the producer and director, and GLADYS KNIGHT and NANCY WILSON, the singers.


Smaller House Delegation Attracts Big Primary Field
New Congressional district lines and the retirement of three Democratic incumbents produced a swollen roster of candidates -- 123 people running for 13 seats -- as the filing deadline passed today.
Fifteen candidates, four Republicans and four Democrats, as well as a political panoply that included a Populist, a Capitalist, a Socialist, a Libertarian and a representative of something called You Gotta Believe filed for the new Sixth District on the Jersey Shore.


BRIEFS
Debt  *
Commonwealth Edison Co. is offering $180 million of 5.75 percent notes due in 1994 at 100 through Paine Webber Inc.
Noncallable through maturity, the notes are rated Baa-1 by Moody's and BBB+ by Standard &amp; Poor's. *
Province of Manitoba, Canada, is offering $300 million of 8 percent debentures due in 2002 at 99.525 to yield 8.07 percent through Salomon Brothers Inc.
The noncallable debentures are rated A-1 by Moody's and A+ by Standard &amp; Poor's.


Foreign Affairs; Voters Boot Centrists
The results of recent elections in Western Europe and primaries in the U.S. suggest a new, volatile and inward-looking pattern of politics within industrialized democracies.
Voters, from ordinary citizens to skinheads, are angry at mainstream parties for failing to address their problems.
They are increasingly turning against both conservative parties long in power and the usual liberal/Socialist alternatives.
With the apparent exception of Britain, they are throwing out the bums-in-power without bringing back the familiar bums-in-waiting.


Firefighter Charged With Arson at Store
A volunteer firefighter was charged with setting a fire at the Kmart store where he worked as an assistant manager, the police said today.
The firefighter, Stanley Kasprzak, 19 years old, was charged with using a lighter to set two fires in a storage area at the store, said Lieut.
Joseph Corney.
The fire began around 11:30 A.M.
Wednesday and authorities evacuated shoppers and employees.


ABC Series by Oliver Stone
The film director Oliver Stone's first work for network television will be a six-hour series based on a comic strip in Details magazine, ABC announced yesterday.
The series, which like the comic strip will be called "Wild Palms," is ABC's first attempt to create what it is calling an event series: a short multi-part series to be broadcast on the same night over a number of weeks.


Goggles Brighten Dark Subway
Borrowing a page from the military or a James Bond adventure, the transit police are testing a new device that allows officers to see clearly in the darkest of subway tunnels without being seen.
It is, in a sense, an artifact of the times, a high-tech cyclops that will help officers catch vandals and find homeless people who hide in the dark recesses of the transit system.


First Union Bank Reports Record First-Quarter Profits
The First Union Corporation of Charlotte, N.C., a leading bank in the Southeast and the 13th largest in the nation, said yesterday that it earned a record first-quarter profit as its problems with bad loans fell sharply.
First Union's results were stronger than analysts are predicting for other large banks, mostly because First Union's home markets in the Carolinas, Florida and Georgia have not suffered as much from the recession as have other regions, particularly the Northeast.


House Postal Clerk Indicted, This Time for Selling Drugs
A Federal grand jury today charged a former clerk at the House post office with selling crack and conspiring with other postal employees to conceal thefts of postal funds.
The indictment against the stamp clerk, Wendell Magruder, provided new details about possible criminal activity at the Capitol Hill mail operation, an institution whose haphazard management has been under heavy criticism in Congress since other three postal employees pleaded guilty to embezzlement charges in February.


Who Keeps Score on Commissioner? The Owners
The words were so remarkably similar they prompted instant recollection of the first time they were heard.
Criticizing the head of the National Hockey League Players Association recently, the head of the owners' board of governors said that the strike leader had miscalculated the stance of the owners.
For the last decade, Bowie Kuhn, who as baseball commissioner presided over a 50-day players' strike in 1981, has said that the players miscalculated the resolve of the owners that year.
The owners' resolve, in reality, was such that as soon as their $50 million worth of strike insurance ran out, they capitulated, and the players ended their strike.


Deadlines Come And Deadlines Go In N.H.L. Talks
Face-to-face discussions are expected to resume today between John Ziegler, president of the National Hockey League, and Bob Goodenow, executive director of the N.H.L.
Players Association, which has been on strike against team owners since April 1.
After a 3 P.M. deadline imposed by Ziegler had passed without the hockey season's being declared finished, Ziegler told team owners in a conference call yesterday that Goodenow would come to New York today to continue talks, which broke off on Tuesday as both sides turned down each others' most recent proposals.
Goodenow and Ziegler spoke by phone several times yesterday.


Bernhard N. Cohn, 68, A Retired Rabbi, Dies
Rabbi Bernhard N. Cohn, who served 25 years as the rabbi of Congregation Habonim in Manhattan, died on Tuesday at Roosevelt Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 68 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of heart disease, his family said.


White House Nominations
President Bush will nominate John C. Dugan to be Assistant Secretary of the Treasury for domestic finance, the White House said today.
Mr. Dugan is currently a Deputy Assistant Secretary at the Treasury.


Talks Cited At Olympia
Thomas S. Johnson, the former president of the Manufacturers Hanover Trust Company, who was named president of financially troubled Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd. last month, confirmed yesterday that he was involved in discussions with the company's chairman and chief executive, Paul Reichmann, regarding his relationship with the company.
He issued a brief statement after both The Wall Street Journal and The Globe and Mail of Toronto, quoting unidentified sources, reported yesterday that friction had grown between the two men and that Mr.
Johnson might quit.


For Children
'Petrouchka, Puppets and Musical Magic'  The Little Orchestra Society Avery Fisher Hall (212) 721-6500 Recommended ages: 5 to 12
Tomorrow
Stravinsky wrote the music for this ballet when he was 28 years old.
It is set at a Russian carnival, where a puppet show, in this version presented by the Bennington Marionettes, recounts the woeful tale of Petrouchka, or Peter, who has the gall to fall in love with a sensational ballerina.
The Vermont company will use movable scenery and special lighting in addition to 20 human-size puppets and marionettes, all dressed in the style of the original Ballet Russe production (Nijinsky danced Petrouchka; the impresario was Diaghilev).


INSIDE
Counterattack at United Way
The United Way's ousted president said he had been denied access to evidence that would disprove the charity's accusations.
Page A16.
Peru's Leader Is Impeached
A majority of the Peruvian Congress, meeting in secret, voted to impeach the President and replaced him with the Second Vice President.
Page A8.
Inaction Bars S.&amp;L.
Cash
Efforts to get more money for the savings and loan bailout collapsed in Congress amid partisan finger pointing over who was to blame.
Page D1.
Indictment in Capitol Case
A Federal grand jury charged a former clerk at the House post office with selling crack and conspiring to conceal theft.
Page A18.


Sounds Around Town
Immortalizing Elvis
Hayden Thompson.
Maxwell's, 1039 Washington Street, Hoboken, N.J., (201) 798-4064.
Hayden Thompson says he remembers the first time he heard Elvis Presley, and he has immortalized the moment in a song: "I was just 16; it was a Saturday night/ The first time I heard him sing 'That's All Right.' " Later, Mr.
Thompson followed in Presley's footsteps to the doors of Sun Studios in Memphis, where he recorded a rockabilly single that was released in 1957.
These days, Mr.
Thompson may not be a candidate for a postage stamp, but whether he's singing his lone Sun single, "Love My Baby," or a country number like the Elvis tribute "The Boy From Tupelo," his dark rockabilly wail seems to rise out of the shadow of a memory.
Tonight at 9:30 and 11:30.
Admission is $7.
Pop Goes the Dream
Television Personalities and the Mad Scene, Maxwell's, 1039 Washington Street, Hoboken, N.J., (201) 798-4064.
Probably because this band has been around too long to be fashionable, Television Personalities is an underrecognized exponent of British dream pop.
Like the newer bands Ride or Lush, electric and acoustic guitars mesh in dazzling, melodic psychedelia, through which the vocals float like a sad whisper.
Since 1978, the band has released several albums and EP's, including the 1989 gem "Privilege" (Fire), which has a gauzy melancholia inscribed into every riff.
The Mad Scene, which features an ex-member of the New Zealand band the Clean, is sure to take similarly unconventional twists on guitar-pop.
Tomorrow night at 11.
Tickets are $7.


DISTRUST OF U.S. HINDERS IRAN CHIEF
The boulevards are no longer clogged with demonstrators tramping over American flags and the vitriolic condemnations of United States foreign policy in the press have lost some of their sting.
But distrust, even fear, of the United States run deep in Iran, sentiments that have slowed the efforts of President Hashemi Rafsanjani to expand trade ties and foreign investment and perhaps even to open a political dialogue with Washington.


Fernandez Replaces and Reshuffles His Top School Staff
The New York City Schools Chancellor, Joseph A. Fernandez, yesterday announced what he called a reorganization of his top staff to speed action on some of his ideas for improving instruction, including a longer school day.
But others in the educational community discerned the marks of a shakeup.
Aides to Mr.
Fernandez said he was taking advantage of the almost simultaneous departure of three top officials to improve his leadership team and to elevate the status of instruction -- the system's most important function -- in his cabinet.


Review/Cabaret; Mischief With Dixie Carter
Dixie Carter is one cabaret performer who is not afraid to go too far.
And the further she goes, the funnier she usually becomes.
Miss Carter recently returned for her third season at the Cafe Carlyle (35 East 76th Street), where she is appearing through April 25.
Early in her show the evening of April 2, she hoisted herself onto the grand piano to shimmy and vamp her way through a lip-smacking, eye-rolling rendition of "Let's Do It," eventually turning the instrument into a kind of trapeze from which she dangled upside down.
Even before that, Miss Carter began what seemed to be a serious dramatic reading of "Sophisticated Lady," then paused after the line "Is that all you really want?" and exclaimed, "Yes, do you think I'm nuts?" She immediately launched into a rip-roaring "How You Gonna Keep 'Em Down on the Farm?" that concluded with a question that became a refrain throughout the evening: "Is that silly enough for you?"


Weekend Walker's Cry: To the Mall!
THE South Shore Mall in Bay Shore, the midpoint of Long Island, looks forlorn on early Saturday mornings, with its brown brick outer walls gloomy in the dim light and only a few dozen cars scattered on its asphalt grounds.
But inside, the hallways teem with life.
On weekends, scores of people walk counterclockwise circles in the mall's plant-filled central corridor.
Mostly retirees or young mothers pushing strollers, they traipse the equivalent of the Appalachian trail between Macy's and J. C. Penney each year.


De-Icing Report on Crash Plane Was Ignored; Try Fluorescent Dye
To the Editor:
"Maker of USAir Plane Urged More Frequent De-Icing" (front page, March 28) indicates that the problems of USAir Flight 405, which crashed at La Guardia Airport the night of March 22, resulted from ice accretion on the wing, of which the pilot was unaware.
Massachusetts Institute of Technology holds a patent on a substance that enables a pilot to "see" ice.
This substance is a fluorescent dye, which is meant to be added to de-icing fluid.
The dye loses its fluorescence when ice begins to form.
Had it been added to the de-icing fluid, the pilot would have known there was ice on his wings.
MARILYN B. DERSHOWITZ New York, March 30, 1992


Asian Gang Guilty On Federal Charges
Nine members of a violent gang called the Green Dragons were convicted yesterday in Brooklyn on Federal charges of murder, extortion and racketeering.
Among those convicted in Federal District Court was Chen I. Chung, described as the 23-year-old street leader of the Queens-based gang of young Asians.
Federal prosecutors said the gang extorted tribute from dozens of Asian-American restaurant owners primarily in Elmhurst.


Reports Show a Slight Rise In Retailers' Sales in March
The country's major chain stores reported March sales figures yesterday that show a continued slight but sustained rebound in consumer spending.
But several stores, notably the Gap and Wal-Mart, failed to match the strong performances they have had throughout the recession.
"The results are slightly disappointing, but they were affected by several different variables, like unusually cold, bad weather," said Jeffrey Edelman, a retail analyst at C. J. Lawrence.


Homeless People Protest Connecticut Budget Cuts


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-14  MAJOR CLAIMS VICTORY IN BRITAIN
Prime Minister Major declared victory after nearly complete returns gave his Conservative Party a narrow margin over the opposition Labor Party..
A1  JAPAN'S MARKET MALAISE
The plunge in Japanese stock prices has grown so unnerving in the last week that top Government officials and business leaders fear the market's deepening malaise may soon drag down the economy and weaken the financial system.
A1  GIANT STEP FOR SOUTH AFRICA
South Africa's drive to reconcile itself with the rest of Africa crossed a watershed when President de Klerk flew into Nigeria on the first visit ever permitted a South African head of state.A1  NORTH KOREA RATIFIES PACT
After years of delay, North Korean lawmakers ratified an accord to let international inspectors view its nuclear sites.
The move starts the clock on a 90-day deadline to open up plants where the country is believed to be developing atomic arms.
A3  U.S.
IMAGE STICKS IN IRAN
The boulevards of Teheran are no longer clogged with demonstrators tramping over American flags.
But distrust of the United States runs deep in Iran, slowing theefforts of President Hashemi Rafsanjani to expand trade ties.
A3  AN IMPEACHMENT IN PERU
The Peruvian Congress, meeting secretly at the home of one of its members, voted to impeach President Alberto K. Fujimori and replaced him with the Second Vice President.
A8  SENATE WARY ON RUSSIAN AID
Supportive but wary, American lawmakers began to express worry about the cost of aiding Russia as the Bush Administration began a spirited campaign to win taxpayers' support for the package.
A14
Ukraine and Russia backed off from a confrontation over a fleet.
A14  BOSNIAN TOWN FALLS TO SERBS
As Yugoslav Army tank units stood idly by, a guerrilla force captured its second key town in a week in the newly recognized republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Officials said Serbs were trying to seize land for a future Serbian state.
A14  ALLIES HESITATE TO WARN IRAQ
Uncertainty over the policies of the next British Government and Turkish hesitation are holding up a U.S. plan to warn Iraq to stop attacks against Kurds or possibly face an air strike, envoys say.
A9  National A16-27  NORIEGA IS CONVICTED
Two years after invading American forces had deposed him as Panama's military ruler, General Noriega was found guilty of cocaine trafficking, money laundering and racketeering.
A1
In Panama, many people gave the outcome only passing notice.
A24  TSONGAS STAYS OUT OF THE RACE
Former Senator Tsongas said that despite his strong showing in the New York primary, he had decided not to re-enter the Democratic Presidential campaign.A1
Brown has started to sound decidedly less combative.  A26
Many Democrats in Congress are reluctant to back Clinton.  A26
For Presidential candidates, debt is a way of life.  A27  BUSH'S SON TO THE RESCUE
In the latest and clearest sign of political alarm in the Oval Office, President Bush has summoned his son George, who helped dispatch John H. Sununu as chief of staff four months ago, to review White House speechwriting, domestic policy and scheduling.
A27  VAST OVERHAUL OF AIR FARES
American Airlines, the nation's largest carrier, said it would scrap the convoluted system of airline fares in favor of a simplified system that will mean lower prices for many business and leisure travelers.
Other carriers quickly announced similar overhauls, which will take effect next Monday.
A1  FED LOWERS INFLUENTIAL RATE
Amid concern that the economic recovery remains dangerously weak, the Federal Reserve pumped more money into the nation's banking system to reduce, from 4 percent to 3.75 percent, the rate at which banks lend one another money overnight.
A1  COUNTERATTACK ON UNITED WAY
William Aramony, ousted president of the United Way of America, said he had been denied access to evidence that would disprove accusations that he had manipulated the charity's finances for questionable purposes and billed it for his personal expenses.
A16  INDICTMENT IN HOUSE POSTAL CASE
A Federal grand jury charged a former clerk at the House post office with selling crack and conspiring with other postal employees to conceal theft.
A18  A PREOCCUPIED PEORIA
Peoria Journal: In the city where 12,600 workers have been on strike against Caterpillar for five months, there is talk of little else.
A16  Congress is having second thoughts on canceling costly weapons.
A25  Law Page B10  Metropolitan Digest, B1 Business Digest, D1  Weekend C1-38  Music for Easter week.
C1  Weekend walking at the mall.
C1  Theater: On Stage, and Off C2  "A Terrible Beauty." C18  Film: Mike Leigh film retrospective.
C1  Music: The Boston Symphony.
C5  Dixie Carter at the Carlyle.
C18  Fashion B8  An ovation for Trigere  Sports B12-18  Baseball: Mets beat Cardinals, 7-1.
B13  No rape charges filed against three Mets.
B13  Yankees beat Boston and Viola, 3-2.
B15  Golf: Wadkins and Sluman lead Masters.
B13  Hockey: Owners and striking players resume talks.
B13  Obituaries B9  Dr.
Herman F. Mark, pioneer in polymer chemistry  Editorials/Op-Ed A36-37  Editorials A36  The voters, yes.
Which ones?
False fears on Japan's crash.
Why Ashe kept it secret.
Topics: Library vote.
Letters A36  A. M. Rosenthal: Missile-mongering.
A37  Leslie H. Gelb: Voters boot centrists.
A37  David Moberg: Local strike, national stake.
A37  Roswell L. Gilpatric: Revamp defense thinking.
A37


Book Publishers Tighten Authors' Belts
To the Editor:
"Book Lists Dwindling as Publishers Cut Fat" (Business Day, March 30) might mislead many.
"The books that suffer are the ones you don't need," Phyllis E. Grann, president of the Putnam-Berkley Group, announces.
"I really believe a book that is really good will be published, even if it's a print run of only 4,000 or if it ends up with a smaller house." While a good book may eventually be published, this often takes years of stoic patience and disappointment.
Publishers Weekly, for example, recently reported that an award-winning novelist finally achieved publication -- after eight years and 25 submissions.


In Money Funds, Size Pays
Choosing the right money fund can be an overwhelming chore.
With more than 800 to choose from, one rule of thumb can narrow the choices.
Based on studies by IBC/Donoghue Inc., which tracks money funds, those funds with assets exceeding $50 million are likely to outperform funds with assets of less than $50 million.
The larger funds are more diversified and offer more services and financial safeguards.
Here is a comparison of the average returns on investments in large and small funds in 1991.
Over Under
*2*$50 million
TAXABLE FUNDS
Government-only
5.58%
5.39%
General-purpose
5.74
5.47
All consumer
5.68
5.44
All taxable
5.74
5.48
TAX-EXEMPT FUNDS
General-purpose
4.20
4.05
State-specific
4.06
4.00
All consumer
4.13
4.03
All tax-exempt
4.16
4.03
(Source: IBC/Donoghue Inc., Ashland, Mass.)


Knicks Can Jump Up And Touch the Title
Needing a victory in the worst way, the Knicks responded with their best offensive performance in a week.
In snapping a three-game losing streak, New York toppled the Philadelphia 76ers, 115-99, last night before a capacity crowd (19,763) at Madison Square Garden.
During their losing skid, the Knicks failed to reach 100 points in all three defeats and their ball movement and shot selection left much to be desired.


New York Prevents 'Worker-Leasing' Abuses
To the Editor:
Re: "Some 'Worker Leasing' Programs Defraud Insurers and Employees" (front page, March 20).


Children Try to Raise Money to Help Bury a Classmate


A Change in Perspective


CHRONICLE
In a different arena of the law, former Senator HOWARD H. BAKER JR., who served as President Reagan's chief of staff, has signed a $500,000 contract on behalf of his law firm to represent KING HUSSEIN and the Government of Jordan, according to foreign-agent registration papers filed with the Justice Department.
Mr.
Baker is a partner in Baker, Worthington, Crossley, Stansberry &amp; Woolf of Knoxville, Tenn., and Washington.
A column in The National Journal that is to be published on Tuesday reports that the firm was hired to keep King Hussein "advised of trends, changes and developments in United States foreign policy" that might affect Jordan.


Reichmanns And Official In Dispute
Because of a clash with the secretive Reichmann brothers over financial disclosure, Thomas S. Johnson, the president just hired to head their company, Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd., is likely to miss a crucial meeting with creditors on Monday, banking and company officials said today.
"Let's say that I'd fall over a chair if I saw Mr. Johnson there," said an Olympia official who asked not to be identified.


It's Warm Enough For Hot Yankees
Absolutely nothing seemed right before the Tigers opposed the Yankees tonight.
Freezing rain eliminated batting practice, the temperature slid into the 30's, and the sparse crowd wore the latest Michigan winter gear.
It was football weather at a baseball game.
But as the first few innings unraveled, the Yankees started doing things that made the chilly evening bearable to them.
Mel Hall rocked a gigantic home run, Melido Perez pitched decently, the Yankees snatched a 4-0 lead, and their undefeated record looked sure to stretch on for another night.


FIGHTING IMPERILS EFFORTS TO HALT WAR IN YUGOSLAVIA
Efforts to end the civil war in fragmented Yugoslavia have been seriously jeopardized by the surge in fighting this week, Western diplomats and Serbian officials said today.
They said the continuing deployment of United Nations peacekeeping troops in Croatia, seen only a few weeks ago as the best way to resolve a conflict that has already claimed 10,000 lives, is now in question after renewed bloodshed in that breakaway republic.


Japan's Economy Turns Hollow
Japan's bubble economy has burst, revealing systemic problems that preceded the country's recession and are likely to worsen in the future.
Some commentators speak of the "hollowing out" of the economy, even of the shrinking of the industrial base.
The ailments run so deep that it is deluding to imagine that Japan's economy can serve as a model to remedy our own problems.
Aside from the dramatic rise and fall of the Nikkei index, corporate failures are at a postwar high.
Banks are suffering from bad real estate loans and the collapse of the real estate market.
The Government is having trouble covering its obligations from expected revenues.


Nets May Laugh All Way to NBA Playoffs
Looking at the schedule of New Jersey's last six games of the regular season, tonight's meeting with Cleveland loomed as the toughest game for the Nets because the Cavaliers were the only team in the group with a better than .500 record.
But what looked to be no laughing matter turned out to be a laugher for the Nets, who built a couple of 28-point leads and even used some schoolyard plays on the way to a 110-86 victory at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


Stars &amp; Stripes Is Able to Hang On in Trials
Dennis Conner added the option of a sudden-death tie breaker today in his lingering struggle to stay alive in the America's Cup defenders' trials.
In the semifinals this afternoon, Conner's Stars &amp; Stripes defeated Bill Koch's Kanza by 1 minute 11 seconds in a race that drew on Conner's expertise at playing a sea of wind shifts to his advantage.
The victory guaranteed Conner of at least a tie with Koch -- who has two yachts, Kanza and America3, in this round -- for a place in the finals.
Even if Stars &amp; Stripes loses to America3 on Saturday, Conner will still have the sudden-death opportunity to earn his place in the finals by winning a sailoff with Kanza on Monday.


4th Graders Cope With the Murder of a Classmate
A lavender-and-white crepe paper bouquet lies atop Cathy Sirju's empty desk inside Community Elementary School 114 in the Bronx, a handiwork born of her fourth-grade classmates' grief.
Last Saturday, according to the police, Cathy's father shot and killed the 8-year-old girl and her 14-year-old stepsister Carmelita as they lay in bed.
The next day, he ambushed and wounded their mother as she approached the apartment, then turned the gun on himself.
Anthony Sirju, the police say, may have thought his wife had been unfaithful.


Turning Airliners Into Rec Rooms
Although the airline industry's attention right now is riveted on simplifying fares, filling seats and turning a profit, some executives are still thinking more about the future.
At Northwest Airlines headquarters here, those executives are hoping to raise customer loyalty by giving passengers a wider array of on-board entertainment and amenities, for an extra fee.
Basically, each seat would have a television monitor with several channels showing news, live sporting events and other programs.
It would also probably have a shopping channel for ordering gifts or clothing in flight that could be waiting for passengers when they land.


Life on Long Island Is Full of Slow Lanes
Guido Bonelli lives in Ronkonkoma, nearly 50 miles from midtown Manhattan.
In most metropolitan areas -- even in most parts of the sprawling New York region -- Mr.
Bonelli's house would be outside the ring of densely populated suburbs.
It would be surrounded by woods or open fields and he would drive to work on bucolic back roads.
But Mr.
Bonelli lives in the heart of Long Island, and that means he fights his way each morning along the Long Island Expressway to the men's clothing store in the Walt Whitman Shopping Center here, where he works as a tailor.
His route covers 16 miles, and would take no more than 25 minutes without traffic.
Most days, however, the rush-hour commute takes nearly an hour.


Krasnoyarsk Journal; Lenin Belongs Only in a Museum -- Or Does He?
If the American culture of the 1980's was Rambo and "The Bonfire of the Vanities," in the former Soviet Union they were still building lavish temples to the cult of Lenin, fatherly revolutionary and civic saint.
Old posters show Lenin striding off into the future with the banner of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union behind him, reading: "C.P.S.U. Even now Lenin is more alive than all the living." But with the party gone, what can be done with the cult -- not merely the preserved body, but the millions of dollars of Leninalia all over the former empire?


U.S. Erases Section on Sex From Child-Rearing Book
The Bush Administration has removed a chapter on contraception from a best-selling guide on child-rearing before distributing the book to 275,000 Federal workers.
The six-page discussion of contraception and adolescent sexuality was deleted from the Special Federal Employees Edition of the book, "Taking Care of Your Child," by a senior official who considered it "too controversial" for the workers to read.


3 Businessmen Meet Deadline of News Offer
Three businessmen who had previously expressed strong interest in buying The Daily News were the only people to respond to a deadline yesterday for submitting proposals to acquire the bankrupt newspaper.
Mortimer B. Zuckerman, a real-estate developer and the owner of U.S.
News &amp; World Report and the Atlantic Monthly, said he had submitted a tentative offer, on terms he declined to disclose.


Trial Within Noriega Trial: Jurors Tell of Their Ordeal
After jurors found Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega guilty, some rose and sang gospel hymns.
But in five days of deliberation, the people who on Thursday convicted the deposed Panamanian leader struggled mightily with their consciences and, at times, with each other.
For seven months, the nine women and three men had watched General Noriega and listened to testimony from 79 witnesses on 10 counts of cocaine trafficking, racketeering and money laundering.
But nothing, several jurors said today, had prepared them for the intensity and difficulty of deciding the fate of a man who was once an American ally and whom Washington was now calling "an international outlaw."


House Would Let Retired Earn More
The House of Representatives voted overwhelmingly Thursday night to increase the maximum amount that Social Security recipients could earn and still collect full benefits.
The measure, reflecting the power of older Americans in an election year, would nearly double, to $20,000, the amount that workers from 65 to 70 years old could earn before losing any Social Security benefits.


Mother and Daughter in Car Are Wounded by Brooklyn Gunman
A woman and her 18-month-old daughter were critically wounded yesterday afternoon when a gunman fired shots into their car at an intersection in the Bushwick section of Brooklyn after what the police said was a traffic dispute.
The two were riding in a car driven by the young girl's father about 1 P.M. when a man fired at least six shots through an open passenger window, striking both the woman and her child in the back, said a police spokesman, Officer Andrew McInnis.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: California; Strategies Emerge in Dual Senate Races
John Seymour's first television commercials for California's June 2 senatorial primary neglect to mention that he is a Senator, but tell viewers that Congress "has botched things up" and is "the epitome of arrogance."
The advertisements have led the Democratic candidates and Mr.
Seymour's critics in the Republican Party to call him a hypocrite for disguising the fact that he was appointed to fill the comfortable chair on Capitol Hill that belonged to Gov.
Pete Wilson until 1990.


School Board Freezes Out Arbitrator After Ruling
In November, a longtime arbitrator, Ralph S. Berger, issued a ruling that infuriated Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez because it gave New York City teachers two extra days off.
Since then, Mr.
Berger has been effectively frozen out of hearing any disputes between the teachers' union and the Board of Education.
The board has postponed every case that comes Mr.
Berger's way.


Your Money; Rising Tax Load On Middle Class
TO the middle-class taxpayers who feel they are saddled with an unfair share of the nation's tax burden, H &amp; R Block Inc., America's biggest tax-preparation firm, is saying, "You're right."
Block, which prepares one in seven of the country's tax returns, commissioned a study by the Tax Policy Research Project at the University of Missouri-Kansas City and released the results this week.
"Middle-income taxpayers have been shown to bear increasing effective total tax rates over the last 15 years," the authors concluded.


Mets Begin Shopping Around for a New Shortstop
The Mets, sufficiently concerned about the lack of genuine progress in the health of Kevin Elster's shoulder, have begun serious exploratory talks with more than one club about acquiring a quality shortstop.
The organization has tried to iron out the specifics of a deal and likely will pull the trigger on it the moment it is acceptable, said a person with knowledge of the front office's strategy.


Play Hockey! Settlement Ends 10-Day Strike
The first strike in the history of the National Hockey League ended just before midnight last night as team owners and the Players Association agreed on a new collective-bargaining agreement that will last until the end of next season.
The current season, with 30 games remaining on the regular schedule, will resume tomorrow and the full four rounds of the Stanley Cup playoffs will begin later next week.


Infant Safety Gets Deregulation Ax
To the Editor:
The Bush Administration's election-year effort to stem regulation wins the praise of business, you report March 23, but it hurts the health and safety of American families.
The latest victims of President Bush's antiregulation zeal are toddlers.


The G-Rated Version
A senior official of the Bush Administration removed a chapter on contraception and adolescents' sexuality from a best-selling guide about child-rearing before the book was distributed to 275,000 Federal workers.
The White House said it had not participated in the decision.


Reviews/Fashion; Catch Beene, If You Can
Geoffrey Beene vaults so nimbly from peak to higher peak in design that he makes the creative process seem effortless.
Let other designers rework their past successes or leap on the bandwagon full of the latest trends.
He continues to pursue the elusive perfect design, and gets closer and closer to his goal.
His aim is to find new ways of making clothes in a modern way, which involves lightness, packability and flattery.
He would be pardoned if, for one season, he rested on his many laurels.
He is already so far ahead of the pack that his followers would appreciate some time to catch up.


Classical Music in Review
Garrick Ohlsson Pianist Carnegie Hall


Columbia Faculty to Meet About Leadership Concerns
Amid growing signs of dissatisfaction with Columbia University's leadership, the faculty of Arts and Sciences has been summoned to an extraordinary meeting later this month to grapple with concerns ranging from budget shortfalls and projected cuts to fears that the quality of education at one of the nation's premier universities is being eroded.
The meeting is billed as informational but is expected to be an outspoken forum for rising faculty resentments against the administration.
It is to be held April 23 under the auspices of an 11-member executive committee of the faculty of Arts and Sciences, which sent a letter yesterday to the faculty's 500 members urging them to attend.


QUOTATION OF THE DAY
"In America in tough times, executives might cut their big bonus pay for the year. In Japan, they cut the base salary. That sends a very different message." -- STEPHEN F. O'BYRNE, a consultant on executive pay.  [ 1:5 ]


News Summary
International 2-5 NEW CONCERN IN YUGOSLAVIA
The surge in fighting this week has seriously jeopardized efforts to end the civil war, diplomats and Serbian officials said.
They said the deployment of United Nations peacekeepers in Croatia was in doubt after renewed conflict there.  1


Fighting Price Gouging on Passover Foods
Like many Jews around the country, Alice Landes, a New York artist, buys kosher-for-Passover foods for her family during the Passover holiday.
But in recent years, she says, prices for these products have tended to rise signficantly as the holiday nears.
"I resent having to pay more," she said.
"We're a captive audience and we're under pressure when we shop."


Joe Camel Stands for Artistic Freedom
To the Editor:
I read with appreciation "Joe Camel, an X-Rated Smoke" (Op-Ed, March 20), Marjorie Garber's stating of the obvious about the phallic mascot of R. J. Reynolds, Joe Camel.
As publisher of an X-rated newspaper, I have long been aware of mainstream advertising's co-opting my adults-only turf.
But one aspect of the debate over Joe, and especially Surgeon General Antonia Novello's official call for his removal, troubles me greatly.


Consumer Price Index Jumps 0.5%
Consumer prices posted their biggest increase in 17 months in March, climbing five-tenths of 1 percent, the Labor Department said today.
The sharp rise prompted much surprise at first, but little dismay on closer analysis.
The increase, about twice as much as most analysts had expected and largely attributed to higher energy and food costs, sent an initial tremor through the bond market, pushing rates higher.
But most of the loss was later recovered as analysts and traders found the rise marked by statistical quirks and temporary factors that in some cases have already been reversed.
"It doesn't seem to signal any sort of resurgence of inflation," asserted Robert A. Brusca, chief economist for Nikko Securities.
He said that every economic recovery in the last 40 years had shown inflation declining during its first year and that he saw no reason why the pattern should be different this time.
An Official's Viewpoint
A relatively benign view was also taken by Patrick C. Jackman, a senior Labor Department economist in charge of studying prices and living conditions.
"We are definitely still on track for an increase of less than 4 percent for the year," he said.
The hefty increase in retail prices followed by one day a reassuring report on inflation at the producer level that seemed to have encouraged the Federal Reserve to make another cut in an important short-term interest rate.
The Labor Department said producer prices last month edged up just two-tenths of a percent.
For the first three months of the year, the Consumer Price Index has risen at an annual rate of 3.5 percent, slightly above the 3.1 percent rate posted for all of 1991.
Although some analysts, such as those at the New York investment firm of C. J. Lawrence, cling to inflation projections as low as 2 percent this year, the average annual inflation expectation of the 52 economists responding to the Blue Chip survey was reported today as 3.1 percent, unchanged from a month ago.
For 1993, they expect inflation to be 3.6 percent.
But there are also those who found in today's figures confirmation of their view that inflation pressures are rising, although none saw a return to even half the double-digit inflation levels of a decade ago.
This group expects that economic recovery will prompt companies to seek higher prices rather than greater market share.
Among them is Kathryn L. Kobe, economist at Joel Popkin &amp; Company, a Washington firm headed by a former Labor Department price specialist.
While finding that the March increase was exaggerated by "some strangeness in the seasonal factors," Ms.
Kobe said she still expected the consumer index to advance by at least 4 percent this year.
The latest report included data for five major metropolitan areas, three of which recorded price increases higher than the five-tenths of 1 percent for the country at large.
For New York, the rise was seven-tenths of 1 percent, paced by a 1.4 percent jump in residential rents and a 1.7 percent jump in owners' rent-equivalency.
Mr.
Jackman said, however, it would be "a leap" to conclude from this that there has been a firming in the area's real estate market.
Prices in Philadelphia surged eight-tenths of 1 percent, reflecting a big increase for clothing, while prices in the San Francisco area rose six-tenths of 1 percent.
Energy and Food Rise
Nationally, the department said, the speeding up of the inflation pace, from the three-tenths of 1 percent posted in February, mainly reflected an upturn in the price of energy and a faster rise for food, almost entirely in fresh fruits and vegetables.
Even when the erratic energy and food components were excluded, however, the advance was five-tenths of 1 percent, up from four-tenths of 1 percent in February and three-tenths of 1 percent in January.
Viewed yet another way, divided into indexes of goods and of services, the increase in each category was still five-tenths of 1 percent.
The fact that the overall consumer index includes services and imported goods while the producer index does not, was cited as one reason, besides seasonal and statistical aberrations, for the difference between the two gauges.
Some analysts suggested that today's report, while not ruling out further action by the Federal Reserve to cut interest rates, made it highly unlikely the Fed would make such a move soon.
As it was, some thought the Fed might have embarrassed itself by making an unexpected rate cut on Thursday and then seeing today's somewhat jarring data, even though the rate cut seemed to be largely a response to lagging M-2 money growth.
A Fed governor who is usually accessible declined to respond today to a request for comment.
The inflation figures showed food rising five-tenths of 1 percent, led by a 6.1 percent rise for fresh fruits and vegetables.
Tomatoes soared 22.8 percent last month and have more than doubled since New Year's Day.
Cereal and bakery products also rose, but the price of eggs dropped 9.9 percent.
Housing rose four-tenths of 1 percent, double the early-year advances, with fuel oil prices falling less than usual for the month and electricity climbing nine-tenths of 1 percent.
Furniture and bedding jumped 1.9 percent.
Cars, Gas and Air Fares Go Up
In transportation, where prices climbed seven-tenths of 1 percent after two straight monthly declines, the main factors were higher prices for gasoline, new cars and airline fares.
Prices of used cars were unchanged after falling for three straight months.
Clothing prices, for which the seasonal adjustment factors are particularly suspect in light of shifting industry practices, rose six-tenths of 1 percent but this was less than February's 1.5 percent jump.
The cost of medical care, moderating slightly, rose five-tenths of 1 percent to a level 7.8 percent above that of March 1991.
Elsewhere, entertainment rose four-tenths of 1 percent while such personal expenses as legal and financial services and funeral expenses advanced five-tenths of 1 percent to bring the first-quarter annual rate to 9.6 percent.
The index now stands at 139.3, meaning that a group of goods and services that cost $10 in the 1982-1984 period now costs $13.93.
An alternate gauge, the C.P.I.-W., covering urban wage earners and clerical workers, also rose five-tenths of 1 percent last month, the Labor Department reported.


Beliefs
Christianity is a dangerously historical faith, and at no time of the year are Christians more bluntly confronted with that fact than now.
To Christians, Christ is not a cosmic hero who triumphed in an undefined age of mythical origins; He rose from the dead at a specific time and place, after crucifixion under a specific procurator of the Roman Empire.


F.B.I. Investigates Disputed Prison Pact
Federal agents are investigating a disputed $1.9 million contract to use ankle bracelets to electronically monitor inmates released from New York City jails, officials said yesterday.
Law-enforcement and city officials said the inquiry by the Federal Bureau of Investigation and Federal prosecutors in Manhattan is focusing on whether officials in the city's Correction Department showed improper favoritism in tentatively awarding the annual contract in November to the BI Monitoring Corporation of Boulder, Colo.


Two Officers Are Indicted In Drug Case
A mystery about the Sussex County Prosecutor's takeover of the four-member Police Department here in the hills of northwestern New Jersey ended today with the indictments of the Police Chief and a patrolman in a drug case.
"This is not a happy day for me as a county prosecutor," the Prosecutor, Dennis O'Leary, said in a news conference in Newton, the county seat.
"I take no pleasure in this."


Caterpillar and Union Agree to Meeting
Caterpillar Inc. said today that its management would sit down with leaders of the United Automobile Workers Union on Monday at the request of the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service.
U.A.W. members have been on strike at Caterpillar for five months.
Neither side predicted that the talks, which will be the first time the two sides have discussed their differences in nearly a month, would produce a quick end to the dispute.


For 14 Bronx Workers, a Small, Small Token
The Great Moments Room in Yankee Stadium is adorned with pictures of heroes -- Ruth, Gehrig, DiMaggio, Joe Louis.
On Tuesday morning, they will be joined by even bigger heroes, most of whom would otherwise have been unsung.
For the 16th straight year, New York City employees who work in the Bronx and who demonstrated valor will receive gold-plated medals.
They are based on a medal of valor designed for the Police Department by Tiffany's in 1877.
The stylish "NY" on that medal later became the symbol of the Yankees.


Review/Rap; K.R.S.-One Fuses Personality and Technology
Rap concerts, which usually feature a handful of acts, are furiously seductive, with group after group trying to win the attention of the audience.
Last Saturday night at the Ritz, a handful of groups came out and did their best; between shows, amateur rappers took up the microphone on the club's balconies to rap with a D.J., testing their skills.
The audience, esthetes to the last person, was quick to boo.
But when K.R.S.-One (Kris Parker), the leader of Boogie Down Productions, came out to close the show, the audience went crazy.
Mr.
Parker's victory was the result of several components, including his understanding of rap as a live medium, his own personality and his smart use of technology.
Where other rappers -- Fu-Snickins and UMC's -- had come out and tried to perform complicated raps rife with changing rhythms, intricate call-and-response and abstract word play, all post-De La Soul rap, Mr.
Parker was strictly old school.
His ability, honed in live performance, matched his intent, which was to communicate clearly.
And where the other rappers cluttered up their tracks and were often incomprehensible, Mr.
Parker's backing tracks, supplied by his brother, Kenny Parker, on turntables, were spare, his vocals clear.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Edberg Beats Gilbert  Stefan Edberg and Jim Courier, continuing their battle for the world's top ranking, yesterday advanced to the semifinals of the $1.19 million Japan Open in Tokyo.
The top-seeded Edberg of Sweden, who took back the No. 1 ranking in the world from Courier last month, beat the American Brad Gilbert, seeded seventh, 4-6, 6-2, 6-3, on the hard court of Ariake Colosseum.
The second-seeded Courier had to go to a tie breaker in the first set before outlasting eighth-seeded Amos Mansdorf of Israel, 7-6 (7-5), 6-4.
Among the women, Kimiko Date of Japan upset top-seeded American Amy Frazier, 6-3, 6-4, to set up a final today with the second-seeded Belgian Sabine Appelmans, who beat fourth-seeded Naoko Sawamatsu of Japan, 7-6 (8-6), 6-3. (AP)
Mancini Stops Lendl: Ivan Lendl, once a semifinalist in almost every tournament he played, now can't get past the quarterfinals.
Lendl, who has yet to reach a semifinal in eight tournaments this year, lost by 3-6, 6-3, 6-4 to Alberto Mancini in the quarterfinals of the Conde de Godo clay-court event in Barcelona, Spain.
His world ranking has dropped to ninth, his lowest in more than a decade.
Mancini advanced to the semifinals, where he will play Carlos Costa, a 7-6 (7-2), 6-3 winner over Rodolphe Gilbert. (AP) Favorites Win at Amelia Island: The Bausch &amp; Lomb Championships were devoid of drama as the top-seeded players easily advanced to the semifinals of the clay-court tournament in Amelia Island, Fla.
Steffi Graf, Gabriela Sabatini, Arantxa Sanchez Vicario and Conchita Martinez were barely challenged in quarterfinal matches.
Graf, the top-seeded player, and Sabatini, the defending champion, stayed on course to meet in the final for the third time in four years.
Graf beat seventh-seeded Leila Meskhi, 6-0, 6-2, and Sabatini beat fifth-seeded Jana Novotna, 6-2, 6-1.
Sanchez Vicario advanced with a 6-1, 6-2 victory over unseeded Sabine Hack.
Martinez beat eighth-seeded Zina Garrison, 6-3, 6-1. (AP) GOLF  Donald Grabs Lead  The former United States Open runner-up, Mike Donald, tied a tournament record with an eight-under-par 62 yesterday, taking a two-shot lead after two rounds of the Deposit Guaranty Golf Classic in Hattiesburg, Miss.
Donald cruised through the 6,280-yard Hattiesburg Country Club course with seven birdies and an eagle as he dropped to 10-under 130 for the tournament.
Donald had a chance to set a tournament-record 61 but missed a 5-foot par put on the 18th hole. (AP)


No Earthquake in Britain
"Britain Set for a Hung Parliament With Labor the Biggest Party," promised the headline in The Sunday Times of London.
But polls and pundits proved fallible.
In Thursday's elections, Conservatives won their fourth straight victory, albeit with a parliamentary margin shaved from 86 to 21 seats.
The clear message is that Britons trust Prime Minister John Major more than the Laborite Neil Kinnock -- especially on taxes.
That Mr.
Major won despite Britain's worst recession since the 1930's will doubtless cheer President Bush.
For democrats, with a small or capital D, the outcome suggests that anyone like Mr.
Kinnock who dares say that better schools or improved health care have real costs will be punished.


Bush Asks Bailout Action
President Bush replied today to a Congressional request for a detailed analysis of the Administration's views on how to pay for the savings and loan bailout with a curt letter saying that the Administration was willing to accept any of several proposals already in Congress and wanted one of the plans adopted quickly.
The Resolution Trust Corporation's authority to spend money selling failed institutions expired April 1, and Congressional Democrats and the White House are blaming each other for the delay in renewing it.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.50
6.50
9.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
6.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.50
3.76
5.61
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.64
3.67
5.51
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.76
3.75
5.60
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.01
6.99
7.83
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.87
7.85
8.14
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.83
8.80
9.25
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.70
6.70
7.26
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Frank J. Brennan, Ad Executive, 66
Frank J. Brennan, a retired New York advertising executive, died on Wednesday at Calvary Hospital in the Bronx.
He was 66 years old and lived in Jackson Heights, Queens.
A friend, William Ivey, said lung cancer caused his death.


METRO DIGEST
A CONTRACT UNDER SCRUTINY
The Federal Government is investigating a disputed $1.9 million contract for electronic ankle bracelets to monitor inmates releases York City jails.
Officials said the inquiry was focusing on whether the city's Correction Department showed improper favoritism in tentatively awarding the contract to a Colorado company.
Page 29.
IMPORTING CRIMINALS FROM RUSSIA
Emigre criminals in the United States have begun importing con artists, extortionists and contract killers to commit crimes and then disappear back home in the former Soviet Union, officials say.
Page 1.


BRIEFS
*
Arianespace S.A., Paris, signed contracts to put two satellites in orbit for Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Corp., Tokyo. *
Battle Mountain Gold Co., Houston, resumed production at its San Luis Gold Mine in Costilla County, Colo., after a six-day voluntary suspension.


CHRONICLE
Under ordinary circumstances, booking a lecturer for a conference is a routine matter, done through a speakers' bureau or an agent.
But students at New York University who were organizing a program on the legal problems of American Indians had to work a little harder.
The only way they could get LEONARD PELTIER on their program was to persuade his fiancee to take a tape recorder into the Federal prison in Leavenworth, Kan., where Mr.
Peltier is an inmate.
Today, an audience of about 200 is to hear Mr.
Peltier speak on tape for 10 minutes, against a background of screaming children in the visitors' area of the prison.


Observer; So Good To Clinton
Much nonsense is being spoken and written about the cruel and inhuman punishment to which Governor Clinton was subjected by New York and its obstreperous press.
It shows how quickly the transient passions of political campaigning will blind humanity to what lies more than two feet beyond the end of its nose.
Anyone who can see as far as the coming autumn must agree that what is being deplored as New York brutality was a kindness, indeed a blessing, to a visitor who came among us as an innocent and dangerously unwary stranger from Arkansas.


Couples Closes In Despite Blunder
Fred Couples shot 67 today for a 36-hole total of 136, only one stroke behind the Masters co-leaders, Ian Woosnam and Craig Parry.
Couples's round included nine birdies.
"But I can only remember one hole, the 14th," he said later. "Forget the birdies."


Health and Hospitals To Have an Able Chief
To the Editor:
As someone who has known and worked with Dr.
Billy E. Jones for years, I protest your mean-spirited coverage of his nomination as president of New York City's Health and Hospitals Corporation (news article, April 2).
Dr.
Jones was not selected by default.
He has been repeatedly mentioned as the front runner for the job since the position became vacant.


S.E.C. Assailed on 'Penny Stocks'
The Securities and Exchange Commission adopted rules yesterday aimed at limiting abuses in sales of "penny stocks" by unscrupulous brokers, but only after amending the rules to reduce substantially the number of stocks they covered.
The new rules exempt all stocks traded on Nasdaq, even small ones that were included in the preliminary rule, a decision that immediately drew criticism.
"It will greatly weaken the rule and will create fraud," said John R. Perkins, the Missouri Commisisoner of Securities.
"The penny-stock cases we have seen over the past two years have almost all involved Nasdaq securities."


Keating Is Sentenced to 10 Years For Defrauding S.&amp; L. Customers
A California judge sentenced Charles H. Keating Jr. to 10 years in prison today for duping depositors at the Lincoln Savings and Loan Association into purchasing high-risk junk bonds issued by Lincoln's parent company.
Judge Lance A. Ito of the California Superior Court in Los Angeles imposed the prison sentence, the maximum, after hearing emotional testimony for much of the day from purchasers of the bonds.
The investors, many of them elderly, blamed Mr.
Keating for crippling financial losses they suffered when the bonds became worthless.
Judge Ito also imposed a $250,000 fine on Mr.
Keating, who has asserted that he is broke.
Rejects Community Service
Judge Ito rejected arguments by Stephen C. Neal, the lawyer for Mr.
Keating, who argued that his client should be sentenced to community service.
Mr.
Keating, a 68-year-old financier and real estate developer from Phoenix, could be paroled after five years.


A New Squeeze On Air Travelers
On most flights across the country, passengers have a limited choice of entertainment.
They can watch a movie, read and on aircraft with two aisles, stretch their legs a bit.
But now, some airlines are increasing the number of single-aisle, or narrow-bodied, airplanes they use on long-distance domestic flights.
This makes it important for long-distance travelers concerned about comfort to ask, when making their reservations, what type of plane they will be on.


Joe Camel Stands for Artistic Freedom; Smoking Is the Issue
To the Editor:
While I am glad that you finally recognized that old Joe Camel exudes not only charm and cartoonish cool but also phallic contours (Op-Ed, March 20), I take issue with the anxiety such an observation creates.


Car Bomb Kills 2 in London
An explosion killed at least 2 people and injured 80.
Hours later another car bomb exploded in London, but no one was reported hurt.
Page 5.


Judge Orders LTV Unit Sold To a French-Linked Group
A Federal bankruptcy judge in New York ended a tense, spirited auction of the aerospace and missile operations of the LTV Corporation today by ordering the sale of the unit to the Carlyle Group and Thomson-CSF for $450 million.
The decision, which came late in the afternoon after three days of dueling by opposing suitors, brought an immediate warning from the Martin Marietta Corporation, one of the losing bidders, that the deal could jeopardize the nation's military power.


INSIDE
U.S. Feared Big Toll In Persian Gulf War
A report issued by the Pentagon shows that the United States command expected that allied casualties could run into tens of thousands of killed and wounded.
The report is the Pentagon's definitive version of how the war was fought and what lessons have been learned from it.
Page 4.
One City, Two Atlantas
After long focusing on foreign affairs, former President Carter has turned to the poverty that exists alongside wealth in his own city.
Page 6.
Hockey Strike Settled
Players and owners settled the 10-day-olf National Hockey League strike and said the regular season would resume tomorrow.
Page 35.


Bush Backs 'Outside Pressure' to End Peru's Crisis
President Bush said today that he would support subjecting Peru to "outside pressure," including economic sanctions, to promote a restoration of democracy there.
Asked at a White House news conference whether he would favor outside pressure and sanctions to counter the decision by the Peruvian President, Alberto Fujimori, to suspend Peru's Constitution, dissolve the Parliament and jail opposition figures, Mr.
Bush said, "Yes, I'd favor some outside pressure."


Bridge
The usual format of a bridge Pro-Am calls for an expert to be paired with a less experienced player.
An alternative, rather more popular with the experts, is for them to play with each other but for both groups to compete in one field.
This was used a week ago at the Town Club, at 9 East 86th Street in Manhattan.
The expert winners were Kathie Wei, who also won the event the only other time the Town Club had it, and David Berkowitz.
They were closely followed by Michael Kamil and Irina Levitina.
The non-expert winners were Fabrizio Biasiolo and Mario Orsenigio.


Classical Music in Review
Israel Chamber Orchestra Carnegie Hall


Pierrepont Trowbridge Noyes, 78, Former Head of Oneida Tableware
Pierrepont Trowbridge Noyes, longtime head of Oneida Ltd., the company that started as a religious commune and today considers itself the world's largest tableware maker, died on Wednesday at his home in Oneida, N.Y.
He was 78 years old.
He died of multiple natural causes, his family said.


Disabled of Moscow Seek Help From West
To the Editor:
The disabled people of the former Soviet Union have found themselves in an extremely hard and difficult position.
Russia is on its move to the market: some enterprises are getting closed, and the number of unemployed is steadily increasing.
Disabled people are being widely refused in getting jobs.
Almost 90 percent of the disabled can hardly make ends meet and have to drag on with a miserable pension while prices are going crazier and crazier.


Nederlanders Change Their Box-Office Boss
The Nederlander Organization, which recently reported a significant theft from the box-office receipts of one of its theaters, has relieved a senior executive of responsibility for the organization's box-office, marketing and sales operations.
According to a spokesman for the Nederlander Organization, the executive, Arthur Rubin, will retain his titles of executive vice president and general manager.
But the company's box-office operations will be handled by Herschel Waxman, a theater marketing executive who used to be a box-office treasurer for the Nederlanders.


Students Take Part in a Dedication Ceremony for Newly Restored Olmsted Park


Review/Film; Fiends With Nasty Feeding Habits
Moments before she kills a policeman with a corncob snatched from a dinner plate, Mary Brady (Alice Krige), a fiend in human form, utters the only witty lines to be heard in "Stephen King's Sleepwalkers." "No vegetables, no dessert!" she growls.
"Those are the rules."
The film, which opened today at local theaters, follows the mayhem wrought by Mary and her son Charles (Brian Krause) when they arrive in the small town of Travis, Ind.
Both mother and son are Sleepwalkers, werewolflike creatures condemned to feed on the life force of beautiful young women to stay alive.
They are also lovers.
Before dispatching her son to find a fresh young victim, Mary entices Charles to slow dance with her to his favorite song, "Sleep Walk" (what else?), the 1959 hit by the Brooklyn guitar duo Santo and Johnny.


Corrections
An article on the Fashion page yesterday about several young designers misstated the status of the business of one of them, Randolph Duke.
His company was bought on April 1 by Prominent Apparel, an American division of C. Itoh, a Japanese company.
It did not go out of business.


Having Outwitted the Seers, Tories Wax Conciliatory
Emboldened by the Conservative Party's unexpected triumph in the national election on Thursday, Prime Minister John Major vowed today to lead Britain out of recession and toward the "classless society" he envisioned when he took over the Government from Margaret Thatcher 16 months ago.
Appearing outside 10 Downing Street only hours after voters defied pundits, bookmakers and poll takers who argued the Conservatives were likely to fall to the Labor Party, the Prime Minister chose to strike a deliberately conciliatory tone after one of the most closely fought British election campaigns in recent memory.


Editors Aim for Ties Without Strings
Shrinking circulation has prompted the nation's newspapers to seek ways to strengthen ties to their communities, but a debate is mounting among editors over how intimate those ties should be.
For editors, meeting here for the annual convention of the American Society of Newspaper Editors, the debate over community involvement goes to the heart of the broader dialogue about the future of newspapers and how they should change as they fight to remain relevant.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Endorsements; Urging Unity, Senator and Union Back Clinton
Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas, who is striving to quell doubts among some Democrats, received help today when he was endorsed by a labor group and a Senator, and both urged wider support for his Presidential candidacy.
The executive board of the Service Employees International Union, which claims one million members, and Senator John D. Rockefeller 4th, Democrat of West Virginia, endorsed Mr.
Clinton in separate announcements.


Riot Charge in Brooklyn Melee
A misdemeanor charge of inciting to riot was filed yesterday against a 28-year-old Brooklyn man arrested on Monday night in the racial disturbances that took place in the Crown Heights section last summer.
The original arrest complaint against the defendant, Robert Wesley of Crown Heights, accused him of first-degree riot, a felony carrying a maximum sentence of one and one-third to four years in prison.


Tories' Triumph: Bucking a European Trend
At first glance, the surprise victory for Prime Minister John Major's Conservative Party in Britain on Thursday seems to go against the grain of other recent European elections.
In France, Italy and Germany, local and national votes in the last month showed strong dissatisfaction among voters with the status quo and the parties in power.


No Victory for Panama
The Bush Administration is savoring the drug conviction of Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega as a final triumph over the deposed dictator.
But its own studies show that toppling him failed to stanch the flow of illicit narcotics through Panama.
Further, critics in Congress and elsewhere are saying that the Government built its case against the general by making far too many costly deals with drug traffickers and other criminals to get them to testify against the defendant.


At Masters' Halfway Point, Two Little Guys Come Up Big
On a course built for big games, two fireplugs who wear approximately the same abbreviated jacket size took the lead today after 36 holes of the 56th Masters.
Ian Woosnam of Wales, who at 5 feet 4 1/2 inches measured for a 40-short green jacket after his victory last year, and Craig Parry of Australia, at 5-6 just a smidgen bigger, shot 66's over a defanged Augusta National to post nine-under-par totals of 135.


Dr. Frank M. Lapeyrolerie, 62; Headed New Jersey Dental School
Dr.
Frank M. Lapeyrolerie, a former dean of the dental school at the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, died on Tuesday at East Orange General Hospital in New Jersey.
He was 62 years old and lived in Montclair, N.J.
He died of a stroke, his family said.


Richard Goode Recital
The pianist Richard Goode is to play his only New York recital this season at 7:30 P.M. tomorrow at Avery Fisher Hall.
On the program are sonatas by Mozart and by Schubert and four preludes by Debussy.
Tickets are $11, $15 and $20.
Information: (212) 721-6500.


I.B.M. Notifies Workers of Cuts
I.B.M. yesterday began notifying thousands of employees in its United States marketing and services division that their jobs no longer existed and that they must therefore look for work elsewhere in the company or accept a severance package.
The cutbacks are part of a plan to revamp the world's largest computer maker announced last December by cutting its work force and by decentralizing its operations.


Reichmanns And Official In Dispute
Because of a clash with the secretive Reichmann brothers over financial disclosure, Thomas S. Johnson, the president just hired to head their company, Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd., is likely to miss a crucial meeting with creditors on Monday, banking and company officials said today.
"Let's say that I'd fall over a chair if I saw Mr. Johnson there," said an Olympia official who asked not to be identified.


Classical Music in Review
Cynthia Raim  Pianist  Weill Recital Hall


Sports of The Times; The Many Promises of Spring
There were clearly more cheers than boos yesterday as the 1992 Mets were introduced at Shea Stadium, though without much passion on either side.
Bobby Bonilla, the richest Met, received an enthusiastic greeting, though even that was tempered by grumbling among a few fans that the Mets had paid too much for his services.


Daniele Bovet, 85, the Discoverer of First Antihistamines, Is Dead
Daniele Bovet, the Swiss-born Nobel Prize-winning pharmacologist who discovered the first antihistamine and created important muscle-relaxing drugs from curare, died Wednesday in Rome.
He was 85 years old.
Dr.
Bovet died of cancer, the Associated Press quoted officials of the Lincei Scientific Academy as saying.


A Happy Ending: Museum Keeps Stolen Artifact and College Gets Cash
The ownership of a spectacular ancient Egyptian tomb ornament, stolen from a small Pennsylvania college in the late 1970's and bought several years later by the Museum of Fine Arts in Boston, has been resolved after a year of contentious negotiations.
The school, Lafayette College in Easton, has also filed suit against a former employee in connection with the theft.
The agreement between Lafayette and the Museum of Fine Arts calls for the museum to keep the ornament, a breast plate believed to be 3,000 years old and worth well over $1 million, after paying the college an undisclosed sum.


South Africa-Nigeria Talks Close Without Diplomatic Recognition
President F. W. de Klerk of South Africa ended a two-day visit to Nigeria today without obtaining any promise of formal relations with Africa's most populous nation.
Despite the warm reception Mr. de Klerk received, no agreements emerged from his visit, the first by a South African head of state to Nigeria, a country that for years was among the most militant critics of apartheid.


Philip E. Burnham, 79, Adviser on Education
Philip E. Burnham, a retired teacher, headmaster and adviser to the College Entrance Examination Board, died Thursday at his home in Hopkinton, N.H.
He was 79 years old and died of cancer, his family said.
Mr.
Burnham worked at St.
Paul's School in Concord, N.H., from 1946 to 1978 as a teacher, head of the English department, summer school dean and assistant headmaster.
He also was headmaster of the Fessenden School in West Newton, Mass., from 1981 to 1983.


Corrections
A listing in Weekend yesterday about cultural events misstated the program of the Brooklyn Philharmonic tonight at the Brooklyn Academy of Music.
The violinist William Preucil and the cellist Janos Starker will play the Brahms "Double" Concerto in A minor.
The violinist Oscar Shumsky will not appear.


Pentagon Report on Persian Gulf War: A Few Surprises and Some Silences
Shortly before the allied offensive in the Persian Gulf war, the United States command anticipated that coalition casualties might run into tens of thousands killed and wounded, according to a report on the war issued by the Pentagon today.
Although the eventual toll never remotely approached that magnitude, a previously undisclosed order approved by President Bush, revealed in the report, suggested that casualties could run as high as 10 percent of ground combat troops.
The order shows how seriously the Pentagon viewed the possibility that a bloody campaign might be required to oust nearly half a million Iraqi troops from Kuwait, even if a steady air campaign cut Iraq's strength in half before ground troops moved in.


Reichmanns And Official In Dispute
Because of a clash with the secretive Reichmann brothers over financial disclosure, Thomas S. Johnson, the president just hired to head their company, Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd., is likely to miss a crucial meeting with creditors on Monday, banking and company officials said today.
"Let's say that I'd fall over a chair if I saw Mr. Johnson there," said an Olympia official who asked not to be identified.


Oysters, the Only Game in Bivalve
Everyone knows about the gambling casinos at Atlantic City, but come to the scarred docks at Bivalve about 30 miles southwest of the ocean resort to observe the biggest floating crap game in the state.
Here, where the dark Maurice River flows through tidal marshes fringed with straw-colored cattails to spill into Delaware Bay, commercial oyster boats strain at lines lashed to creosoted pilings.
Once again, for the fourth year out of the last six, the boats aren't leaving the docks to work the oyster beds in the bay.


Ashe Already Fostering New AIDS Awareness
It may seem awkward for an AIDS patient to serve as a director of an insurance company that will not write policies for AIDS patients, but if nothing else, ARTHUR ASHE is an AIDS patient with a difference.
Ashe, who disclosed on Wednesday that he has had AIDS for several years, has been a director of the Aetna Life and Casualty Company since 1982 and plans to remain on the board despite the company's refusal to sell new policies to people with AIDS or to people who test positive for the virus that causes AIDS.


Iran Vote Expected to Turn on Economy
Millions of Iranians voted today to elect a new Parliament, turning polling stations into an open forum on the quality of life under Iran's 13-year-old revolution.
The election of the 270-seat Parliament, the first nationwide poll of the people since the death of Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini in 1989, will strengthen support for the economic and foreign-policy initiatives of President Hashemi Rafsanjani if, as expected, it gives him a clear majority in the legislative body.


Dinkins Given O.K. To Have Solid Foods
The abscess on Mayor David N. Dinkins's colon is healing well, and doctors told him yesterday that he could resume eating solid food, which he promptly did -- consuming a dinner of stewed chicken, couscous, steamed broccoli and a slice of lemon meringue pie at Gracie Mansion.
The Mayor's personal physician, Dr.
Adrian L. Edwards, said in a statement that a CAT scan yesterday afternoon showed that the abscess on the wall of Mr.
Dinkins's colon was draining "and the very thick, inflammatory tissue which earlier was found to exist around the abscess no longer exists."


After Test, Montana Gives Himself a Passing Grade
It was a test.
Not a major one, but important enough that Joe Montana, who is attempting a comeback from elbow surgery in October, allowed himself to sound optimistic today, three months before the start of the San Francisco 49ers training camp.
He was rusty and tight, but Montana gave himself a passing grade after throwing for more than an hour during a minicamp.


Review/Dance; Lado Troupe, Renamed but Unchanged by Croatian Strife
Lado, the Folk Dance Ensemble of Croatia, was called Lado, the Yugoslav National Folk Ensemble From Zagreb, on its previous United States tours.
History, strife and politics are resonant in the name change, but Lado itself remains what it has always been: one of the world's great folk companies.
You don't have to be an expert on Croatian peasant rituals and salon dances of the past to head for the current tour's last performance, tomorrow at 6 P.M at the Colden Center, Queens College (Kissena Boulevard and the Long Island Expressway, Flushing, Queens).
Anyone interested in intricate choreography, fast footwork and superb singers and dancers will not be disappointed.


Derby Hopefuls in Blue Grass
Fair weather and a fast track were predicted for Saturday's 68th running of the Blue Grass Stakes, with Hammer's Dance Floor, the Willis family's Pistols and Roses, and John H. Peace's Colony Light still favored to emerge as major candidates for the Kentucky Derby.
This will be the fourth straight year that the Blue Grass has been run three weeks before the Derby, and for the third straight year, it could produce the winner of the Derby.
In 1990, Unbridled ran third in the Blue Grass and first in the Derby; in 1991, Strike the Gold won both.


Stewart-Foreman Is No Joke for Either Contestant


Noriega's Guilt, and Its Aftertaste
Manuel Noriega, former feared dictator of Panama, stands convicted of running his country as a racketeer enterprise, turning it into a staging area for Colombian drug lords to sell cocaine in the United States.
The verdict seems just.
Then why doesn't it feel better?
Mainly because of nagging concern that the United States may have paid too much to prove his guilt.
It sent a military force to invade Panama and capture him.
It made a sweeping claim of regional power and criminal jurisdiction.
And it struck some generous bargains with some scabrous prosecution witnesses.
Some of these concerns, though not all, are justified.


Gooden's About the Only Hit of the Day for Mets
There was an initial electricity at Shea Stadium yesterday, but then nothing further to power it.
There was introductory applause, but then little reason to repeat it.
And so an afternoon enriched by Dwight Gooden's extraordinary athletic triumph was ultimately diluted by a thousand small failures by the Mets in a 4-0 home-opener loss to the Montreal Expos.
Gooden, full of inner excitement and thanks for his remarkable return from shoulder surgery, walked to the mound and then marched through the Montreal order, touched for two runs in six and two-thirds innings but unharmed otherwise.
His teammates, though, were feeble at the plate, smothered by Ken Hill.


Dow Chemical Ozone Move
The Dow Chemical Company said yesterday that it would cease normal production and sale of ozone-depleting methyl chloroform by Dec. 31, 1995, the deadline recently suggested by President Bush for a halt to such operations in the United States.
MCF, as the chemical is commonly called, is widely used in industrial cleaning and in aerosols and coatings.
Dow said annual sales have fluctuated between $100 million and $200 million in recent years, with more than 60 percent of the sales made outside the United States.


Ink Dries for Massimino
The Nevada Board of Regents has approved a five-year contract that will guarantee the new Nevada-Las Vegas basketball coach, ROLLIE MASSIMINO, at least $386,000 a year.
The Regents didn't see the contract, but relied on information provided by the university's president, ROBERT MAXSON.
U.N.L.V. has agreed to help Massimino arrange additional private business deals that could increase his total compensation to nearly $600,000. (AP)


Earnings at First Chicago Sharply Higher in Quarter
The First Chicago Corporation announced a sharp increase in quarterly profits yesterday, citing a decline in losses from bad loans, growth of its credit card business, and profits from investments in other companies.
Losses from bad loans remained high, but were down sharply from the previous quarter, and not much changed from a year earlier.
In its first quarter, ended March 31, First Chicago, which owns the First National Bank of Chicago and is the 10th-largest banking company in the country, said it earned $60.7 million, or 71 cents a share, up 23 percent from $49.5 million, or 63 cents a share, a year ago.


BUSINESS DIGEST
COMPANIES
Charles H. Keating Jr. was sentenced to 10 years in prison for duping depositors at Lincoln Savings into purchasing high-risk junk bonds issued by Lincoln's parent company.
After hearing emotional testimony from purchasers of the bonds, a California judge imposed the maximum sentence, as well as a $250,000 fine.  [ Page 1. ]


First Pitch, Ditto
Sure there's been a lot of hand wringing suspense.
In addition to all the questions -- "Will he?" or "Won't he?" -- it appeared for a while that the Governor would simply be too wrapped up in budget negotiations to budge from Albany, let alone fulfill a political destiny.
But now that the Legislature has put the budget to bed, leaving the Governor free to follow his heart, he has absolutely, definitely made up his mind.
According to his office, MARIO CUOMO will throw out a ceremonial first pitch when the Binghamton Mets open their first season next Thursday.
Cuomo had promised to do just that when he attended the groundbreaking ceremony for Binghamton Municipal Stadium last July, but club officials took no chances.


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday about the Intel Corporation's first-quarter earnings misstated the company's closing stock price in over-the-counter trading on Thursday.
It was $57.25 a share, down 25 cents.


Iraq Tells U.N. That Surveillance Flights Might Be Shot Down
Clashing again with the Security Council, President Saddam Hussein of Iraq has said photographic surveillance flights that the United Nations is conducting over Iraq using a borrowed American U-2 spy plane might be shot down.
The Iraqi Government is calling for the suspension of those flights, which hunt for secret stores of weapons of mass destruction, and says they are being used for illicit intelligence gathering.
Baghdad warned that as a result of the Iranian air attack last Sunday on a military training camp for Iranian rebels in Iraq, its forces might mistake the U-2 for an attacking Iranian warplane and accidentally shoot it down.
Letter Cites Iranian Attack
In a letter to Rolf Ekeus, head of the commission charged with finding and destroying Iraq's nuclear, chemical and biological weapons, Baghdad said the flights had been endangered by "the recent treacherous Iranian attack on our territory" and called for their suspension "to avoid any unfortunate incidents."
The Security Council reacted angrily to the threat tonight, expressing "grave concern" at the Iraqi move and warning Baghdad that it faced "serious consequences" if it failed to insure the safety of those flights -- a phrase, diplomats say, that could imply military action.
"The members of the Council call upon the Government of Iraq to take all necessary steps to insure that the Iraqi military forces will not interfere with or threaten the security of the flights concerned," the Council said in a statement read by its president this month, Simbarashe Simbanenduku Mumbengegwi of Zimbabwe.
The warning came as the United States, Britain and France prepared for another showdown with Iraq's leader, this time over his treatment of the Kurds.
Those three countries, which are protecting a Kurdish enclave in northern Iraq with forces based in southern Turkey, want Baghdad to pull back anti-aircraft missile batteries it has recently stationed near the northern city of Mosul and stop attacking Kurdish areas.
Earlier this week, the American commander of those forces gave their demands to senior Iraqi military officers at a meeting in the town of Dohuk.
But the three are now discussing a stronger statement with Turkey, which would carry an implicit threat to destroy the missile batteries if they are not withdrawn, diplomats said.
Iraq's warning about the spy-plane flights came in a letter to Mr.
Ekeus on Thursday complaining about the commission's plans to send another flight across its territory sometime between April 11 and 13.
The U-2 plane, piloted by an American and on loan to the commission, carries United Nations markings and is based in Saudi Arabia.
It is making two flights a week over Iraq photographing suspected sites and is looking for any signs that Iraq may be rebuilding destroyed weapons installations.
The commission tells Baghdad where the plane will enter and leave Iraqi airspace.
But it specifies only the 48-hour period during which the flight will take place and does not reveal the flight path over Iraq.
In its protest letter, Iraq says the flights are being conducted for "purposes of coercion and threat" and are "serving interests which are entirely unrelated to the mandate of the Special Commission." It says the flights "now endanger the aircraft itself and its pilot" and should be halted.
In his reply, Mr.
Ekes said the commission "views these remarks with the gravest concern as they appear to constitute a threat to the security of the commission's aerial surveillance flights."
He also hinted that the United States and its allies might give the U-2 a fighter escort to insure its safety.
He said that unless Iraq guaranteed that it would not threaten the security of the flights, "the modalities of these unescorted flights will have to be reviewed."


Wrestling Stopped At Notre Dame
Notre Dame has decided to drop wrestling as a varsity sport, the university's athletic director, Dick Rosenthal, said today.
"Though our program has enjoyed some success at the national level over the last eight years, that has not translated into the fan interest we might have hoped for," Rosenthal said.


Carter's Civic Crusade Tries to Meld Two Atlantas
In the shadow of the city's downtown skyscrapers and 100 yards from the manicured lawn and crisp, modern architecture of the Carter Center, vacant city-owned lots are overgrown with gnarled kudzu vines, and tar paper shacks occupied by some of the city's homeless dot the brush.
It has been a decade since the land was cleared of rundown houses and warehouses to make way for a parkway to carry suburban commuters into downtown Atlanta.
But the roadway has been tied up in court action and the only development has been the shacks of the homeless.


Corrections
An article on April 2 about violence in the Israeli-occupied Gaza Strip referred imprecisely to the killing of at least 17 Palestinians at Al Aksa mosque in Jerusalem in October 1990.
Recreating the sequence of events in that incident, an Israeli judge concluded last year that before the Palestinians threw stones in the direction of worshipers at the Western Wall, the police had fired into the Palestinian crowd, killing at least one person.
After the stoning, the police returned in greater force, and that is when most of the casualties occurred.


Driver Asleep at the Wheel, a Bus Crashes, Injuring 23


Review/Opera; Justifying Eastern Ends With Western Means
The simple answer to a formidable puzzle arrives and does its work so swiftly that one wonders why long-laboring problem-solvers produce so few of them.
Bright Sheng finds several simple answers in his brief new opera, "The Song of Majnun," a few frail levers used to move considerable weight.
Mr.
Sheng, during his 10 years in this country, has struggled impressively to accommodate Eastern culture to Western means.
Perhaps in opera he has found a resting place.
Last night's premiere at the Lyric Opera of Chicago was, at the least, encouraging.
One problem was this: Majnun (pronounced My NOON), in this ancient tale, is driven mad by thwarted love for Layla.
Her parents marry her instead to Ibn Salam.
Majnun goes into the desert and sings a song of desperation so powerful that its beauty spreads across the land.
How to show this?
With his handful of choristers on the small stage of the Civic Theater, Mr.
Sheng must move momentous events across great distances in a hurry.


Ruth Hammond, Actress, 96
Ruth Hammond, an actress whose career on Broadway spanned half a century, died in her sleep on Thursday, her 96th birthday, at the Actor's Fund Home in Englewood, N.J.
Miss Hammond created the role of Cora in the 1939 hit play "Life With Father" and remained in the cast for the entire run of the show, missing only one performance in seven and a half years.
Her first appearance on Broadway was in 1920 in "The Ouija Board"; her other credits included "Saturday's Children" with Ruth Gordon and "The Good Fairy" with Helen Hayes, as well as "Winterset," "The Women" and "Life With Mother."


Patents; Debating 2 Delayed Approvals
A report prepared for Congress and released this week raises new questions about whether lawmakers should extend the patent lives for Olestra, the innovative fat substitute developed by the Procter &amp; Gamble Company, and an arthritis drug developed by the Upjohn Company.
The report was prepared by the General Accounting Office, the Congressional watchdog agency, at the request of the House and Senate Judiciary subcomittees that oversee patent issues.
It is the first independent analysis of a high-stakes controversy with no easy answer.
The companies argue that they should get the extensions because the Food and Drug Administration has rendered their patents virtually worthless by taking so long to approve their products for sale.


Classical Music in Review
Mark Steinberg Violinist Weill Recital Hall


4 Whole Days Till Tax Time, So Why Panic?
If you are among the millions of taxpayers tackling Form 1040 this weekend, don't despair.
Even though Wednesday is the tax-filing deadline, you can still avoid running afoul of the Internal Revenue Service and get any tax breaks you are entitled to.
The keys are completeness and accuracy, said Michael Janicki, a partner in Arthur Andersen &amp; Company, the nation's largest accounting firm.


What Coated Windows Can Do
To the Editor:
Because efficient windows are critical to solving many environmental and economic problems I was happy to see your March 21 Consumer's World page article bring these issues to a wide readership.


Reviews/Fashion; A Subdued, Elegant Mizrahi
To all the commentators out to pinpoint what the 1990's are all about, or cadge quotes about the effect of the economy on fashion, Isaac Mizrahi's fall collection said a lot.
Gone were the dizzy, drop-dead numbers of recent seasons, thematically contrived and designed to leave his fashion followers squealing in arpeggios of delight.
Absent were the disco dresses and "press dresses," the kind that make great runway photographs but seem improbable on the retail rack.


Russian Emigres Importing Thugs to Commit Crimes in U.S.
Exploiting the relaxation of travel restrictions in the former Soviet Union, emigre criminals in the United States have begun importing con artists, extortionists and hired murderers who carry out contract crimes for small sums of money and then disappear back home, law-enforcement officials say.
The intercontinental criminal traffic is the most striking way in which a small but violent underworld of emigre criminals has evolved to take advantage of the breakup of the Soviet Union.
And although no one can know the extent of the crime, law-enforcement officials in New York and Los Angelessay they are starting to see evidence of such joint ventures in crime.


Travel Industry Upbeat on AMR's Fare Cut
A day after American Airlines spurred the airline industry to simplify its patchwork fare structure, reservations centers were flooded with calls, with some reporting twice the usual number.
Travel officials sorting out the winners and losers said that most travelers would benefit but that some corporate fliers and members of the armed forces and the Government, who have enjoyed big group discounts, could pay more.


Kenneth L. Dawson, 45, Is Dead; Led Gay and AIDS Organizations
Kenneth L. Dawson, a leader and adviser of gay and lesbian and AIDS organizations, died on Thursday at New York University Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 45 years old and lived in Brooklyn.
He died of complications from AIDS, said Jed Mattes, a friend.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: White House; BUSH, IN A SESSION WITH JOURNALISTS, PLAYS TO STRENGTH
Apparently trying to counter the notion of policy paralysis in the White House and a re-election campaign adrift, President Bush answered reporters' questions in the Rose Garden for an hour today, discoursing on matters ranging from Peru to Perot and from parks to perks.
On the substantive issues he addressed -- welfare, for example, and the environment, health, education and the economy -- Mr.
Bush broke little new ground.
But he displayed a Presidential mastery of those topics and used the occasion to rail against Congress and to deny reports that he had brought his son George to Washington to put the White House and the campaign in order.


COMPANY NEWS;
Government officials today wrote one of the final chapters of a one-time buccaneer within the Texas savings industry, selling Sunbelt Federal Savings to the BankAmerica Corporation for $103 million.
The Resolution Trust Corporation put the eventual loss to taxpayers in the deal at $297 million.
But losses from fraud, unfettered lending sprees and other errant practices at the original Sunbelt Savings Association amounted to an estimated $2 billion when the institution was closed in August 1988.


Jackson Goes Home
It'll be awhile before he can test his new equipment under game conditions, but BO JACKSON and his new left hip are expected to be at Comiskey Park for Monday's home opener.
Jackson, who had his hip replaced last weekend, left the hospital yesterday to begin nine months of rehabilitation and an uncertain athletic future.
Although his doctors said the surgery had gone well, it will take time to determine whether he can return to baseball. (AP)


Surgery for Young
MICHAEL YOUNG, Denver's top receiver last season, will undergo back surgery on Tuesday that could keep him out through the first weeks of the 1992 season.
The surgery will be to repair a herniated disk that has been putting pressure on nearby nerves in the lower back, causing numbness in Young's left foot.
Recovery is expected to take between four and six months. . . .
Broncos offensive lineman ELBERT CRAWFORD, who had a heart attack during workouts on Tuesday, was moved out of intensive care and his condition was upgraded to fair. (AP)


Englehard's New Products
The Englehard Corporation said yesterday that it had developed two catalysts that it says could save oil refineries $2.5 billion as they retool to meet the requirements of the Clean Air Act.
Refiners said the catalysts showed promise.


A Second Big Loss for the Senate
Another exceptional U.S.
Senator has quit in disgust.
Tim Wirth, the Colorado Democrat, says he won't run again, in part because Congress isn't working -- only two weeks after Warren Rudman, a Republican from New Hampshire, gave his colleagues the same pointed message.
Mr.
Rudman had planned to leave after his second term.
Mr.
Wirth's decision was a surprise.
Yet both shared the same deep frustration over Washington's inability to address and deliver solutions to national problems.


Treasuries Drop After Report but Recover
The worst inflation report in the last 17 months led to a selloff yesterday in the Government securities market.
Prices of Treasury notes and bonds tumbled immediately after the Labor Department disclosed that consumer prices rose by half a percent in March.
But buyers stepped in at lower price levels, and most of the early price declines were erased as the session went on.


Advance of 7.6% Halts Drop in Tokyo Stocks
After a week of plunging prices and frayed nerves, Government action in the credit markets in both the United States and Japan finally arrested the slide in Japanese stocks.
The market began a sharp, if unsteady, rise from the opening bell here today and posted its fourth-largest one-day gain in a spectacular rally.
Government officials and analysts welcomed the improvement after a two-week decline, but many noted that it still left the market with a big loss for the week and did not appear to have revived badly damaged investor confidence.


Democracy's Checkpoint
Millions of Americans are hunched over desks and dining room tables this weekend, struggling to meet Wednesday's deadline for filing Form 1040.
Too many will skip right past the check-off boxes at the top -- the place to cast your vote for fair Presidential campaign financing.
Each "yes" vote sends a dollar to the fund that finances campaigns and nominating conventions and diminishes the influence of special interests.
Voting "no," or not at all, invites a return to the bad old days of unlimited spending and unrestricted fund-raising.


Mimi Levy Wed To M. J. Mehta
Marilyn Carol Levy, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Philip Levy of Phoenix, was married there last night to Manish Jatin Mehta, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jatin Mehta of Trumbull, Conn.
Tarun Shukla, a Hindu priest, performed the ceremony at the Indo American Cultural and Religious Center.
Mrs.
Mehta, 29 years old and known as Mimi, is an associate at the New York law firm of Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher &amp; Flom.
She graduated from Wellesley College and received a J.D. from Columbia University.
Her father is an endocrinologist in private practice in Phoenix.


As Economy Drops in Japan, Chiefs Vie for Top Cut in Pay
American executives often wince and stumble for explanations when their hefty pay packages are compared with the relatively modest compensation received by their Japanese counterparts.
Now the comparison is becoming even more uncomfortable: With Japan's economy hitting the wall and corporate profits dropping, industrial leaders here are suddenly competing with each other to see who can absorb the deepest pay cut.


Konstantin Sergeyev Dies at 82; Dancer and Kirov Director
Konstantin Sergeyev, a former director of the Kirov Ballet who was also one of Soviet ballet's leading male stars through the 1950's, died on April 1 in St.
Petersburg, Russia.
He was 82 years old.
Mr.
Sergeyev had complained of fatigue and entered a hospital, said Anna-Marie Holmes, assistant to the director of the Boston Ballet.
Mr.
Sergeyev, artistic director of the Kirov Ballet School since 1972, had staged the Boston Ballet's highly acclaimed version of "Swan Lake" in 1990 with the aid of his wife, the former Kirov ballerina Natalya Dudinskaya.
She informed Miss Holmes of his death by telephone from St.
Petersburg and said her husband felt tired after staging "Le Corsaire" at the Bolshoi Ballet and "Giselle" in Tokyo this winter.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Virginia; Caucuses to Provide a Gauge of Clinton's Support
When Virginia Democrats caucus on Saturday to choose delegates to the Presidential nominating convention in July, Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas is favored to win.
But by how much?
The contest for Virginia's 78 delegates is the first since Mr.
Clinton's victories on Tuesday in primaries in New York, Wisconsin and Kansas.
And while it increasingly appears that the Governor will be the party's nominee, what is not clear is how strong a nominee he might be.


Rachmaninoff, Buried in New York, May Return to Russia
First it was Bela Bartok. Will Sergei Rachmaninoff be next?
Rachmaninoff aficionados know that the Russian pianist, conductor and composer is buried in the Kensico Cemetery here with his wife and one of his daughters.
But most garden-variety music lovers are unaware that the composer is not only buried near Manhattan but lived for four years in a five-story town house on Riverside Drive.


Recording by Hand, Nassau Lags Behind
This is what Rita Figurniak, an employee in the Suffolk County Clerk's office, does to record a judicial motion in a court case: she calls up a file on her desktop computer, looks over the papers and enters in two-digit codes.
On average, it takes 30 seconds.
In Nassau County, the papers are assigned numbers, then filed in drawers and, eventually, recorded in two-inch-thick books.
The county is more than three months behind in recording judicial actions.


Best American Men Are Running on Empty In Top Competitions
The first three finishers today in the Columbus, Ohio, marathon for men will represent the United States in the Olympic marathon this summer in Barcelona, Spain.
But, given the current state of American distance running, it might not matter who they are.
The last 10 years have provided dramatic evidence that even the best marathoners in the United States have little chance to win major international events like the Olympics.
Whether the reasons relate to training, cultural differences, motivation or innate talent, Americans are lagging behind rivals from many other countries, including Japan, Mexico, Australia and African nations like Kenya, Ethiopia and Tanzania.


Experts See Glass Beads as Low-Cost Tool for Oil-Spill Cleanup
Using materials like white paint pigment and microscopic glass bubbles, it may soon be possible to clean up huge oil and chemical spills quickly and relatively cheaply, chemists said today.
Comparing their results in combating pollution and oil-spill problems, chemists attending the national meeting of the American Chemical Society agreed that the most effective techniques will probably involve combined approaches exploiting solar energy, bacteria and mechanical agents like glass beads.


CAMPUS LIFE: Brown; Codes and Classes On Sex Offenses Draw Praise
In the fall of 1990, Brown University here gained notoriety when a so-called rape list - graffiti naming alleged rapists - was found on the walls of a campus bathroom.
As a result, the university adopted procedures to deal with sexual assault and harassment on campus.
Those procedures are now winning praise.
The 1990 incident provoked a campus debate about how the university had been handling sex-related complaints.
Led by the Committee of Four, four students who becaume the spokeswomen for the cause, students accused the univeristy of ineptness in dealing with the issue.


PHYSICIANS REFUSE MEDICARE PATIENTS
Many doctors in Manhattan, Miami and other places where medical care is expensive say they are curtailing services for the elderly because of sharp reductions in the payments they receive from Medicare.
Medicare payments used to be based on the fees that doctors in an area customarily charged their patients.
But starting March 1, Medicare adopted a national payment schedule that sharply narrows the gap between more expensive and less expensive places.


Paths of Patient and His Therapist Cross on Dark Journey Leading to Death
He was a brilliant child who taught himself to read by the time he was 4 years old and was so strong-willed that as a pre-schooler he refused to take a dose of aspirin until he read the instructions on the bottle himself.
But at the Harvard Medical School, Paul Lozano, the son of Mexican-American immigrants, became lonely and depressed.
He sought help from a distinguished psychiatrist on Harvard's clinical staff, Dr.
Margaret Bean-Bayog.
Then began an agonizing downward spiral in which Mr.
Lozano was repeatedly hospitalized, and in which Dr.
Bean-Bayog used therapy that she herself has described as "somewhat unconventional" to depict herself as his mother.


Great Ideas for the General Public
THE MAKING OF MIDDLEBROW CULTURE  By Joan Shelley Rubin.
Illustrated. 416 pp.
Chapel Hill: The University of North Carolina Press.
Cloth, $34.95.
Paper, $14.95.


Mattingly and Leary Lift Yanks to 4-0
The Yankees will not proclaim their excitement out loud because Manager Buck Showalter has preached to them about being cautious, but their play is passing the message for them.
Their actions are screaming, "Take us seriously."
How about those four home runs today, including a towering shot by Don Mattingly?
Serious.
How about Tim Leary resurrecting himself for a game with a superb start?
Very serious.
And how about the Yankees' knocking off Detroit, 8-1, for their fourth straight victory as they remained undefeated?
A serious start, for sure, but it is so early.


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester; Affordable Housing Law Brews a Storm
A RISING storm has begun to swirl around Connecticut legislation that was designed to shift some of the responsibility for affordable housing from overburdened cities to the suburbs.
The law is aimed at towns in which fewer than 10 percent of the dwellings are classified as affordable.
At least a dozen resulting lawsuits, with dozens more expected, are winding through the courts on the heels of the first one to reach a judicial decision early last month.


Great Ideas for the General Public
THE MAKING OF MIDDLEBROW CULTURE  By Joan Shelley Rubin.
Illustrated. 416 pp.
Chapel Hill: The University of North Carolina Press.
Cloth, $34.95.
Paper, $14.95.


Bush Election Chief Declares All Is Well
The President's public approval ratings are extraordinarily low, and a drumbeat of news reports has depicted his White House as adrift.
But Robert M. Teeter, heading Mr.
Bush's re-election campaign, said in an interview that all was going as planned.


Computer College Tests Leap Backward
To the Editor:
The tests you herald in "Standardized College Exam Is Customized by Computer" (front page, March 21) send out precisely the wrong educational messages.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo; Brown Renews His Battle Against the Moonbeam
Is Edmund G. Brown Jr. being followed by a moonbeam shadow?
Like Cat Stevens, the mellow rock singer who dropped out of sight to become a militant Muslim in the late 1970's, Mr.
Brown fled this state in the 1980's after his second failed bid for the Presidency to search his soul in the hovels of India and the Zen monasteries of Japan.


Return of Serve
After he had brain surgery in 1988, Arthur Ashe learned that he had contracted AIDS, apparently from a blood transfusion in connection with heart bypass surgery in 1979 or 1983, and he told a few friends and family members.
Over the years, others doubtless learned, but until last week no one threatened to make the tennis legend's misfortune public.
What Mr.
Ashe called a "silent, generous conspiracy" to protect his privacy fell apart with a phone call from USA Today on Tuesday.
Assuming that the newspaper was going to print an Ashe-AIDS story the next day, Mr.
Ashe called a news conference for Wednesday to make a reluctant disclosure.
The former Wimbledon champion said he did not blame USA Today or its reporter, but nevertheless felt that he and his family had been victimized.
As Mr.
Ashe spoke of his wife and daughter, he wept.
"I didn't commit any crime. I'm not running for office," he said.
"I should be able to reserve the right to keep things like that private."


Laura Hobson Is Married in Natchez
Laura Thorn Hobson, a landscape architect in Charlottesville, Va., was married yesterday to Daniel L. Larson Jr., the president of Larsdale Inc., a Boston industrial products manufacturing company.
The Rev.
John Jenkins, an Episcopal priest, officiated at Montaigne, in Natchez, Miss., the home of Mrs.
Hunter Goodrich, the bride's maternal grandmother.
Mrs.
Larson, a graduate of the University of Arizona, has a master's degree in landscape architecture from the University of Virginia.
She is a daughter of Mrs.
Frederick L. Haack of New Orleans and the late John B. Hobson 3d.
Her father was the president of Southern Metal Products, a metals manufacturing company in New Orleans.
Her stepfather is retired as a chief civil engineer for the Arabian American Oil Company in Dhahran, Saudi Arabia.


Top Athletes Are Being Wooed to Fill Some Big Shoes
Forget the burning question about how the United States basketball team will fare at the Summer Olympics in Barcelona, Spain, with Patrick Ewing, Charles Barkley and the other pros taking on the world.
Consider this one: How good at selling shoes will the Algerian runner Noureddine Morceli be?
Or Jane N'Goto, a 3,000-meter specialist from Kenya, or the triple-jump record-holder, Inessa Kravets of Russia?


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-23  UNDERGROUND PRIESTS REJECTED


Manly Looks Take Wing
In his fall fashion show on Friday, Byron Lars, a young designer, proved himself a genuine talent and one of the most imaginative interpreters of men's wear for women, a trend that is sweeping the collections.
With his parents and grandparents sitting in the front row at the Parson School of Design auditorium, Mr.
Lars opened his show with a newsreel of Amelia Earhart's trans-Atlantic flight.
Afterward, the models, in a cloud of smoke, appeared in silk rain jackets, cut to resemble the radial folds of a parachute.
They wore white cloth aviator helmets and white goggles.


40's-Style Melodrama Takes Giddy Turns
IN his six and a half years as artistic head of the Boston Post Road Stage Company, Douglas Moser has fancied the non-mainstream play with an off-center point of view.
But none has been wilder and crazier than "The Lady in Question."
Charles Busch's on-target sendup of a 1940's-style Hollywood flag-waving melodrama is populated by a glamour queen with a Grade B budget and an X-rated past, a Baron who is a "pathetic mother-fixated" fool; his mother, a Hitler-obsessed nymphomaniac, and a mad doctor on the prowl for human experiments, not to mention motley sadomasochists, in or out of drag, "in carefree Bavaria."


Republican Snipers in the House
Finally, laudably, Speaker of the House Tom Foley led his colleagues last week to pass two measures sorely needed to restore confidence in Congress.
And what did House Republicans do?
They tried to torpedo both bills, tearing down Congress for election-year advantage.
There's no other way to explain their negative votes.
The first measure would relieve the pressure to take money from favor-seekers.
It would create a cleaner, more competitive system built on a foundation of spending limits, new curbs on special-interest political action committees and Federal matching payments.
For the House to pass it was a monumental breakthrough.


Corrections
An article last Sunday on the Making a Difference page about steel trade issues misidentified Carla A. Hills.
She is the United States trade representative.


Peruvian Official Assails Pressure From U.S.
In an interview before his departure for talks in Washington, Peru's Foreign Minister bitterly criticized the Bush Administration for putting pressure on other governments to isolate President Alberto Fujimori, who seized broad power last Sunday in what many people are calling a civil-military coup.
The Foreign Minister, Augustino Blacker Miller, said in the interview late Friday night that Mr.
Fujimori's action had wide popular support among Peruvians and wondered how the United States could be so "naive" as to lump Peru's situation with the military takeover in Haiti last year.


Why 'Republic of Macedonia' Incenses Greeks; For Neighborliness
To the Editor:
Re "The Two Macedonias" (editorial, April 5): Macedonia has been Greek for more than three millenniums, while the self-styled "Macedonians" of Skopje have been using the name for less than 50 years.
If, as they try to convince the world, their intentions are of such crystalline purity, why do they insist on usurping the venerable name of Macedonia, to which they can lay no credible historical or cultural claim?


A Reverential 'Oklahoma!' Revival
CARRYING the weight of history and nostalgia, "Oklahoma!" represents hallowed musical comedy territory.
One feels obliged to welcome it with good will and cheer.
No critical carping.
That would be unthinkable, if not subversive.
Justifiably, the sunny melodiousness of Rodgers and Hammerstein's first score is still to be marveled at, even though theatergoers who have never depended on the recurrence of dream ballets for musical highs may acknowledge Agnes de Mille's pioneering choreography with deferential admiration, if not total abandon.


New Lines Seek Niches In the Air
ALTHOUGH Pan Am, Eastern and Midway were shot out of the friendly skies last year, joining such other casualties of the air wars as People Express and Air Florida, a growing group of entrepreneurs is seeking to start new airlines -- not just to fly from one small city to another, but also to Africa, the Caribbean and the Baltic states.
What the newcomers have in common is access to a large pool of experienced pilots, planes and ground personnel, people who worked for the airlines that could no longer compete with such mega-carriers as American, United and Delta.
And most of the newcomers also share a common strategy -- trying to carve out a niche too small or too insignificant to invite competition from the big carriers.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: White House; BUSH ATTACKS WAY UNIONS ARE USING NONMEMBERS' FEES
In a move long sought by conservatives, President Bush will soon take steps to prevent labor unions from using money collected from nonunion workers for political activities that those workers oppose.
In a speech planned for Monday, Mr.
Bush will describe his actions as a way to enforce a 1988 Supreme Court decision that held that workers who choose not to join a union may not be required to pay for any union activities other than collective bargaining and representation on labor-management issues.


A Last Call for Fathers, Sons and Barflies
I have no statistics to back this up.
But it's my guess that the two most common manifestations of the American drama are the bar play and the father-son play.
The bar play -- "The Time of Your Life," for example, or "The Iceman Cometh" -- usually assembles a bunch of eccentrics in a corner dive and lets them indulge their eccentricities or dream their pipe dreams.
In the father-son play ("Long Day's Journey Into Night" or "Death of a Salesman," to cite the best of the breed), the playwright generally sets out to record the emotional fallout of a relationship that was troublesome at best, crippling at worst.


Booth Speech Reveals a Killer's Mind
In 1860, more than four years before John Wilkes Booth assassinated Abraham Lincoln in Ford's Theater, the actor wrote a 21-page manuscript that showed his fanatical state of mind, his sympathies for the Southern secessionists and his association with the historical characters he portrayed in Shakespeare's plays.
Had these sentiments been known to the officials responsible for guarding the President, in the view of Lincoln scholars, it is possible that Booth would not have had such easy access to the Washington theater on April 14, 1865.


Patricia Gilligan Has Wedding
Patricia Elizabeth Gilligan, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James R. Gilligan of Manasquan, N.J., was married yesterday to John Emmet White, a son of Mrs.
John H. Keating Jr. of Rumson, N.J., and the late Dr.
Richard L. White.
The Rev.
Robert Burke officiated at St.
Catharine's Roman Catholic Church in Spring Lake, N.J.
Mrs.
White, 26 years old, is the senior promotion writer and producer at WCVB-TV in Boston.
She graduated from Villanova University.
Her father is a marketing consultant to Jac Jacobsen Industries, a Greenwich, Conn., lighting concern.


Song and Symphony


Little Laughter in "Heidi Chronicles"
"THE HEIDI CHRONICLES," the play by Wendy Wasserstein that won both the 1989 Pulitzer Prize and Broadway's Tony Award, is at the Studio Theater in Lindenhurst through May 2.
On Broadway, the play was a comedy with serious undertones.
It was a comedy of manners in which the laughs piled up on one another like a huge fender-bender on the Long Island Expressway.
You laughed at the absurdity of it even as you realized the serious nature of the situation.


Christine Concannon Plans to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Richard J. Concannon of Larchmont, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Christine Mara Concannon to David Ehrlich Geithner, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter F. Geithner, also of Larchmont.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss Concannon, 25 years old, graduated from the College of the Holy Cross and is a network buyer at Young &amp; Rubicam, a New York advertising agency.
Her father is a senior partner in the New York law firm of Kelley Drye &amp; Warren.
Her mother, Maura Concannon, is a freelance writer.
Her great-grandfather Timothy J. Mara founded the New York Giants.


Why Balanchine Rarities Remain Relics Rad Bascome
The repertorial lineup has just been announced for the New York City Ballet's "Balanchine Celebration" in the spring of 1993.
And once again, no "Opus 34" or "Divertimento" or even "PAMTGG" -- fabled lost Balanchine ballets beloved of collectors of City Ballet legends.
There will be 72 ballets of varying degrees of familiarity, from the 1981 Garland Dance from "Sleeping Beauty" to the 1928 "Apollo," shorn, sadly, of a mysterious preamble that Balanchine abandoned.
But the 1947 "Divertimento," popularly known as the "Haieff 'Divertimento,' " will have to remain on fans' wish lists.
Balanchine was adamant about never reviving "Divertimento." Not only had he forgotten the steps, he said, but he had used all the movements in other ballets and so would be revealed as an incorrigible self-plagiarist.


THE WORLD: I.R.A. Blasts in London; Again the Bombs Stiffen Resolve
The Irish Republican Army keeps trying to bomb the British out of Northern Ireland; I.R.A. bombs make the British more determined than ever not to give in.
The vicious cycle, now in its third decade, claimed three more victims in the City of London, Britain's financial center, Friday night and left part of it looking like Beirut.
The City was still crowded with travelers, and bankers and brokers celebrating Thursday's Conservative victory in the British general election, when 100 pounds of high explosive hidden in a van exploded near the Liverpool Street railway station shortly after 9 P.M.
Debris and shattered glass from thousands of windows ripped through the narrow streets and rained down from skyscrapers, killing a 15-year-old girl, a youth in his 20's, and a 44-year-old man from Edinburgh.
Another 91 people were injured, many seriously, including the girl's 7-year-old sister.
A few hours later, a second bomb ripped apart a huge home-repair center in North London, but no one was wounded there.


Hawaii
To the Editor: The informative article entitled "Handmade, and Hawaiian" (Feb. 23) pictured the work, among others, of Mika McCann.
Her baskets are quite extraordinary, and, not surprisingly, quite expensive.
Purchasers should also be alert to a procedure practiced by Ms.
McCann.
The gallery on Maui where she was exhibiting agreed to ship the $500 purchase to my home in Connecticut, and charged me a 10 percent shipping fee (which seemed about right), payable to Ms.
McCann.
When the package arrived, nearly a month later, it carried a C.O.D. shipping charge of $45.95.
At that point, there was nothing to do but pay it.
When I complained to Ms.
McCann, I was told that the $50 had been for "packing," not full shipping.
This "packing" consisted of a standard, light-duty cardboard box with a few handfuls of foam pellets, maybe $3 worth of materials in all -- resulting in a price increase of nearly 10 percent.
JEAN B. MAURO North Haven, Conn.
Ms. McCann responds:
The standard packing fee for the galleries I deal with is 10 percent of the art value.
We pay more for boxes and packing materials because of the freight charges to the United States mainland from Hawaii.
This charge also includes the time involved to arrange shipping, correspondence and other related issues.
Mr.
Mauro came to my one-woman show at the Lahaina Art Society (a nonprofit organization where 30 percent of Mr. Mauro's cost of this art can be deducted as a donation from his taxes), and liked and purchased some art pieces from my husband (who was sitting the show for me that day).
My husband explained to Mr.
Mauro about shipping and package fees.
The manager of the Lahaina Art Society also explained these charges to Mr.
Mauro when he paid for the art.


Abby Sue Zuckerman Weds on L. I.
Abby Sue Zuckerman, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin Zuckerman of Cedarhurst, L.I., was married last evening to Dr.
Steven Gregg Wallach, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Gerald Wallach of Merrick, L.I.
Rabbi Sheldon Thal officiated at Hewlett East Rockaway Jewish Center in Hewlett, L.I.
Mrs.
Wallach, 25 years old, is the senior special-event publicity agent for special events at Showtime Networks in New York.
She graduated from the University of Wisconsin in Madison.
Her father is the president of Port Parties Ltd., an electrical contractor in New York.
Her mother, Marlene Zuckerman, is the company's office manager.


Yvette Jacob To Wed in June
June wedding plans have been announced for Yvette K. Jacob, a director of folk art for Ann Jacob Galleries in New York and Atlanta, and David Andrew Schorsch, a partner in the New York antiquities firm of David A. Schorsch.
Miss Jacob, 30 years old, is a daughter of Ann Marie Jacob and the late Ernst Munfred Jacob.
Her mother founded Ann Jacob Galleries, which deals in American folk art and contemporary art.
Her stepfather, David Linzey Schoenfeld, is a partner in the gallery.


Cynthia Dorsey To Wed in July
Mr. and Mrs.
George K. Dorsey of Purchase, N.Y., have announced July wedding plans for their daughter Dr.
Cynthia Margot Dorsey and Dr.
Scott Edward Lukas, a son of Capt. and Mrs.
Thomas E. Lukas of McLean, Va.
Dr.
Dorsey is the assistant director of the Sleep Disorders Center at McLean Hospital in Belmont, Mass.
She graduated from Wesleyan University and received a Ph.D. in clinical psychology from Northwestern University.
Her father retired as the vice chairman of Argus Research, an investment research concern in New York founded by his father, the late Harold B. Dorsey.


Stormy Weather Slows Masters Golfers
Although lightning hit the third round of the Masters today, the accompanying rain took all the fire out of the Augusta National's greens and brought a bevy of players into contention.
Play was stopped for 2 hours 53 minutes after lightning was detected within 15 miles of the course, causing six players to leave the course when darkness fell without having completed their third round.


Feminism and the Wild Man
To the Editor:
My initial dismay at both the tone and the substance of Jill Johnston's diatribe rapidly gave way to immense relief.
If Ms.
Johnston's arguments are the severest attack the nascent men's movement can expect from her form of feminism, then men have very little to fear indeed.


Ms. Alperstein Plans to Marry
Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Alperstein of Rye Brook, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Joann Sharon Alperstein to Jonathan Benjamin Ludwig, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Ludwig of Sharon, Mass.
An October 1993 wedding is planned.
Ms.
Alperstein, 24 years old, is an assistant media planner at Ogilvy &amp; Mather, the New York advertising agency.
She graduated from the State University of New York at Albany.
Her father is a certified public accountant in Rye Brook.
Her mother, Rayna Alperstein, is the director of Christ's Church Nursery School in Rye, N.Y.


Peru's Basic Problems Won't Be Ordered Away
Outside the ornate presidential palace here, there is a figure of a man on a horse, Pizarro the conquistador.
It recalls more of Peru's history than just the subjugation of the Incas.
When things get bad, this country always seems to look for a hero on horseback to save it.
The history of the last 60 years is one of repeated interruption of the democratic process by military and strongman governments.
Only once in that period has a democratically elected President succeeded another one and then handed over power to a third.


Glorious Roses Require Careful Tending
FORSYTHIA in bloom and pruning of roses seem to go together as far as gardeners are concerned.
The reason for this is patience.
By waiting until the forsythia blooms, gardeners can see which rose buds are sprouting and where the winter was severe.
Sometimes rose canes are killed by tough winters, and this one had low temperatures and no snow cover.
Many rose canes and the buds were killed.
Those buds that do sprout may be inner buds.
If left to grow, they would be inside stems.


Return of Refugees to Cambodia to Take Longer Than Planned
The return of 375,000 refugees to Cambodia from border camps in Thailand will take far longer than foreseen, Cambodian, United Nations and relief officials say.
The slow progress of the United Nations-sponsored repatriation effort that began last month raises questions about whether free elections can be held next spring as envisioned in the peace agreement signed in Paris in October to end the Cambodian civil war.


Sports of The Times; Rangers Fans Can't Blame The Strike
LET'S get something straight right away.
This piddly hockey strike, now ended, does not count among the great disasters in Rangers history.
In the event the Rangers crash and burn during the Stanley Cup playoffs -- the second round, against Washington, is the likely scenario -- let there be no instant mythology about the year the Rangers lost the cup because of a strike.
Once they resume tonight, it is every team for itself.
They were all out for the same 10 days.
All 16 teams that will be allowed to make profits during the playoffs had the exact same chance to rest the wounded and the weary, the bored and the burnt out.
Let us not hear any talk about lost momentum.
You do it, or you don't.


IN LONDON'S SHOCK, A CABINET IS NAMED
Prime Minister John Major chose a new Cabinet today to lead a nation once again confronting the brutal consequences of political terror -- the carnage left in the aftermath of two powerful car bombs that exploded in different parts of London overnight, shattering Britain's post-election reverie.
Three people were killed and 91 wounded in the first blast, shortly after 9 on Friday night, in which 100 pounds of explosives packed in a van were detonated in the heart of London's financial district.


Other Views On Animal Rights
Angi Metler's response to a question concerning animal testing reveals the scientific naivete of the animal rights activists (New Jersey Q &amp; A, "A Leader in the Battle for Animal Rights," March 22).
In her reply she dismissed the scientific value of all animal research because, according to her, penicillin is lethal to guinea pigs and thus was "shelved for 10 years," and maintained that animal testing failed to predict the teratological (fetal-deforming) properties of thalidomide.


Miss Rusling Has Wedding
Eleanor Merrill Rusling, a daughter of Thomas G. Rusling and Dr.
Ellen G. Rusling of Pittsford, N.Y., was married yesterday to William Adolph Lampeter, the son of Albina Poje Lampeter and the late Adolph Lampeter of Annandale-on-Hudson, N.Y.
The Rev.
Winifred Collin officiated at St.
Paul's Episcopal Church in Rochester, assisted by the Rev.
James Callan, a Roman Catholic priest.
Mrs.
Lampeter, 25 years old, is a translation coordinator at Hartmann International Services, a business communications company in Rochester.
She graduated from Smith College.
Her father is the president of Howe &amp; Rusling, an investment counseling firm in Rochester.
Her mother is a psychologist with the Monroe County Board of Cooperative Educational Services.


CAMPUS LIFE: Michigan; Committee Urges University to Open Doors for Women
While women constitute nearly half of the undergraduate population and three-quarters of the staff at the University of Michigan, they fill only one-fifth of all faculty positions, according to a report from the special committee created by the university's president to review the matter.
And despite increases in the number of women receiving doctorate degrees at the university in recent years, the study found that only 18 percent of tenured faculty members and 13 percent of department chairs are held by women.
The only exception to this pattern -- smaller numbers of women in each successive rung of the university's academic ladder -- was at the dean and associate dean level, where women fill 34 percent of the positions.


Arthur Nelson, Art Professor, 79
Arthur Nelson, a retired art professor, died April 4 at his home in Spring Valley, N.Y.
He was 79 years old.
He died of a lung ailment, his family said.


Walker Pines for Home
The Vikings don't want him.
He doesn't want them.
The Vikings would love to trade him to Atlanta, and he would love to go.
So why isn't HERSCHEL WALKER in a Falcon uniform?
Because the Falcons haven't been willing to meet the Vikings' price and the Vikings haven't been willing to lower it.
Since the Vikings announced last month that they were seeking to trade the 30-year-old running back, Walker, a former Georgia star, seems to have been dreading a trade to any team besides Atlanta. (AP)


Katharin Barr Hogen Is Engaged
Betsy Gotbaum and Timothy Ladd Hogen, both of New York, have announced the engagement of their daughter Katharin Barr Hogen to Morrison Shafroth, the son of Diana Shafroth of Littleton, Colo., and the late John Shafroth.
A Shafroth June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Hogen, who is 29 years old, is known as Barr.
She is the executive chef of the Val 21 Restaurant in San Francisco and runs her own catering business.
She graduated from Bard College.
Her father is the president of Hogen Associates, a national fund-raising consultancy for nonprofit organizations.
Her mother is the Commissioner of Parks and Recreation for the City of New York.


Corrections
A brief review of "Carnival Culture: The Trashing of Taste in America" on page 12 of The Times Book Review today misstates the first name of the book's author.
He is James B. Twitchell.


Exhibit On Pioneers Of Oregon Trail
Next year will mark 150 years since the start of the great migration of Americans along the Oregon Trail, and there will be a series of events commemorating the early pioneers.
But visitors to Oregon do not have to wait until 1993 to find a new monument to the event.
The National Historic Oregon Trail Interpretive Center is scheduled to open in Baker City in the northeastern part of the state on Memorial Day, May 25.
It will be the first of four such centers in Oregon, and each will illustrate the 2,000-mile trek that began in Independence, Mo., in 1843, and pioneer life in the Northwest.


Gorbachev Plays Traditional Japanese Game


POINT COUNTERPOINT ON I.B.M.
In an article on the Forum page on March 22, Webster Brown, a former engineer with International Business Machines Corporation, wrote about his 26 years with I.B.M.
He told of how the optimism with which he signed on in 1964 for what probably would be a lifetime career eroded to the point that two years ago he took voluntary retirement at the age of 54.
He said he feared that had he stayed at the company, he would be weeded out by an employee appraisal system "which gets tougher each year, that seems designed to sweep the company clean of employees who, however loyal and competent, no longer fit in at I.B.M."


A Capitalist Free-for-All in Czechoslovakia
In Czechoslovakia, the most socialized economy in Eastern Europe, more than 2,000 large enterprises are on the block.
The occasion is a Government auction meant to spin off everything from pollution-spewing steel works to the 700-year-old brewery that makes a great little lager named Budweiser.
The zealously capitalist Government has set tight deadlines for companies to either find foreign buyers or hand over their shares for a one-shot giveaway to the public.
"They're privatizing the privatization process," said Daniel Arbess, from the New York law firm of White &amp; Case, an adviser to the Government.


The Health Curriculum Keeps Growing
"HOW many of you have heard about a situation where a big person tried to do things that are not right to a little person and that make that little person feel 'yucky' ?" Bernice Krehbiel asked a fidgeting class of second graders at the Roaring Brook Elementary School here.
Hands shot up in the room.
"Like trying to give a child poison?" suggested one girl.
"Isn't that called molestering?" asked another.
"No, it's like when grown-ups touch people that are, like, younger than them and, like, you don't want to be touched but they do it anyway," volunteered another.


It's Showalter Behind Doors No. 1, 2 and 3
The office door opened and Don Mattingly emerged.
Then the Yankee coaches scurried into the office and the door closed again.
Then the door remained open as a team meeting was conducted elsewhere.
Then Jesse Barfield entered the office and the door closed again.
The scene was the manager's office in the visitor's clubhouse at Tiger Stadium hours before the Yankees opposed Detroit this afternoon.
For Manager Buck Showalter, communication is essential to winning, so the door opens and shuts as he meets with players and coaches.
And this sort of swinging-door policy has helped the Yankees rush to a 4-0 record and has made Showalter popular in the clubhouse.


Ukraine, Awaiting Fleet Decision, Builds a Navy
The Ukrainian Government is quietly taking steps to build its own naval force as Ukrainians and Russians await a political decision on the future of the Black Sea fleet, which has been a major point of contention between them.
Ukrainian military representatives have set up a temporary base in an old training school for ensigns.


Turkey Is to Broadcast to 6 Ex-Soviet Lands
Pursuing an ambitious program to swing the six Muslim republics of the former Soviet Union behind its modern brand of Islam, Turkey is planning to blanket the area with satellite television broadcasts.
While the Iranians comb the backwaters building mosques and handing out copies of the Koran in their battle to win converts to Islamic fundamentalism, the Turks, armed with the tools of modern mass communications and hard currency, plan to provide 89 hours a week of Turkish entertainment and news.
Making Up for Lost Time
"This channel will be their window to the West," said Sedat Orsel, deputy head of the state network TRT and chief of the project.
"We come from the same origin. We speak the same language and we have the same history.  But for more than 70 years we have been cut off."


Gregory Peck Enters The 'Tribute Stage'
IN THE 1950's, WHILE DRIVING INTO THE mountains of what was then Ceylon, Gregory Peck spotted a sign in a tiny village.
It read: "Gregory Peck. Fine Gentleman's Tailoring."
"I couldn't resist," Mr.
Peck said recently.
"I went in, and there was a little man sitting cross-legged with a needle and thread, sewing a jacket. His jaw dropped when he saw it was really Gregory Peck. I said, 'Why? Why did you do this?' He said, 'To attract the public.' "


Inventory for Rangers: A Little Dust, No Rust
About the time Tie Domi and Joe Kocur began chasing each other around the locker room with a shopping cart yesterday morning, it became obvious that the Ranger players had voted to ratify the new National Hockey League collective-bargaining agreement.
"It was simple, vote 'accept' or 'not accept' on a slip of paper," Domi said.
"It was unanimous. The strike helped me, absolutely. I'm healthy now and ready to roll."


Slump Vs. Wetlands in Trenton Bill to Revive Construction Permits
In a battle pitting builders against citizens groups and environmentalists, the New Jersey Assembly is to vote on Monday on a bill that would automatically extend through 1994 all building permits that have expired in the last three years.
Builders say the extension will spur construction in a time of recession.
But citizens groups say it would damage the environment by allowing builders to skirt strict laws passed since the permits were issued.


Mutual Funds; Popular Closed-End Municipals
Investors experiencing the April 15 blues and seeking to free more of their income from taxes can choose from a growing number of closed-end municipal bond funds.
Closed-end funds issue a fixed number of shares, which trade on stock exchanges like common shares, often at a premium or discount to the value of the funds' holdings.
The growth in closed-end funds that buy tax-free municipal bonds results in part from falling interest rates, which have pushed investors out of money market funds, and in part from rising effective tax rates.
Unlike mutual funds, closed-end funds can leverage their portfolios by selling very-short-term preferred stock, using the proceeds to increase the yield for common stockholders.


Faking Hospital Records: A Case of Double Jeopardy
To people not involved in health care, the issue can appear arcane.
Even some doctors and nurses have a hard time believing it is important.
But with increasing intensity, Federal investigators and industry regulators are concentrating on a series of little-known meetings so confidential that New York and most other states protect their records from disclosure even by subpoena in malpractice cases.
These meetings are part of "quality assurance," the main internal system for monitoring hospitals and fostering improvements in patient care.
Doctors and nurses in these meetings must analyze medical mistakes and other matters and assign blame if appropriate.


Sally Srok Marries
Sally Jean Srok, a daughter of John Srok of Milwaukee and Joyce Goulet of Denver, was married yesterday evening in Milwaukee to Michael Andrew Friedes, a son of Bernice Friedes of New York and the late Harry E. Friedes.
Judge John DiMotto of Milwaukee County Circuit Court performed the civil ceremony at the Wisconsin Club.
Mrs.
Friedes, 27 years old, is a manager of retail events at Go Silk, a sportswear manufacturer, in New York.
Mr.
Friedes, 28, is a sales representative at the Giorgio Armani Fashion Corporation in New York.


Feminism and the Wild Man
To the Editor:
I tell you, I have such an aversion to propaganda.
When I read Jill Johnston's ill-conceived and vicious essay "Why Iron John Is No Gift to Women" (Feb. 23), I got so angry I went to the bookstore first thing Monday morning and bought two paperback copies of "Iron John." I sent one copy to my dad, the other to my son.
I'm not sure if it was the part comparing Robert Bly to David Duke that put me first in line at the cash register that Monday, or her churlish, girlish ridicule describing 450 human beings at a meeting in Canada trying to find a little comfort in a violent, callous world of shallow, mocking bench warmers like Ms.
Johnston.


Making a Difference; Sir Freddie to Take Off Once More
Airplanes with Laker Airways emblazoned on the sides.
They're not just a glint in Sir Freddie Laker's eyes.
The man who shook up the major trans-Atlantic carriers with his Laker Airways' Skytrain no-frills cut-rate service in the late 1970's has received Bahamian approval for a new charter airline, Laker Airways (Bahamas), to fly between several cities in the United States and Grand Bahama Island.


Sports of The Times; Couples Is Not Yet The 'World's Best'
OVER the years, golfers have thrived on catch phrases.
Head down.
Don't sway.
Follow through.
Now their favorite phrase at the Masters and elsewhere is "the world's best golfer."
Fred Couples is the latest to be anointed with those words.
But it's a rush to judgment.
Just because there's a weekly worldwide Sony Ranking system doesn't mean that its No. 1 golfer deserves instant recognition as the world's best.
That sacred phrase should be saved to describe a dominant golfer in major championships, not merely a "hot" golfer.


Stimulating Students Toward Science
As a science educator I would like to respond to Steven Weinberg's interview in Connecticut Q &amp; A (March 15).
I absolutely agree with Mr.
Weinberg that there is a shortage of scientists and a tremendous need to stimulate and attract qualified students to careers in science by offering them exciting and challenging opportunities to develop critical thinking, problem-solving and decision-making skills through the scientific process.
However, Mr.
Weinberg would have you believe that animals are the best "vehicle for teaching the processes of science."


POINT COUNTERPOINT ON I.B.M.
In an article on the Forum page on March 22, Webster Brown, a former engineer with International Business Machines Corporation, wrote about his 26 years with I.B.M.
He told of how the optimism with which he signed on in 1964 for what probably would be a lifetime career eroded to the point that two years ago he took voluntary retirement at the age of 54.
He said he feared that had he stayed at the company, he would be weeded out by an employee appraisal system "which gets tougher each year, that seems designed to sweep the company clean of employees who, however loyal and competent, no longer fit in at I.B.M."


An Irresistible Force Moves a Few Objects in Moscow
President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia, under some pressure last week from unreconstructed conservatives in his testy legislature, said he might step down from his concurrent post as Prime Minister in three months' time, at least if his economic reform program is going well.
If he does, will it matter?
Almost assuredly not.
This is still Russia, where a lot of sensible people talk of the need for government by an "iron hand," and there is little indication that Mr.
Yeltsin's hammy fists are losing their calluses.
Mr.
Yeltsin took the job of Prime Minister in the first place to put the force of his considerable personal popularity behind an economic reform program that was never perfect, but that attempted to draw a line under both the Communist past and the endless dithering of the last Soviet President, Mikhail S. Gorbachev.


Ultimate Insider, Ultimate Outsider
THE CHAIRMAN  John J. McCloy: The Making of the American Establishment.
By Kai Bird.
Illustrated. 800 pp.
New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $30.


What's Good for General Motors?
The troubles at General Motors spilled over into the boardroom last week, when the giant automaker's chairman was removed as head of a powerful board committee and its president was demoted.
Chairman Robert C. Stempel had announced plans in December to shut down 21 plants and cut 74,000 workers from the payroll.
But declaring that "a more aggressive management approach" was needed, the board served notice that the overhaul of the company was not going fast enough.
The moves were clearly a reprimand for Mr.
Stempel.
Not only did he lose his post as head of the board's executive committee, replaced by John G. Smale, a director who is a former chief executive of Procter &amp; Gamble, but the unseated president, Lloyd E. Reuss, had been fulsomely praised earlier this year by Mr.
Stempel, saying "Lloyd's my man."


POSTINGS: Tweed Courthouse; Fixing Crumbling Cornices
The problems never end for the New York County Courthouse, better known as the Tweed Courthouse.
Late last year, while partway through a long-term renovation project, architects for the city's Department of General Services found that five sections of the courthouse's cornice and the entire portico along Chambers Street had deteriorated and would require extensive shoring with exterior steel framing and a 14-foot-high protective fence to keep out the public.


Jane Sexton, Nurse, Marries
Jane Elizabeth Sexton, a daughter of Mary Jane Sexton of Syracuse and the late John Sexton, was married yesterday evening to Adam Todd Bernstein, the son of Susan Bernstein of Oceanside, L.I., and the late Dr.
Stuart Bernstein.
The Rev.
Patrick O'Leary, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony, assisted by Rabbi Alvin Roth, at the Hotel Syracuse.
Mrs.
Bernstein, 26 years old, is a registered nurse at St.
Francis Hospital in Roslyn, L.I.
She and her husband graduated from the State University at Buffalo, she cum laude and he magna cum laude.


Ms. Marvel Engaged
Bonnie Mae Marvel, a production coordinator at ABC News in New York, and Michael Howard Barris, a reporter for The Oshawa Times in Oshawa, Ontario, plan to marry in September.


Pulling Down the Corporate Clubhouse
It used to be so easy, so civilized, more a social ritual than a chore.
The members of the corporate board would fly in the night before, dine with their old friend, the chief executive, sharing after-dinner brandy and camaraderie.
Each director would receive a slender binder of briefing papers that, typically, got a cursory read before the formality of the next morning's board meeting.
The chief executive called the tune, and the board hummed along.
"Those days of the corporate club are over," said Gerard Roche, chairman of Heidrick &amp; Struggles, a big executive recruiter.
"There's a lot more tension between the board and the chief executive today, but also a lot more communication. Things are going in a healthy but uncomfortable direction."


Lynn Sanborne Weds M. F. Jimenez
Lynn Marie Sanborne, a graduate student in clinical social work at Bryn Mawr College, and Michael Francis Jimenez, an assistant professor of history at Princeton University, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Patrick Connor, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at Princeton University Chapel in Princeton, N.J.
Ms.
Sanborne, 34 years old, is keeping her name.
She is a cum laude graduate of Harvard University.
She was until recently the manager of community compaigns at Save the Children, an international children's agency in Westport, Conn.
She is a daughter of Philippe and Billie Sanborne of Northport, L.I.
Her father is an assistant news editor at Newsday and her mother is the office manager at Fort Hill Animal Hospital in Huntington, L.I.


Booth Speech Reveals a Killer's Mind
In 1860, more than four years before John Wilkes Booth assassinated Abraham Lincoln in Ford's Theater, the actor wrote a 21-page manuscript that showed his fanatical state of mind, his sympathies for the Southern secessionists and his association with the historical characters he portrayed in Shakespeare's plays.
Had these sentiments been known to the officials responsible for guarding the President, in the view of Lincoln scholars, it is possible that Booth would not have had such easy access to the Washington theater on April 14, 1865.


Review/Music; Tennstedt Conducts His Particular Bruckner
What is Bruckner's Eighth Symphony really about?
The question seemed unavoidable when Klaus Tennstedt conducted the New York Philharmonic in the 80-minute work on Thursday night in Avery Fisher Hall.
This is a symphony of obsessions and repetitions; it takes simple musical facts and subjects them to an almost tidal pressure, gradually altering their implications, creating waves of fortissimo climaxes.
The symphony might be about just such abstract musical alterations or, more elaborately, might be considered a spiritual autobiography in sound.
But whatever narrative one imagines for this work is bound to be a narrative of transformation.
Though earlier themes return, the end cannot be the same as the beginning, either in how the music is played or how it should be heard.


On the Street; Vests Break Free Of Stuffed Shirts
There is vested interest in the revival of the three-piece suit, the vest on its own, the longer weskit, the sweater vest and fancy brocaded vests.
They all say spring and they are all being worn about town.
Many of them, like the one seen on Madison Avenue (top, second from left), evoke the imagery of the English aristocrats of the 1920's who paraded through the novels of the Bloomsbury authors.


Rome
As Europe's capitals go, Romans acknowledge with a mix of pride and regret that theirs best exemplifies the old adage that time is money: in other words, in this city, it is virtually impossible to spend time without spending money in substantial dollops.
So the question arises: Is it still worth it now that youth's lost memories of dollar-a-bowl pasta are gone, and the famed three coins in the Trevi Fountain won't even buy a cappuccino?
The answer, with some significant qualification, is: yes.
And the reasons are as cliched as ever.
For all the buzzing, high-decibel motorini, the purse-snatchers, the suicidal lemming-rush of the traffic and the pall of carbon monoxide over the Pantheon, this is still a city of art and amusement, of romance that extends from the young couples locked in koala-like embrace to the sudden glimpse under some archway on some cobbled byway of a cascade of geraniums catching the sunlight by a fountain and a statue.


For the Garage Door, An Automatic Opener
RECALLING winter weather or a sore back may be evidence enough that it is time to invest in an automatic garage-door opener.
They can be installed on virtually any overhead door that operates smoothly.
If the current automatic opener was installed before 1982, consider replacing it with a safer model that complies with the Underwriters Laboratories standards, which were upgraded in 1982.


Ito Wants to Retire
Let's see.
She has won a world championship.
She was the first woman to perform the forbidding three-and-a-half-revolution triple axel in competition and at the Olympics.
And although a fall kept her from winning, she did bring home a silver medal from the 1992 Winter Olympics.
So what's a 22-year-old figure skater to do?
Something else.
That's the word from Tokyo, where MIDORI ITO has told the Japanese Skating Federation that she wants to retire.


J. K. Albaugh, 66, Retired Psychiatrist and Administrator
Dr.
Judson K. Albaugh, a retired psychiatrist and mental health administrator, died on Friday when he collapsed and fell into Cayuga Lake in New York while fishing on the shore.
He was 66 years old and lived in Binghamton.
His death was caused by a heart attack, his family said.


Lauren Levy Has Wedding
Lauren Beth Levy, a daughter of Nina and Jay Levy of New York, was married last evening to Scott Michael Gilbert, a son of Enid and Gary Gilbert of Wellesley, Mass.
Rabbi Miriam Ancis officiated at the Mark Hotel in New York.
Mrs.
Gilbert, 24 years old, is a magna cum laude graduate of Columbia University.
She and her mother own and operate Terracotta, a craft gallery in New York.
Her father is a partner in Amalgamated Programs Corporation, a New York insurance brokerage.


World Markets; Is Japan Ready to Bottom Out?
Fiona Biggs, portfolio manager for the Dreyfus Strategic World Investing Fund, has been bearish on the Japanese stock market, and she looked very smart last week.
The Nikkei index of 225 shares fell 10.6 percent through Thursday, to its lowest level since October 1986.
The market was down 27.8 percent for the year and 57.4 percent since its all-time high at the end of 1989.
On Friday in Tokyo, however, Ms.
Biggs was buying a few stocks as the Nikkei index surged 7.6 percent, regaining some of the ground lost earlier in the week.
The rally was partly a response to the steep falls that preceded it.
In addition, the rally on Thursday in New York of the Dow Jones industrial average, which followed an easing of interest rates by the Federal Reserve, helped.


Precedents In Chemistry
To the Editor:
Stephen Holden's attempt to liken Alan Menken's loss of the lyricist Howard Ashman to that of Richard Rodgers (when Oscar Hammerstein 2d died) and Alan Jay Lerner (when Frederick Loewe retired) was tenuous at best  [ "For Alan Menken, a Partnership Ends but the Song Plays On," March 15 ] .


Jennifer Horne, Student, to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Michael S. Horne of Chevy Chase, Md., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Jennifer Elizabeth Horne, to Timothy Scott Teter, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Roger Teter of Sunnyvale, Calif.
An August wedding is planned.
Miss Horne, 25 years old, and her fiance, 25, are second-year law students at Stanford University.
Miss Horne graduated from Brown University, Mr.
Teter from the University of California at Davis.


A Home for an Ambulance Corps
The 15-year-old, 80-member Throgs Neck Volunteer Ambulance Corps -- one of 53 volunteer units around the city -- serves 16,000 households in the Bronx, answers 70 to 100 calls a month and hopes to begin building a no-frills, one-story, 2,000-square-foot headquarters in May.
"We took a minimal building and tried to enhance it,"said the Riverdale-based architect, Daniel Hammerman, who is donating his services.


Deliverer's Union Nears Pact With The Times
The New York Times and a major independent newspaper delivery company reached separate tentative agreements with the drivers union yesterday that could insure labor peace in the wholesale distribution of New York's newspapers until the year 2000 and speed the opening of The Times's new printing plant in Edison, N.J.
The pacts cover 1,000 drivers for four wholesale distribution companies that deliver The Times, The Daily News, The New York Post, The Wall Street Journal and other publications to newsstands and other outlets in the city and suburbs.
The pending sale of the wholesale companies -- two to The Times and two to the independent company, Imperial Delivery Service -- made new agreements for their drivers necessary.


Treating Alcoholics In Russia
The article "Russians Learn About Helping Alcoholics" (March 8) was informative and inspiring in many ways, but it presented some inaccurate facts about what is actually progressing in the former Soviet Union with regard to alcoholism treatment and recovery.
Your readers deserve to know the history and the facts about what is currently transpiring in the Commonwealth of Independent States.
In the 1970's the Soviet government acknowledged for the first time the devastating effect that the disease of alcoholism was having on its citizenry.
The country reported four million registered alcoholics, most of whom were being treated with such primitive methods as punishment in labor camps, starvation or antiquated medical care.


Miss Popularity Bites the Dust
THE WAY MEN ACT  By Elinor Lipman. 305 pp. New York: Pocket Books. $20.


Easter Dinner as an Evocation of Spring
EASTER dinner is as much a celebration of spring as a religious festival.
But we have become so used to produce being available year round, that it is easy to forget what comes into season when.
Asparagus, morels, baby lamb and strawberries are at their peak now, and the following is an Easter dinner to remind us that spring, along with the first crocuses and daffodils in the garden, has finally arrived.
Morels are highly prized mushrooms; they are dark brown with honeycombed caps and a meaty taste.
Most of them come from the Pacific Northwest, Michigan, Wisconsin and some parts of the East Coast.
Their season begins now and runs into July.
They make a delicious first course simmered in light cream and served with asparagus.


The Secret Spa
The hottest buzzword in the current beauty industry lexicon is an oldie-but-goodie -- spa.
What's unusual is its pairing with the many new head-to-toe products designed specifically, it seems, to elevate prosaic rituals, like bathing, showering or even makeup application, into full-scale pampering events at home.
Take Spa Collection, Elizabeth Arden's new bath and body line (out next month).
With body splash, moisturizer, bath gel and soap, these products purport to restore, revitalize and stimulate the senses through aromatherapy and color psychology, besides getting you clean.
A few companies seem willing to stretch things a little to include the evocative S-word in a product title.
Spa Colours, Princess Marcella Borghese's new eye makeup line, promises to both color and comfort eyes, presumably in the way such tasks are accomplished at Italy's Terme di Montecatini, Borghese's spa affiliate.
There's also Lip Spa, Arden's exuberantly named lipstick line, which contains spring water, admittedly a popular spa element.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Tower of Love
IT isn't definite yet.
Courtships can be tricky on Long Island, and she seems a little young, he a little slow.
But if they do mate, they couldn't have picked a more romantic spot to make history.


Maestro's 'Messiah'


Silencing of Editor Considered Reason For Fatal Shooting
One month after the slaying of the editor Manuel de Dios Unanue, his companion of seven years said yesterday that she believed he was killed to stop his investigations into drug trafficking.
In her first extended comments since Mr. de Dios, the crusading former editor of El Diario-La Prensa, was shot to death in a Queens restaurant, his companion, Vicky Sanchez, said that she could not rule out the possibility that his slaying was specifically in retaliation for any one article.
But she added, "I think it was more to silence him in the future."


Social Events
Equity Fights AIDS
April 12 -- Betty Buckley, Harry Groener and Julie Wilson are among the Broadway and cabaret performers lending a helping voice to benefit Equity Fights AIDS and the Momentum Project of The Church of St.
Paul.
All songs were written for the event, which begins at 7:30 P.M. at the church, 415 West 59th Street.
Tickets, $20, from (212) 978-9390.
Dinner, Dancing, Writers
April 13 -- The annual PEN Mont blanc Literary Gala to benefit the PEN American Center will be at the New York State Theater at Lincoln Center.
About 60 authors, including Oscar Hijuelos, Gay Talese and Cynthia Ozick, will be table hosts at the black-tie dinner and dance.
Tickets, $800, from (212) 334-1660.
Auctions for AIDS Research
April 13 -- The American Institute for AIDS Research will sponsor a black-tie evening at the Pierre, with two jewelry auctions and a dinner-dance.
There will be cocktails and a silent auction at 6 P.M.; a live auction at 7, and dinner at 8.
Tickets, $250 for cocktail party and auctions; $500 includes dinner dance, from (212) 265-8111.
Easter Egg Hunt
April 14 -- Children and their adult friends can participate in a treasure hunt for Easter eggs at F. A. O. Schwarz, 767 Fifth Avenue (58th Street), from 7 to 9 P.M., that will benefit the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center.
Peter Rabbit and Snoopy are among the scheduled guests.
Tickets, $15 for children, $60 for adults, from (212) 639-7972.
Artist-Physician Honored
April 14 -- Dr.
Mark Podwal, an artist and physician, will be honored by the physicians' division of the UJA-Federation of New York at its cocktail reception at the New York University Medical Center at 6 P.M.
Elie Wiesel will be the guest speaker.
Tickets, $250, from (212) 836-1157.
Saluting a Sportsman
April 14 -- Frank Cashen, chief executive officer of the New York Mets, will receive the New York City Sports Commission's first Sportsman of the Year award at a luncheon beginning at 11:45 A.M. at Avery Fisher Hall at Lincoln Center.
The not-for-profit group works to bring major sports events to the metropolitan area and sponsors scholastic and community sports programs for youngsters.
Tickets, $195, from (212) 773-6100.
Cocktails at Macy's
April 14 -- A 7:45 P.M. cocktail buffet, against the backdrop of the annual Macy's flower show, will benefit the Greater New York Chapter of the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation.
Tickets, $200, from (212) 986-8783.
A Rain Forest Benefit
April 14 -- Dr.
Thomas E. Lovejoy, a leading advocate of rain forest conservation, will be honored -- and roasted -- at a dinner at the Water Club, 30th Street and the East River, to benefit the Rainforest Alliance.
Chevy Chase will be the master of festivities; other entertainers, business and political leaders are expected to attend.
Cocktails at 6:30 P.M.; dinner at 7:30.
Tickets, $250, from (212) 777-4219.
Cruising for the Gold
April 14 -- Television stars will team up with Olympic heroes to benefit the 1992 United States Olympic Team at a black-tie dinner on the Royal Caribbean Cruise Line ship Majesty of the Seas.
Bob Costas, the sportscaster, will be the master of ceremonies.
Cocktails at 6 P.M.
Tickets, $350, or $500 to include overnight accomodations aboard, from (212) 551-3003.
Phoenix House Is 25
April 14 -- One of the events helping Phoenix House celebrate the 25th anniversary of its nonprofit drug-treatment program is a black-tie dinner honoring Robert G. Schwartz, the chief executive officer of Metropolitan Life, at the Waldorf-Astoria.
Cocktails at 6:30 P.M., dinner at 7:30.
Tickets, $550, from (212) 595-5810 ext. 104.
For the Joffrey Ballet
April 15 -- The Joffrey Ballet's spring benefit will feature -- what else? -- dancing.
The black-tie event in the Plaza's grand ballroom will include three dances by the company, dinner and dancing for guests.
Cocktails at 7 P.M.; dinner and performance at 8.
Tickets, $150, from (212) 265-7300.
A Broadway Preview
April 15 -- The New York City Mission Society, a private social service agency, is sponsoring a special preview of the Broadway musical "Metro" at 8 P.M.
A cast party at the Rihga Royal Hotel, 151 West 54th Street, will follow.
Tickets, $125, from (212) 674-3500.
Downtown Does Midtown
April 15 -- A benefit concert for the Kitchen, a center for avant-garde performing arts for 20 years, will star Laurie Anderson and Eric Bogosian, bolstered by a diverse cast, including the 25-member Blue Dot Chorus.
The 7:30 P.M. concert at Town Hall will be followed by a party at the Kitchen, 512 West 19th Street.
Tickets, $100 for party and concert; $25 for concert, from (212) 255-5793.
Immune Deficiency Research
April 16 -- The Jeffrey Modell Foundation, which raises funds for research into a genetic disease known as primary immune deficiency, is planning an evening of dining and dancing at the Plaza.
Cocktails at 7 P.M., dinner at 8.
Tickets, $350, (212) 575-1122.
Passover Celebration
April 17 and 18 -- Capsouto Freres, a French restaurant at 451 Washington Street (Watts Street), will hold Sephardic-style seders at 7 P.M. on the first two nights of Passover.
The proceeds will benefit the American Jewish Joint Distribution Committee.
Tickets, $75, from (212) 966-4900.
Playwrights Horizons
April 20 -- The "hidden talents" of performers and writers, including Blair Brown, Wendy Wasserstein and Tom Hulce, will surprise guests at the Playwrights Horizons benefit dinner beginning with cocktails at 6:15 P.M. at the Puck Building, 295 Lafayette Street (Houston Street).
Tickets, $350, from (212) 564-1235.
Reconstructive Surgery
April 20 -- The National Foundation for Facial Reconstruction is sponsoring a night on Broadway.
A cocktail buffet at the Marriott Marquis at 5:30 P.M. will precede "Guys and Dolls." Tickets, $150 for the performance alone; $250 for party and performance, from (212) 263-6656.
For the Cancer Society
April 21 -- The annual spring benefit of the American Cancer Society's New York City division will be a dinner and dance at the Supper Club, 240 West 47th Street.
Tickets, $250, from (212) 586-8700, ext. 390.


CAMPUS LIFE: SUNY, Albany; Students Learn About Leadership In the Community
Mixing youth with experience, the State University of New York at Albany is working to help students realize their leadership potential through the guidance of elders.
Through what is formally known as the Student Leadership Development Program, promising students are paired for an academic year with a mentor from the community.


Ngozi Okezie To Wed in June
Dr. and Mrs.
Okogbue Okezie of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter Dr.
Ngozi Babette Okezie to Dr.
Sean Patrick Curtis, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
George W. Curtis of Boulder, Col.
A June wedding is planned.
The prospective bride, 27 years old, is a psychiatry resident at the University of Colorado Health Sciences Center in Denver, where her fiance is a resident in internal medicine.
She graduated from Bryn Mawr College and the Yale University School of Medicine.
Her father is an internist in New York.


Or Was Silence Overblown?
To the Sports Editor:
As a former journalist, I believe the media reaction to the silence of the Mets was predictably overblown.
The Mets are hardly a group of wide-eyed innocents wronged by dastardly deeds of pen and camera.
But neither will their period of silence damage baseball, democracy or the American Way.
It may just put a dent on the daily scoop machine.
DONA STEVENS YASSER Ocean, N.J.


Thoroughly Modern Maestro
Most days in midwinter, a stocky, still-young man can be seen hurrying out of the new Symphony Hall in Birmingham, England, on his way to a late and often rapid lunch in the neighboring Hyatt Regency.
In the street, he cuts an unmistakable figure.
Tatterdemalion wrappings and a huge head of curly hair mark him out from the chief executives, present and future, who haunt the Hyatt.
A further clue to his identity is the very small four-wheeled cart, no more than 10 or 11 inches in any direction, that he pulls behind him on a long leash.


Killings of 5 in East Orange Being Investigated for Links
A day after the bodies of three women were found within blocks of one another in East Orange, N.J., law-enforcement officials announced that they would investigate possible links between the killings, as well as with two other slayings last year.
The authorities repeatedly asserted that it was too early to say whether the deaths were related and they refused to speculate on potential motives or the possibility that a serial killer was responsible.
And they did not say specifically why the three cases that emerged on Friday were being combined with the other two.
But the timing of their announcement, which included the formation of an interagency task force, seemed calculated to calm fears and assure the public that every effort was being made to solve the mystery.


Cleanup Project Can Be Inspiration
Mike Booth's splendid cleanup project in Long Branch by the unemployed, described in "How One Idea Solved Two Problems, Lifting a City's Spirits" (March 22), should inspire other communities to start similar ventures.
Mr.
Booth's concern about Federal or state regulations concerning such projects prompts a question: how did our nation become the idol of the world years ago without all such regulations imposed by Big Brother meddling?


Francesca Grifo Plans to Wed
Judge Richard D. Grifo and Leonarda T. Grifo of Easton, Pa., have announced the engagement of their daughter Dr.
Francesca Theresa Grifo to William James Hahn, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
James Hahn of St.
Louis.
A September wedding is planned.
Dr.
Grifo, 33 years old, works for the World Wildlife Fund in Washington, where she is the senior program officer for Eastern Europe in the biological diversity program.
She graduated from Smith College and has a Ph.D. in systematic botany from Cornell University.
Her father is a judge of the State Court of Common Pleas in Easton.
Her mother is the chairwoman of the State Theater, Center for the Arts there.


Corrections
A theater review on page 14 of the Arts and Leisure section today omits part of a paragraph in some copies.
The passage, by David Richards about "Lypsinka! A Day in the Life," should read:


For the Garage Door, An Automatic Opener
RECALLING winter weather or a sore back may be evidence enough that it is time to invest in an automatic garage-door opener.
They can be installed on virtually any overhead door that operates smoothly.
If the current automatic opener was installed before 1982, consider replacing it with a safer model that complies with the Underwriters Laboratories standards, which were upgraded in 1982.


Some Land-Use History Highlights
1871: The first Tenement Law is enacted, setting a minimum for the amount of light and air reaching tenement dwellers.
An amendment in 1901 increasing those standards results in the so-called "new law" tenements.
1916: The "Building Zone Plan" -- better known as the 1916 Zoning Resolution -- is adopted in New York City.
It regulates what uses may go into what zones, as well as physical characteristics: height, lot coverage and configuration.
One result is the "wedding-cake" style of tower, with numerous setbacks.


Bridge
Two men who were born a month apart both had claims to fame in totally distinct fields: bridge and insurance.
One was Oswald Jacoby, who was born in Brooklyn in 1902.
At the age of 21, he became the youngest person ever to qualify as an actuary and worked for four years for the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company.
His remarkable bridge career ended with a major national victory in 1983 when he was dying of cancer.
The other was Easley Blackwood of Indianapolis, who died on March 27 at the age of 89.
He was born in Birmingham, Ala., in 1903, and later moved north.
At the age of 26, in Decatur, Ill., he was the youngest manager ever appointed by Metropolitan Life and served the company for 45 years.
He became fascinated by the new game of contract bridge, which had been codified by Harold Vanderbilt in 1925 and soon spread to the Midwest.


Sam Kinison, 38, Comedian, Dies; Wife Injured in Head-On Collision
Sam Kinison, a former tent preacher who gained fame as a shrieking and often insulting stand-up comedian, was killed Friday night in a head-on automobile crash on a desert highway near Needles, Calif.
He was 38 years old and lived in the Hollywood hills in Los Angeles.


Tapia Again Can't Fight
Friday wasn't JOHNNY TAPIA'S day.
He learned that he had tested positive for cocaine and had lost his license to fight on a card in Albuquerque on April 30.
He was also arrested and charged with having bribed a witness in a homicide prosecution against his cousin.


Ashley Theriot To Wed in June
Mr. and Mrs.
Jacques Theriot of Waccabuc, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Ashley Farrar Theriot, to Matthew Birkeland McCall, the son of Mrs.
Clifford H. McCall of Sarasota, Fla., and the late Mr.
McCall.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Theriot, 27 years old, graduated from Georgetown University and is a graduate business student at Northwestern University.
Her father is an executive vice president of Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Company in New York.


CAMPUS LIFE: Washington; Students Organize to Battle Against Sexual Assault
Sexual assault is a growing concern on campuses nationwide, and students at the University of Washington are organizing to combat it.
Since the undergraduate student government's Sexual Assault Committee formed last fall, the committee has initiated a program on rape prevention and education and has sponsored a petition drive supporting the creation of a Sexual Assault Center on campus.
The committee chairwoman, Judith Nicastro, said 1,000 signatures have been collected.


Show Marks Queen's 40 Years
An exhibit at the Victoria and Albert Museum in which many items belonging to the royal family are on display for the first time is among several events in Britain marking the 40th anniversary this year of Queen Elizabeth II's accession to the throne.
Also being shown are coronation robes, gold plates used at state banquets, family photographs and gifts.
The exhibit, called "Sovereign," continues through Sept. 13.
It is organized in sections starting with a prologue that recalls the moment when the 25-year-old Princess Elizabeth, while visiting Kenya, heard of her father's death.
Admission is about $10, $8.25 for children under 17 and the elderly, and the museum is open Monday to Saturday from 10 A.M. to 5:50 P.M. and Sunday from noon to 5:50.
Tickets may be purchased through the Keith Prowse agency in New York, (212) 398-1430 or (800) 669-8687.


Carolyn Balch To Wed in June
Mr. and Mrs.
James P. Balch of Sheffield, Mass., have announced the engagement of their daughter Carolyn Knowles Balch to Michael Wells Streett, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald H. Streett of St.
Louis.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Balch, 27 years old, is an insurance underwriter at Chubb &amp; Son in New York.
She graduated from Kenyon College, as did her fiance.
Her father is the chief financial officer at the Berkshire School in Sheffield, and her mother, Gretchen M. Balch, is the school's college adviser.


Feminism and the Wild Man
To the Editor:
A great gust of
Schadenfreude
swept through me as I saw Jill Johnston questioning the political rectitude of Robert Bly for presiding over self-help groups that exclude women.
I remembered how Ms.
Johnston, at a publicly advertised lecture during the early 1970's in Berkeley, Calif., expelled all the men present after imperiously announcing that she no longer wished any men to be in the room.


Chess
If you drop into a chess club and browse among the games being played and come upon one in which a king has moved out into the board early, the pawns have a disheveled look, with some blocking their own pieces or wrapped around the enemy pawns.
The pieces look randomly strewn, and you may conclude 99 percent of the time that two "woodpushers" (or "weakies," as Bobby Fischer called them) are having a good time.
Yet there is that remaining 1 percent of the time when the logic of the situation demands extreme, peculiar measures, even by a world champion.
Surely the opening of the game between Gary Kasparov of Russia, the titleholder, and Miguel Illescas, a Spanish grandmaster, in the 10th round of the Linares International Tournament, which ended on March 14 in Spain, required bizarre stratagems.
And Kasparov was not lacking in the backbone or virtuosity to try them.


THE ORACLE OF CROWN HEIGHTS
Specter writes that the Hasidic men and women of Crown Heights live in a setting that grafts "the 18th century onto the 21st." In fact, our lives here are high-tech, but our morals are indeed "18th-century." Counted among our problems
are not
unwed mothers, teen-agers on drugs, suicides, wife-swapping, AIDS and so on.


Stephen Foster's Songs Speak to a Modern Era
Pop comebacks keep getting stranger: first Robert Johnson, then Nat (King) Cole, and now Stephen Foster.
America's first pop star, Foster wrote "Oh! Susanna," "Jeanie With the Light Brown Hair," "Beautiful Dreamer" and nearly 200 other sentimental and minstrel songs of the mid-1800's.
Three of Foster's songs appear on "Songs of the Civil War," a collection of 19th-century battle songs and ballads interpreted by Kathy Mattea, Waylon Jennings, Judy Collins and others.
It won this year's Grammy for Best Traditional Folk Album.


Shopping for Body Parts
STARDUST, 7-ELEVEN, ROUTE 57, A&amp;W, AND SO FORTH  Stories.
By Patricia Lear. 161 pp.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $19.


Stephanie Blau Has Wedding
Stephanie Elizabeth Blau, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Harvey Blau of New York, was married in New York last night to Ron Kramer, the son of Mrs.
Bernard Kramer of New Haven and the late Mr.
Kramer.
Rabbi Norman Kahan performed the ceremony at the Metropolitan Club.
Mrs.
Kramer, 26 years old, is an associate at Blau, Kramer, Wactlar, Lieberman &amp; Satin, a law firm in Jericho, L.I., of which her father is the senior partner.
She graduated from Barnard College and received a law degree from Yeshiva University.


Glorious Roses Require Careful Tending
FORSYTHIA in bloom and pruning of roses seem to go together as far as gardeners are concerned.
The reason for this is patience.
By waiting until the forsythia blooms, gardeners can see which rose buds are sprouting and where the winter was severe.
Sometimes rose canes are killed by tough winters, and this one had low temperatures and no snow cover.
Many rose canes and the buds were killed.
Those buds that do sprout may be inner buds.
If left to grow, they would be inside stems.


THE ORACLE OF CROWN HEIGHTS
When I was a college student, I attended Habad Sabbath dinners for the warm, family atmosphere I missed.
I wanted to study Torah, so the local Lubavitcher rabbi accommodated my full schedule by getting up at 5:30 A.M. to teach my roommate and me.
Traveling in Zurich, my husband and I attended a megillah reading and were treated to an elaborate holiday meal with the local Lubavitcher rabbi and his family.
In countless cities and countries, the Lubavitchers are a valuable resource for Jews, regardless of their level of observance.
It is to support such people that I give money to the Lubavitchers, not out of some sense of "nostalgia, guilt or inadequacy." SUSAN TEDMON
Highland Park, N.J.


Pretoria Sees a New Unity With Africans
As Foreign Minister Roelof F. Botha flew home to South Africa Friday night after President F. W. de Klerk's historic visit to Nigeria, his aides announced that he would brief journalists traveling in the economy seats of his chartered jetliner.
Mr.
Botha emerged attired in ethnic Nigerian costume, puffing on a fat cigar.
The sunglasses he wore could not conceal his satisfaction at parading his new African identity.


Results Plus
N.B.A.
Sinking Lakers Can't Get Past the Jazz The Utah Jazz beat the Los Angeles Lakers, 93-90, in Inglewood, Calif., yesterday, further jeopardizing the Lakers' streak of 15 consecutive seasons in the playoffs.
Los Angeles began the day a half-game behind Houston for the eighth and final Western Conference playoff spot.
Utah, which won its third straight game, clinched playoff spots for Seattle and San Antonio with the victory.
Karl Malone gave Utah a 91-90 lead with 43 seconds left.
Eldon Campbell then missed a short jumper, and Mark Eaton scored on a dunk for a 93-90 lead with 11.5 seconds left.
Malone blocked A. C. Green's 3-point attempt with 3.6 seconds left. (AP) Trail Blazers 113, Sonics 106: Portland's Terry Porter scored 14 of his 27 points in the fourth quarter of the Friday night game.
Portland led by 2 with 3 minutes 33 seconds left in the game before Clyde Drexler and Porter scored all of the Trail Blazers' points in a 9-2 run that gave them a 109-100 lead with 1:27 left. (AP)


If You're Talking $1 Million for a Major Leaguer, You're Talking Peanuts
The average salary in major league baseball has soared so high this season that 15 players who have salaries of $1 million or more are earning less than the average.
Based on 719 players on opening-day rosters and the disabled list, the average salary is $1,086,988, marking the first time it has reached $1 million.
The record figure is 22 percent higher than last year's opening-day average of $890,844.
The total payroll, which includes salaries for 69 players on the disabled list, amounts to $781,544,253, according to a survey of salaries by The New York Times.


Wall Street; Before the Bombs, London Toasted the Tories
The terrorist bombs that hit London's financial district Friday night were a grim finale to what had already been a turbulent spring in the British markets, as the Conservative Government fought off a Labor challenge, first in the opinion polls and then at the ballot box.
The market's upheaval began on March 10, with the Financial Times-Stock Exchange index of 100 stocks closing at 2,574.8.
The Government's new budget, released late in the day, disappointed Tory backers, who felt it would not placate voters.
Then, on March 11, new parliamentary elections were officially called -- and the index plunged to 2,522.4.


CAMPUS LIFE: Montclair State; From College to University: Is It a Step Up?
The letterhead on the official stationery here shows an imposing black-lettered "Montclair State" underlined by a thick red bar.
The bar is so thick, in fact, that some people think it would look better with a word inside it.
A word like "university," for example.


U.N. Warns That Time Is Running Out on Cyprus
In a new effort to settle the decades-old Cyprus dispute, the Security Council has told the island's Greek and Turkish leaders to start settling their differences by July or risk the collapse of the United Nations force that is helping keep the peace on the island.
In a resolution unanimously approved on Friday, the Council instructed the Secretary General, Boutros Boutros-Ghali, to press for an agreement on a framework settlement to the Cyprus dispute and to report back to the Council in July on progress.


Corrections
An article on page 26 of the Arts and Leisure section today about the composer Stephen Foster characterizes "Songs of the Civil War" incorrectly.
The album was nominated for a Grammy Award this year.
It did not win one.


The Runyonland Express Is Back in Town
Damon Runyon is back on Broadway, and it's about time; also a good reason to dust off his bones and see how he has weathered the last half-century.
"Guys and Dolls," which I am offering six-to-five is the best musical ever created -- bet me -- opens Tuesday at the Martin Beck Theater, directed by the three-time Tony winner Jerry Zaks, a very valuable citizen of Broadway, from the singular score by Frank Loesser and book by Abe Burrows, the main writer, and Jo Swerling.


A Last Call for Fathers, Sons and Barflies
I have no statistics to back this up.
But it's my guess that the two most common manifestations of the American drama are the bar play and the father-son play.
The bar play -- "The Time of Your Life," for example, or "The Iceman Cometh" -- usually assembles a bunch of eccentrics in a corner dive and lets them indulge their eccentricities or dream their pipe dreams.
In the father-son play ("Long Day's Journey Into Night" or "Death of a Salesman," to cite the best of the breed), the playwright generally sets out to record the emotional fallout of a relationship that was troublesome at best, crippling at worst.


Booth Speech Reveals a Killer's Mind
In 1860, more than four years before John Wilkes Booth assassinated Abraham Lincoln in Ford's Theater, the actor wrote a 21-page manuscript that showed his fanatical state of mind, his sympathies for the Southern secessionists and his association with the historical characters he portrayed in Shakespeare's plays.
Had these sentiments been known to the officials responsible for guarding the President, in the view of Lincoln scholars, it is possible that Booth would not have had such easy access to the Washington theater on April 14, 1865.


Anne Gillette Plans to Marry
Scotty and E. Peter Gillette Jr. of Minneapolis have announced the engagement of their daughter Anne MacGregor Gillette to George Douglas Frederick Cleveland, a son of Kathleen and George D. Cleveland of Wayzata, Minn.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss Gillette, 27 years old, is an assistant product manager for the Ringer Corporation, a distributor of pesticides and fertilizer in Minneapolis.
She graduated from Brown University, and she and her fiance received master's degrees from the American Graduate School of International Management in Phoenix.
Her father is the Minnesota State Commissioner of Economic Development and Trade.


Miss O'Hearn Plans to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Walter D. O'Hearn Jr. of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter Meghan Patrick O'Hearn to Douglas Brainard Benedict, a son of Julia Barber Benedict of St.
Louis and Charles B. Benedict of New York.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss O'Hearn, 27 years old, is a partner at In Focus Associates, a photographers' representative in New York.
She graduated from Boston College.
Her father is a partner in the New York investment company of Keane Securities.
Her mother, Denise O'Hearn, is the managing director of T. Barile &amp; Associates, an executive search company in New York.


Salmon Fishing Greatly Limited But Not Banned
After four days of often emotional testimony on the dwindling runs of Pacific salmon, a Federal panel late Friday rejected a proposal to ban all ocean salmon fishing and decided to allow a limited season this year.
As a result of the decision, the West Coast salmon fishing season, which opens next month, will allow the smallest harvest in history and may be financially devastating to coastal communities from California to the Canadian border.


Data Bank/April 12, 1992


Awaiting a Prince


Correction
An article on March 22 about historic homes in Virginia misidentified the Presidential Administration during which Matthew Perry opened Japan to Western trade.
It was during the Administration of Millard Fillmore.


Giants, Shepherds and Kings
Once there were no kings.
Oh really? the children say.
No kings?
No, nor Presidents nor primary campaigns.
Well, when did kings begin, they ask, and why?
Were they good, or did they betray their friends or their wives?
Did they retire when they got old?
If they did bad things, were they good anyway?
Here is THE STORY OF KING SAUL AND KING DAVID (123 pp. Schocken Books. $20. All ages) by Lore Segal, with illustrations from the Pamplona Bibles, to tell all about the first two kings.
These are among the richest tales from the Old Testament and have modern echoes.
Samuel was the last of the just judges of Israel.
Alas, his sons "went out for profit, took bribes, and bent justice to their own advantage," so the elders asked for a king.
Samuel warned them against the greed of such rulers, but the Israelites persisted, and the Lord chose one.
Tall, shy Saul hid to avoid his destiny but, once he became king, ruled well, until he disobeyed the Lord.
Enter David, the "young and rosy-cheeked and handsome" shepherd boy, who slew the Philistine giant and was destined to be king instead of Saul's son, Jonathan, David's best friend.
The struggles of Saul and David, the plotting and battles, the courtiers and lovers, the betrayals and triumphs are vivid and exciting.
In the seasons of his life, as son, youth, king, lover, general, father and dying old man, David is fascinating.
Ms.
Segal says in the preface that she has followed "the modern trend to avoid the fancy-dress sound of antiquity . . . to produce an English syntax . . . not to sound solemn." She has succeeded so brilliantly that reading aloud in a baffling political season, a weary adult can recall the true complexity of leadership.


Justice by the Numbers: A special report; Full Spectrum of Judicial Critics Assail Prison Sentencing Guides
A five-year effort to make the prison sentences meted out in Federal courts more uniform through mandatory guidelines has evoked a chorus of criticism from normally reticent judges of all ideological stripes.
The guidelines were the product of an unusual bipartisan coalition: liberals convinced that harsh sentences fell disproportionately on the poor and disenfranchised, and conservatives seeking longer, more certain jail terms.


Republican Snipers in the House
Finally, laudably, Speaker of the House Tom Foley led his colleagues last week to pass two measures sorely needed to restore confidence in Congress.
And what did House Republicans do?
They tried to torpedo both bills, tearing down Congress for election-year advantage.
There's no other way to explain their negative votes.
The first measure would relieve the pressure to take money from favor-seekers.
It would create a cleaner, more competitive system built on a foundation of spending limits, new curbs on special-interest political action committees and Federal matching payments.
For the House to pass it was a monumental breakthrough.


If Only the Fish Were Good Enough to Eat


Peruvian Official Assails Pressure From U.S.
In an interview before his departure for talks in Washington, Peru's Foreign Minister bitterly criticized the Bush Administration for putting pressure on other governments to isolate President Alberto Fujimori, who seized broad power last Sunday in what many people are calling a civil-military coup.
The Foreign Minister, Augustino Blacker Miller, said in the interview late Friday night that Mr.
Fujimori's action had wide popular support among Peruvians and wondered how the United States could be so "naive" as to lump Peru's situation with the military takeover in Haiti last year.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
HADLEY  By Gioia Diliberto. Ticknor &amp; Fields, $24.95.


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester; Affordable Housing Law Brews a Storm
A RISING storm has begun to swirl around Connecticut legislation that was designed to shift some of the responsibility for affordable housing from overburdened cities to the suburbs.
The law is aimed at towns in which fewer than 10 percent of the dwellings are classified as affordable.
At least a dozen resulting lawsuits, with dozens more expected, are winding through the courts on the heels of the first one to reach a judicial decision early last month.


Great Ideas for the General Public
THE MAKING OF MIDDLEBROW CULTURE  By Joan Shelley Rubin.
Illustrated. 416 pp.
Chapel Hill: The University of North Carolina Press.
Cloth, $34.95.
Paper, $14.95.


Define Needs, Not Glib Goals; Indefensible Defense
The philosophical mid-air collision about to occur over Washington jeopardizes Presidential Democrats and Congressional Democrats; they are about to run into each other on defense.
The candidates rush to impress the voters with easy assertions of how much they'll cut Pentagon spending.
By a third, Bill Clinton promises.
I'll top that, retorts Jerry Brown.
Cut it by half.


CAMPUS LIFE: Cornell; Opposition Blocks Plan to Improve Dorm Racial Mix
Faced with persistent student and faculty opposition, Cornell University has dropped a proposal to improve the racial mix in student housing for this fall's entering class.
The current housing selection system, which allows freshmen to choose where on campus they want to live, will remain in place until at least the fall of 1994, said Larry I. Palmer, vice president for Academic Programs and Campus Affairs.
He said he had suggested switching to random assignments because of concerns that the university's two main residential areas, West Campus and North Campus, are racially segregated.


Court Civilian
Manuel Noriega, arrested in Panama two years ago by the largest Federal SWAT team assembled to date, was convicted last week on eight of 10 drug racketeering charges brought against him.
Mr.
Noriega, a general and head of state who had been a principal American ally in the region and, perhaps, an intelligence service asset, was tried in Miami like the common criminal -- "just another crooked cop" -- that the prosecutors said he was.
He was accused of doing business with Colombian cocaine cartel members and undermining American investigations.
He helped them drug America, the Governement said.
Mr.
Noriega's lawyers said during the seven-month trial that their client was under attack in a case that "smelled all the way to Washington." The lawyers said that the chief motivation of some drug traffickers who testified against Mr.
Noriega was the lure of a "get-out-of-jail-free card." Mr.
Noriega, who seems likely to get life in prison, is to be sentenced July 10.


Why 'Republic of Macedonia' Incenses Greeks; Albanian Population
To the Editor:
"The Two Macedonias" (editorial, April 5) neglects a key unresolved issue in recognizing an independent Macedonian republic, whatever it might be named.


Face Lifting For the Galleria Wins Approval
LIKE many shopping centers of its vintage, the Galleria at White Plains has begun to show its years.
The 880,000- square-foot enclosed mall in the heart of this urban downtown area is due for a face lifting, say its owners, who are planning to spend $8 million on the project.
"Times change," said Gerald M. Cope, a Philadelphia architect who has been hired to design changes for the mall, which was completed in 1980.
"The Galleria is looking a bit tired. It needs to be more contemporary, more upbeat." Most shopping centers, the architect said, need refurbishing every 10 or 12 years to keep pace with shifts in marketing and consumer trends.


You Can't Tell a Restaurant by Its Name
THE Long Island Seafood Dumpling House in Stamford has a few anomalies in its name.
Immediately putting aside that it's in Connecticut, not Long Island, the word dumpling suggests dim sum, yet there are very few dim sum (appetizer-like tidbits), on the menu.
And while seafood represents about half the menu choices, most of these dishes are either shrimp or scallops.
Then, too, the restaurant's name suggests a certain informality, while the place itself is one of the most elegant-looking Chinese restaurants in Fairfield County, with five handsome dining rooms done in pastel colors, well-spaced tables and banquettes, and walls decorated with delicate Chinese watercolors.


Great Ideas for the General Public
THE MAKING OF MIDDLEBROW CULTURE  By Joan Shelley Rubin.
Illustrated. 416 pp.
Chapel Hill: The University of North Carolina Press.
Cloth, $34.95.
Paper, $14.95.


Robert Levy Wed to Claire Mitchell
Claire Ellen Mitchell and Robert James Levy were married yesterday in Washington.
The Rev.
James M. Fennelly, the bridegroom's uncle, officiated at the National Presbyterian Church.
Mrs.
Levy is an international policy analyst at the Rand Corporation in Washington.
She graduated from Indiana University and has a master's degree in economics from Virginia Polytechnic Institute.
She is a daughter of Dr.
Dean L. Mitchell of Reston, Va., and Kate Stevens of Atlanta.
Her father, who is retired, was a program director at the National Science Foundation in Washington.
Her mother was formerly the editor of American Education Magazine.


Mets' Silence Was Blessing
To the Sports Editor:
In "The Silence of the Mets" (The Times, March 31), Dave Anderson writes that we, the fans, are the "real victims" of the Mets' silence.
Actually, the silence was quite wonderful.
Nobody really wants to hear, see, or read what the players say on a daily basis.
The point is not that players are dumb or inarticulate.
Today's news media coverage of sports has proven beyond a doubt that the game cannot be improved by a player's remarks, but it can be trivialized and demeaned.
JONATHAN KANTOR Westport, Conn.


Pithy Bits
In just five years, Isaac Mizrahi has shot into the red-hot center of international fashion, establishing himself for a uniquely American exuberance and a witty style.
In Paris, Herve Leger is a relative newcomer, but he has already created a name with his sexy, signature 'bandage' designs.
Here, these two front-runners of fashion's new generation talk about their aspirations, their work and even their dreams.
Isaac Mizrahi -- Let's recall all the dictionaries of the world and change the definition of fashion.
Fashion is not a dictate.
It's impossible to say whether a skirt length is right or wrong.
I listen to what women want, not what Paris decrees.
I start a collection by examining the last one.
My first thought was to loosen the waist and create a long line.


Succulent Pairings of Island Food and Wine
THE Jamesport Country Kitchen is the real thing, an authentic rural charmer with simple good taste.
The double storefront has wide plank floors, ruffled curtains at the windows, bentwood chairs, wood tables and baskets, grapevine wreaths and dried flowers everywhere.
It seems the perfect setting for hardy farmhouse breakfasts, and for many years that is exactly what it was famous for.
Then four years ago, Matthew Kar became the owner and chef.
He transformed the restaurant into a serious lunch-and-dinner place.
It is now a haven of well-prepared straightforward American food and a showcase for North Fork wines.


East Germans Face Their Accusers
From the moment Vera Wollenberger left home at the age of 18, she was the prototype of an East German rebel.
Her father was an officer in the oppressive State Security police, the Stasi, and she fled from him to begin an idealistic life of social activism.
She believed in the promise of Communism and joined the ruling party, but was expelled after a few years for her liberal views.
In 1982 she began protesting the presence of Soviet nuclear missiles on East German soil, and a year later she helped organize a human rights group called the Church From Below.
She was constantly harassed by the Stasi, once imprisoned, and fired from her job at a Government research institute.
By maintaining her principles despite such pressure, Wollenberger emerged as a heroine of the movement that brought down Communist rule, and in 1990, at the age of 38, won election to the Bonn Parliament.
In Bonn, she helped shape a remarkable new law, aimed at giving Stasi victims a measure of justice.
Under the law's provisions, the vast and long-secret Stasi archive was opened on Jan. 2.
Each victim is now entitled to read his or her entire file, including reports submitted by spies and informers.
From these files emerge secrets that have shaken Germany and shattered many lives, including Wollenberger's.


CHEMISTS SUCCUMB TO FANTASY'S LURE
Twelve thousand chemists gathered in a dozen San Francisco conference halls and hotels this week to deliver or listen to reports on catalysts, chemical bonding, microelectronics, anti-cancer drugs and countless other weighty topics.
But a large crowd of scientists played hooky for an entire day to attend a symposium at which the moderator's head was adorned with space-alien antennas and where the papers dealt with time travel, Martian invaders and other fantasies.
The symposium on the relationship between science fiction and real science, organized by Dr.
Jack H. Stocker of the University of New Orleans chemistry department, had been planned as a minor session of the history section of the national meeting of the American Chemical Society.
Long before the science fiction session opened, however, the room overflowed, forcing a move to a much larger hall.


Something to Keep In Mind
To the Editor:
While reading the article "Hollywood Law: Whose Idea Is It, Anyway"  [ March 15 ] , I was reminded of the time when I worked for the CBS story department.
My ambition was to become attached to a particular anthology show, and after much discussion with my husband, who was a producer at another network, we agreed that I had a marvelous idea for a story.


Silencing of Editor Considered Reason For Fatal Shooting
One month after the slaying of the editor Manuel de Dios Unanue, his companion of seven years said yesterday that she believed he was killed to stop his investigations into drug trafficking.
In her first extended comments since Mr. de Dios, the crusading former editor of El Diario-La Prensa, was shot to death in a Queens restaurant, his companion, Vicky Sanchez, said that she could not rule out the possibility that his slaying was specifically in retaliation for any one article.
But she added, "I think it was more to silence him in the future."


Jill Nagusky and M. R. Epstein Wed
Jill Ellen Nagusky, a graduate student in human service management at Brandeis University, was married last evening to Dr.
Michael Richard Epstein, a pediatric resident at Children's Hospital in Boston.
Rabbi William Dreskin officiated at Chanterelle, a catering establishment in Mayfield Heights, Ohio.
Mrs.
Epstein, 26 years old, graduated cum laude from Tufts University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David R. Nagusky of Moreland Hills, Ohio.
Her father is the president of the Federal Metal Company in Bedford, Ohio.
Her mother, Helen Nagusky, is a pediatric social worker at Rainbow Babies and Children's Hospital in Cleveland.


When Presidential Slogans Meet the Realities of Government; And Vice Presidents?
To the Editor:
When are the voters of this country going to demand a voice in the selection of the candidates for Vice President?
We are all mortal, even our Presidents, and we should have some say in who would take over the leadership in case of emergency.


Forster's Sisters
To the Editor:
In the article about the Merchant-Ivory film of E. M. Forster's "Howards End"  [ "In the Beginning, the Word; at the End, the Movie," March 8 ]  it is suggested that the two sisters "are thought to have been roughly modeled on the Stephens sisters, the gifted women who would become Virginia Woolf, writer, and Vanessa Bell, painter."


Making a Difference; For Nathan's, Caldor Dogs
Look out, McDonald's. Here comes Nathan's Famous.
Known for its spicy frankfurters and crinkle-cut fries, Nathan's, a trademark New York eatery that began 75 years ago on the boardwalk at Coney Island, has begun to nip at the heels of the country's burger giants.


POSTINGS: Rebirth for Bradhurst; A Start for Sass Plaza
One sign that the long awaited rebirth of Bradhurst, one of Harlem's most impoverished sections, is finally under way is the completion of the first phase of Sass Plaza, a complex that will provide permanent housing for the homeless.
On Thursday a combination ribbon-cutting and ground-breaking ceremony will mark the completion of a gut rehabilitation of the building at 263-65 West 152d Street, with 26 two-bedroom units, and the construction of an eight-story apartment building on Frederick Douglass Boulevard between 152d and 153rd Streets with 69 two- and three-bedroom units.
The development will include a 5,000-square-foot community center on 153d Street.
The complex has been named for Dr.
John J. Sass, pastor of St.
Matthew's Baptist Church, in recognition of his 50 years of community service.


Deliverer's Union Nears Pact With The Times
The New York Times and a major independent newspaper delivery company reached separate tentative agreements with the drivers union yesterday that could insure labor peace in the wholesale distribution of New York's newspapers until the year 2000 and speed the opening of The Times's new printing plant in Edison, N.J.
The pacts cover 1,000 drivers for four wholesale distribution companies that deliver The Times, The Daily News, The New York Post, The Wall Street Journal and other publications to newsstands and other outlets in the city and suburbs.
The pending sale of the wholesale companies -- two to The Times and two to the independent company, Imperial Delivery Service -- made new agreements for their drivers necessary.


New Yorkers, etc.
There is almost nothing that men and women won't talk about publicly these days.
There is little or no hesitation in owning up to alcoholism, drug abuse, extramarital affairs, abuse as a child, compulsive gambling, shopping addiction, face lifts, fat thighs, overeating, undereating -- name it.
Despite all this unburdening and confessing, there is still one thing that few people will admit to, and it has nothing to do with shame or a passion for privacy.
Mention that someone might lack a sense of humor and hackles rise.


Party-Crasher Killed by Police in Armed Faceoff
Police officers shot two men in the basement of a Brooklyn restaurant early yesterday, killing one and seriously wounding the other, after the men turned toward them brandishing handguns, the police said.
The police tentatively identified the dead man as Jose Morel, 25, of 748 49th Street, Sunset Park, Brooklyn.


Talking: Remodeling; An Ideal Time to Do the Job
THIS is an ideal time for a homeowner to embark upon a major remodeling job.
For one thing, the prolonged recession has weeded out many of the fly-by-night operators who flourished when getting anyone to do the work was a minor miracle.
And because of the downturn, work can be done more expeditiously and, in many cases, for less money.


Booth Speech Reveals a Killer's Mind
In 1860, more than four years before John Wilkes Booth assassinated Abraham Lincoln in Ford's Theater, the actor wrote a 21-page manuscript that showed his fanatical state of mind, his sympathies for the Southern secessionists and his association with the historical characters he portrayed in Shakespeare's plays.
Had these sentiments been known to the officials responsible for guarding the President, in the view of Lincoln scholars, it is possible that Booth would not have had such easy access to the Washington theater on April 14, 1865.


POSTINGS: Coming Attraction; From Porn to Hollyrock
The tropical pink and teal neon marquee of Hollyrock, a $2 million entertainment/business space, will begin lighting up 37 West Main Street in downtown Bay Shore, L.I., on the Memorial Day weekend.
"We're hoping this serves as a catalyst for reviving the worst part of downtown," said Thomas Isles, planning commissioner of the Town of Islip.
The building, formerly the rundown Regent Theater built in 1915 and closed six years ago after a career as a burlesque, movie and, finally, a porn house, was redesigned by the Manhattan architect John M. Reimnitz.
"We've taken the 1920's into the 1990's," said Robert W. D'Loren, the developer.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
PYSANKY DEMONSTRATION
According to ancient folk lore surrounding pysanky, the term for Easter eggs decorated in elaborate Ukrainian style, a bowlful of the colorful eggs kept in the house at all times protects the family from fire and lightning.
In fact, the practice of decorating eggs at Easter time was believed to be essential to the continued existence of the world: without it a monster would appear and destroy the planet.
Ukrainian Easter will be celebrated in two Yonkers libraries, with Maria Kozicky showing about 20 of the eggs she has decorated and explaining how it was done.
She will appear at 3:45 P.M. in the Getty Square branch at 7 Main Street and will repeat the program Thursday at 3:45 P.M. in the Grinton I. Will Branch at 1500 Central Park Avenue.


The Men Who Pulled the Triggers
ORDINARY MEN  Reserve Police Battalion 101 and the Final Solution in Poland.
By Christopher R. Browning.
Illustrated. 231 pp.
New York:  Aaron Asher Books/HarperCollins Publishers. $22.


Easter Dinner as an Evocation of Spring
EASTER dinner is as much a celebration of spring as a religious festival.
But we have become so used to produce being available year round, that it is easy to forget what comes into season when.
Asparagus, morels, baby lamb and strawberries are at their peak now, and the following is an Easter dinner to remind us that spring, along with the first crocuses and daffodils in the garden, has finally arrived.
Morels are highly prized mushrooms; they are dark brown with honeycombed caps and a meaty taste.
Most of them come from the Pacific Northwest, Michigan, Wisconsin and some parts of the East Coast.
Their season begins now and runs into July.
They make a delicious first course simmered in light cream and served with asparagus.


Coe's Prize for Winning Race Is Parliament Seat
It was a close race and there was a strong challenge at the finish, but SEBASTIAN COE held on to win election to the British Parliament.
The 35-year-old Coe, who set nine world records, including the 800- and 1,000-meter marks he still holds, ran as a Conservative in Falmouth in the southwestern county of Cornwall.
Coe, who has dreamed of sitting in Parliament since he was a teen-ager, explained his success in his first political race: "I simply made myself accessible and knocked on all the doors." (AP)


Killings of Palestinian Suspects Raise Questions About Israeli Army Agents
As a fruit-stand owner in the outdoor market remembers it, the men were leaning against a wall drinking juice when they suddenly called out to Bassam Fadi Shaban, who was standing yards away in the dusty street.
The fruit vendor recalls two men. Another merchant in the market says there were three.


An Elusive Butterfly
To the Editor:
One would have to extend the definition of creativity to include work and craft in order to support Daniel Goleman's premise on painting in his article "Pondering the Riddle of Creativity"  [ March 22 ] .
The high-realism, almost fetishistic paintings of Gregory Gillespie certainly rely heavily on craft.
The enchanted but misinformed art public is mostly wowed by
how
the work was done more than by
what
was done creatively.


Carter Lee Wed To Peter Maas
Carter Ridgely Lee, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Preston P. Lee of Chatham Township, N.J., was married yesterday to Peter Louis Maas, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Louis I. Maas of Scotia, N.Y.
The Rev.
Roger Dunnavan officiated at First Presbyterian Church in Haddonfield, N.J.
Ms.
Lee, 38 years old, is keeping her name.
She is a vice president of the Corestates Financial Corporation, a bank holding company in Philadelphia.
She graduated from Moravian College and received an M.B.A. from Fairleigh Dickinson University.
Her previous marriage ended in divorce.
Her father, who is retired, was the director of engineering for the Colgate-Palmolive Company in Jersey City.


Education Effort Fights AIDS in Zimbabwe
In a country where talk about AIDS was virtually taboo, Zimbabweans can hardly pass a day now without hearing about the virus in the office, on the farm, in the pub or in the classroom.
Like many African nations where the infection rates soared in the late 1980's, Zimbabwe first reacted by denying the severity of the epidemic.
But a new Health Minister, Dr.
Timothy J. Stamps, appointed two years ago and motivated by the philosophy that not to talk about AIDS makes a bad situation worse, has resulted in one of the frankest and widespread education campaigns on the continent.


Clinton, Among Others, Prevails With the Help of Grudging Voters
Given what he had gone through in the preceding two weeks, quadruple victory was especially sweet for Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas on Tuesday.
He won the big one, the New York Presidential primary, by a good margin, added Wisconsin and Kansas to his string and even prevailed in the non-binding Minnesota "beauty contest." He fairly glowed with bonhomie.
Unless some unforeseen disaster befalls his campaign, Mr.
Clinton is going to be the Democratic Presidential nominee.
Paul E. Tsongas as much as conceded that when he announced on Thursday that he had decided against getting back in the race.
Edmund G. Brown Jr., Mr.
Clinton's only active rival, concedes these days that he finds it difficult to put together a scenario for his own triumph.


POINT COUNTERPOINT ON I.B.M.
In an article on the Forum page on March 22, Webster Brown, a former engineer with International Business Machines Corporation, wrote about his 26 years with I.B.M.
He told of how the optimism with which he signed on in 1964 for what probably would be a lifetime career eroded to the point that two years ago he took voluntary retirement at the age of 54.
He said he feared that had he stayed at the company, he would be weeded out by an employee appraisal system "which gets tougher each year, that seems designed to sweep the company clean of employees who, however loyal and competent, no longer fit in at I.B.M."


Jane Webre and David Plaut to Wed
Jane Marie Noemie Webre and David Lawrence Plaut, lawyers in Austin, Tex., are engaged to be married in June.
Ms.
Webre, 27 years old, graduated from the University of Texas at Austin and from its law school.
She is an associate with Scott, Douglass &amp; Luton.
She is the daughter of Juanita Chisholm Webre and Alfred L. Webre Jr. of Brownsville, Tex.
Her father, who is retired, was a sugar technology consultant.
Her mother is a legal assistant at Texas Rural Legal Aid in Brownsville.


Feminism and the Wild Man
To the Editor:
As a family therapist, a black belt in karate and a longtime feminist, I would like to reply to Jill Johnston's essay.
It is ironic that Robert Bly should be singled out for criticism; in regard to women, he is undoubtedly the very best of the "men's movement" authors that Ms.
Johnston mentions.


Camera
"Change, change, change," is coming at the Image Bank, a New York picture agency acquired by the Eastman Kodak Company last fall.
Those are the words of Pete Turner, a longtime photographer for the agency, which specializes in stock pictures used in commercial photography.
First, the Image Bank will move its corporate headquarters to Dallas in July, said Rex Jobe, the agency's new president.
The office in New York will continue to be part of the agency's network.


Miss Vranka a Bride
Suzanne Vranka, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence A. Vranka of New Hyde Park, L.I., was married there yesterday to John Michael Gabriele, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
A.
J.
Gabriele of Valley Forge, Pa.
The Rev.
Warren Gress, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at the Church of Notre Dame.
Mrs.
Gabriele, 25 years old, graduated from Lehigh University, as did her fiance.
An environmental engineer, she is to join the Envirogroup, a consulting concern in Englewood, Colo., next month.
The bridegroom, 26, is a civil engineer with Canonie Environmental Services, an engineering and construction company in Englewood.


Rodman Writes His Name All Over Backboard
Chuck Daly recalled the 1986 National Basketball Association draft, the one that brought Dennis Rodman and John Salley to the Detroit Pistons.
Daly had already been the Pistons' coach for three years and had managed to give the franchise its first-ever consecutive winning seasons.
Still, the Pistons in 13 playoff appearances before the arrival of Rodman and Salley had advanced past the first round only four times and had never won a championship.
"When those two forwards came, they changed our club," said Daly, whose Pistons won back-to-back N.B.A. titles in 1989 and 1990.


Making a Difference; Taking On Big Oil
In her first year as chairwoman of the three-member Texas Railroad Commission, Lena Guerrero sized up the dicey issue of output limits for the state's natural-gas drillers and took on the mantle of a reformer.
The 34-year-old Ms.
Guerrero, the first woman and first Hispanic to sit on the panel that governs the state's energy and transportation industries, sees the issue as a case of long-needed revisions.
But dozens of major oil-and-gas producers are opposed, saying their big-volume wells are likely to be reined in by the changes she is pushing, giving an unfair break to smaller independent drillers.


Scot Kuo to Wed Jean E. Schroeder
Mr. and Mrs.
Gustav C. Schroeder of Syosset, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Dr.
Jean Ellen Schroeder, to Dr.
Scot C. Kuo, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Charles Kuo of Elkhart, Ind.
A September wedding is planned.
Dr.
Schroeder, 28 years old, is a researcher at the University of North Carolina Medical School at Chapel Hill.
She graduated from Johns Hopkins and received a doctorate in neuroscience from Washington University.


Sunday Menu; A Heady Linguine Sauce That Evokes 2 Regions
Combine elements of a New England dinner of fresh salmon and peas -- a tradition dating from the time when salmon was still abundant in the region's rivers and streams -- with a slightly altered version of New York's Lower East Side lox and cream cheese, and you have a heady sauce for a potful of linguine.
In this version, lox becomes smoked salmon and cream cheese becomes a mixture of ricotta and yogurt.


POINT COUNTERPOINT ON I.B.M.
In an article on the Forum page on March 22, Webster Brown, a former engineer with International Business Machines Corporation, wrote about his 26 years with I.B.M.
He told of how the optimism with which he signed on in 1964 for what probably would be a lifetime career eroded to the point that two years ago he took voluntary retirement at the age of 54.
He said he feared that had he stayed at the company, he would be weeded out by an employee appraisal system "which gets tougher each year, that seems designed to sweep the company clean of employees who, however loyal and competent, no longer fit in at I.B.M."


The Money, Honey
If Ivan F. and Seema Boesky have taken off the gloves in their divorce battle, it might be to get a better grip on the money.
Certainly Mr.
Boesky, a billionaire until he was brought low by fines and prison time in Wall Street's junk bond scandal, has had cushier moments.
Last week, the Associated Press and The New York Post reported that Mr.
Boesky had asked the court to make Mrs.
Boesky, who filed for divorce last year, pay him $20,000 a week -- $1,040,000 a year -- in temporary alimony.
The two have a penthouse in Manhattan and a mansion in Westchester, both in her name.
Last year, Mrs.
Boesky sought possession of Mr.
Boesky's Honolulu condominium when, she said, he failed to pay interest on $2.3 million in loans from her.
Trying to keep their affairs private, the Boeskys, who have been married 30 years and have four grown children, have traded shots in State Supreme Court in Manhattan as Anonymous I vs.
Anonymous II.
Lawyers for both are under a gag order.


Free-Market Capitalism, Applied to the Stage
Whatever else people say about him and they say a lot -- nearly everyone agrees that Wiktor Kubiak has chutzpah.
The producer of "Metro," the first Polish musical to reach Broadway, Mr.
Kubiak is a Runyonesque character who could only have prospered in the let's-make-a-deal capitalism of Eastern Europe.
From his 18th-floor office in the Marriott Hotel, Mr.
Kubiak looks upon a Warsaw dotted with his properties and well-connected friends.
He owns a newspaper and runs four theaters, two of the city's best cinemas and a chain of bookstores.
He is also earning a reputation as a political kingmaker.
A major financial backer of the Liberal Democratic Party, which held power in Poland through most of 1991, he says he helped underwrite President Lech Walesa's 1990 campaign.
Lately, he has been forging links to the new coalition Government headed by Prime Minister Jan Olszewski.


Pop's Bequest
'And I want to donate my body to science," my father said. Bartholomew Patrick Collins was staring at me intensely from his wheelchair, a wisp of a man in a feather of a body with two of the fiercest eyes you ever saw.
"Pop, that means giving your body to a medical school."
That's what I said.
What I was thinking was: That means a roomful of medical students will be cutting you up while making snide witticisms.
And, Pop, you really deserve better.


Mutual Funds; Small and Medium Are Beautiful
Carlene Murphy, co-manager of the Strong Common Stock Fund in Milwaukee, specializes in smaller company stocks.
She did exceptionally well swimming against the current in the 1980's and could do even better now that the tide seems to have turned.
The fund returned a sparkling 35.7 percent for the year that ended on March 31, compared with 14.6 percent for growth funds, on average.
Before signing on with Strong in March 1991, Ms.
Murphy and her co-manager, Richard T. Weiss, ran the SteinRoe Special Fund, which gained 14 percent annually for the previous five years, compared with 9.9 percent for the group.


Charles Busch Spoof of the Movies
IN his six and a half years as artistic head of the Boston Post Road Stage Company, Douglas Moser has fancied the non-mainstream play with an off-center point of view.
But none has been wilder and crazier than "The Lady in Question."
Charles Busch's on-target sendup of a 1940's-style Hollywood flag-waving melodrama is populated by a glamour queen with a Grade B budget and an X-rated past, a baron who is a "pathetic mother-fixated" fool; his mother, a Hitler-obsessed nymphomaniac, and a mad doctor on the prowl for human experiments, not to mention motley sadomasochists, in or out of drag, "in carefree Bavaria."


At Work; Testing Employees for Drugs
It is probably fair to say that the Federal Government is rarely in the avant garde of management style.
But in 1986, the Reagan Administration muscled into place a policy calling for "drug-free" Federal work places, including a clause that mandated drug testing for some workers.
In itself, that action might have had little impact on anyone except employees periodically required to hand over a beaker of urine.
But the executive order led to the Drug-Free Workplace Act of 1988, which required companies with Federal contracts to establish drug policies and make "good faith" efforts to maintain a drug-free work place.
That
did
have an impact, not only on companies with Federal ties but on ones that want them in the future.
One result, according to a report released this month by the American Management Association, is a vast expansion of drug-testing among its members, 7,000 medium- to large-sized firms representing some 25 percent of the American work force.
According to the report, three-quarters of the 1,200 companies responding to the A.M.A.'s questionnaire now test for controlled and illegal substances -- which is to say, not alcohol.
That is an 18 percent jump over last year and a 250 percent pole vault over the baseline numbers the group reported for 1987, the first year it surveyed work place testing policies.


THE BALLAD OF NO-SHOW JONES
As a veteran session musician who has worked with George Jones dozens of times, I agree with Randy Travis that Jones is "one of the greatest when it comes to phrasing" ("The Ballad of No-Show Jones" by James Hunter, March 15).
I can't count the times I've stood in a roomful of musicians on a George Jones session, under the aegis of Billy Sherrill, and, halfway through a chorus, got "hit bumps" -- the goose flesh that is the visceral response to being in the presence of something that is considerably larger than the sum of its musical parts.


Russian Legislature Votes To Curtail Yeltsin's Powers
After heated and tangled debate, the Russian Congress of People's Deputies passed a resolution this evening that could curtail some of the powers of President Boris N. Yeltsin.
The Congress voted for an amendment that would require Mr.
Yeltsin to give up his concurrent post as Prime Minister within 90 days, and to nominate a new Prime Minister subject to parliamentary approval.


Bus Carrying L.I. Students Crashes; At Least 2 Die
A chartered bus carrying students from a Long Island middle school slid off Interstate 87 in the Adirondacks yesterday and tumbled over a steep embankment, killing at least two people and injuring 29, the police and emergency rescue officials said.
The bus -- carrying the driver and 27 students and 3 teachers from Woodland Middle School in East Meadow, L.I. -- crashed at 4:45 P.M. on a desolate slush-covered section of Interstate 87 between Schroon Lake and Pottersville, about 95 miles north of Albany.


Deborah Sager Plans to Marry
Deborah J. Sager, a daughter of Jerome I. Sager of New York and the late Marilyn Sager, is engaged to Norman D. Birnbach, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Maks L. Birnbach of New York.
An August wedding is planned.
Miss Sager, 26 years old, graduated cum laude from Wellesley College and is a law student at Columbia University.
Her father is the executive director and general counsel of the Empire State Pharmaceutical Society, a trade association in New York.


Amy L. Gaudry and Pierre R. Dulin Married
Amy LaRue Gaudry, a daughter of Charles L. Gaudry of Jacksonville, Fla., and Margaret McClain of Louisville, Ky., was married yesterday to Pierre R. Dulin, the son of Santiago Rodriguez Merino and Nicole Dulin of Madrid.
The Rev.
William Starkey performed the ceremony at St.
Thomas Episcopal Church in White Sulphur Springs, W.Va.
Mrs.
Dulin, 25 years old, is a law student at New York University.
She graduated cum laude from Yale University.


Noted With Pleasure
Painting's Cautionary Truths
In capturing the spirit and woes of their own times, Gerald Marzorati argues, the great paintings of the past hold up a mirror to the present.
This is from "A Painter of Darkness: Leon Golub and Our Times" (Penguin, paper).
Art cannot shape the future; it can, at best, bequeath to it a picture of its own time.
A painting . . . cannot eliminate the harshness and pain of poverty, but it can painstakingly portray it, so that the society, when it is ready to look (later, in its galleries and museums, in a receptive spirit), may see it and sense it. . . .
A painting cannot topple a terrible ruler; but how many paintings (by Francisco Goya, for instance) have shown us the face of such a man, helped us to recognize the look, the inner weakness, that must be cloaked in power?
Such works are very much of their time, not ours.
But they were not made to change their time.
Rather, they were made to illuminate their time, to lend it shape and color.
It is only because painters have worked so hard at illuminating their own time -- looking with detachment upon life . . . then working to get it all down right on the canvas -- it is only this age-old method . . . that makes for products that might stand up to time, might continue to hold meaning centuries later.
Fiction's True Art
At the heart of our desire to create fiction is the struggle to find order in an uncertain world, according to Wallace Stegner in "Where the Bluebird Sings to the Lemonade Springs: Living and Writing in the West" (Random House).
Chaos, Henry Adams said in his "Education," is the law of nature, order is the dream of man.
Both fiction and autobiography attempt to impose order on the only life the writer really knows, his own.
Once at a literary meeting I heard someone ask John Cheever why he wrote.
He replied without hesitation, "To try to make sense of my life." That is the best answer I can conceive of.
The life we all live is amateurish and accidental; it begins in accident and proceeds by trial and error toward dubious ends.
That is the law of nature.
But the dream of man will not accept what nature hands us.
We have to tinker with it, trying to give it purpose, direction and meaning. . . .
The guts of any significant fiction -- or autobiography -- is an anguished question.
What Women Know About Men
Difficulty with men can be avoided -- if you just follow the basic rules, according to the heroine of Jeanette Winterson's startling fable "Sexing the Cherry" (Vintage International, paper).
1.
Men are easy to please but are not pleased for long before some new novelty must delight them. 2.
Men are easy to make passionate but are unable to sustain it. 3.
Men are always seeking soft women but find their lives in ruins without strong women. 4.
Men must be occupied at all times otherwise they make mischief. 5.
Men deem themselves weighty and women light.
Therefore it is simple to tie a stone round their necks and drown them should they become too troublesome. 6.
Men are best left in groups by themselves where they will entirely wear themselves out in drunkenness and competition.
While this is taking place a woman may carry on with her own life unhindered. 7.
Men are never never to be trusted with what is closest to your heart, and if it is they who are closest to your heart, do not tell them. 8.
If a man asks you for money, do not give it to him. 9.
If you ask a man for money and he does not give it to you, sell his richest possession and leave at once. 10.
Your greatest strength is that every man believes he knows the sum and possibility of every woman.
The Art of Dwelling
Truly inhabiting a home, a town, a city, the critic Ivan Illich argues, is a vital skill we are in danger of losing.
This is from "In the Mirror of the Past: Lectures and Addresses, 1978-1990" (Marion Boyars).
To dwell is human.
Wild beasts have nests, cattle have stables, carriages fit into sheds, and there are garages for automobiles.
Only humans can dwell.
To dwell is an art. . . .
The human is the only animal who is an artist, and the art of dwelling is part of the art of living.
A house is neither nest nor garage.
Most languages use living in the sense of dwelling.
To put the question, "where do you live?" is to ask for the place where your daily existence gives shape to the world.
Just tell me how you dwell and I will tell you who you are.
This equation of dwelling and living goes back to times when the world was still habitable and humans were in-habitants.
To dwell then meant to inhabit one's own traces, to let daily life write the webs and knots of one's biography into the landscape.
This writing could be etched into stone by successive generations or sketched anew for each rainy season with a few reeds and leaves.
Learning to See
Helen Keller's reaction to a friend's comment that she had noticed nothing exceptional during a walk in the woods reminds us that the art of living well depends on paying attention to the particulars.
This is from "The Creative Spirit" by Daniel Gole
man, Paul Kaufman and Michael Ray (Dutton).
"Glory in all the facets and pleasures and beauty which the world reveals to you."


Details Aren't the Crux of the Caterpillar Strike
As the strikers at Caterpillar Inc. walk the picket line together in the pre-dawn darkness, they often recount their 207-day strike in 1982 and the 80-day strike in 1979.
Striking is nothing new to these 12,600 members of the United Auto Workers.
Yet this time much is new in their dispute with Caterpillar, the world's largest maker of construction machinery, with ramifications unforeseen a few weeks ago.
Now the talk on the line inevitably turns to what, for many, has become the most vexing question: what has brought them and their company to this precipice?
The strikers are not the only ones asking the question.
Though loath to admit it publicly, many people involved in this drama -- from Caterpillar's managers, shareholders, customers and competitors to Wall Street analysts -- wonder why the union and management have collided so deliberately.
The strike, many suggest, could be one of the crucial chapters in the history of the American labor movement, perhaps the Patco of the 1990's, as some have suggested, in a reference to President Reagan's replacement of striking members of the Professional Air Traffic Controllers Organization a decade ago.
But it is too soon to tell.
The Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service announced Friday that company and union officials would resume negotiations tomorrow.
And many people who have studied the confrontation contend that when the larger philosophical issues are set aside, the workaday items that would be left in the conflict appear resolvable.


This Week's Numbers
Consensus
Last Period
Estimates*
Tuesday
Autombile sales rate, in millions
6.2
5.9
Retail sales, change in percent
1.3
0.2
Wednesday
Industrial production, percent change
0.6
0.3
Capacity utilization, percent
78.2
78.3
Business inventories, percent change
-0.4
-0.1
Merchandise trade, in billions
-$5.8
-$5.
Friday
Housing starts, in millions
1.3
1.3
Monday: World agriculture production *
World's central bankers meet in Basel, Switzerland  Wednesday: Announcement of two- and five-year Treasury-note auctions  Friday: Summary of fourth-quarter international transactions from Commerce Department  (Source: I.D.E.A. Inc.)


Peruvian Official Assails Pressure From U.S.
In an interview before his departure for talks in Washington, Peru's Foreign Minister bitterly criticized the Bush Administration for putting pressure on other governments to isolate President Alberto Fujimori, who seized broad power last Sunday in what many people are calling a civil-military coup.
The Foreign Minister, Augustino Blacker Miller, said in the interview late Friday night that Mr.
Fujimori's action had wide popular support among Peruvians and wondered how the United States could be so "naive" as to lump Peru's situation with the military takeover in Haiti last year.


Life's Tragic, but Julie Hagerty's Funny
Here's one way to look at it: Julie Hagerty is finished in Hollywood -- at least in sitcoms, at least for now.
Gone -- under circumstances both mysterious and ridiculous -- is her starring role in the CBS comedy "Princesses." Gone, too, for that matter, is "Princesses." Just a fond memory is her Universal Studios dressing room; ancient history is her shiny red rented sports car; available for occupancy is her former West Coast base of operations -- an, er, interesting house in the Hollywood Hills.
Who's discouraged or surprised by all this?
Not Ms.
Hagerty, who can be seen these days in "Noises Off," Peter Bogdanovich's film version of Michael Frayn's backstage farce.
In "Noises Off," the actress, who is in her late 30's, plays Poppy Taylor, the spectacularly ineffectual assistant stage manager of a dysfunctional theatrical troupe.


The Executive Computer; Hot New Portables: Great Features, Wide Price Range
Several impressive portable computers have come to market in recent weeks, including the first widely available models with color displays.
One in particular, the Zenith Data Systems Z-Note 325Lc, appears to be especially well suited for traveling executives.
A 6.5-pound notebook with a bright color screen, it has built-in Ethernet network adapters and an optional attachment that makes it easy and cheap to attach a full-size keyboard and monitor for desktop use.
It has a list price of $7,299 and will probably be widely available for about $2,000 less.
Color displays have been available on portable computers for several years, but the cost has been high and the performance less than fabulous.
The new color portables reverse that equation, offering surprisingly good performance at prices that make them very competitive with monochrome machines.


June Wedding For Miss White
Mr. and Mrs.
Richard B. White of New Canaan, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Katherine Learned White to Michael Thomas Marsland, a son of Mrs.
Robert O. Burkhardt of Branford, Conn., and the late Thomas H. Marsland.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss White, 27 years old, is a program supervisor in Westport, Conn., for Clasp Homes, a network of group homes for mentally retarded adults.
She is also a student at Fairfield University.
Her father is a senior director of Spencer Stuart &amp; Associates, an executive search firm in Stamford, Conn.


Fish and Love in 'Zara Spook and Other Lures'
A ZARA SPOOK is a type of fishing lure.
Should you see "Zara Spook and Other Lures," the play at the George Street Playhouse about three women in a fishing tournament in Truth or Consequences, N.M., that will become evident soon enough.
But it is important to understand just what sort of lure, among many, a Zara Spook is, for the playwright, Joan Ackermann, reels them off one after another.
A Zara Spook, you see, is used to fool a fish into behaving like an aggressor and then hooking it.
"A walkin' bait," Ms.
Ackermann calls it.
Clearly, to the extent that clarity is to be gleaned in Ms.
Ackermann's play, this is meant as a metaphorical statement about men's and women's roles.


Lesley Bischoff To Wed in June
Richard Bischoff of Fort Lauderdale, Fla., and Nancy Kane Bischoff of New York have announced June wedding plans for their daughter Lesley Clare Bischoff and William Alexander King, a son of William H. King of Higganum, Conn., and Sondra King of Middletown, Conn.
Miss Bischoff, 23 years old, graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and is a credit analyst at J. P. Morgan in New York.
Her father retired as a yacht broker in Fort Lauderdale.
Her mother is the director of medical staff services at the Hospital for Special Surgery in New York.


Russian Emigres' Passover: The Gift of Freedom
By SALLY FRIEDMAN
IT might have been just another Sunday afternoon party in suburbia, complete with bountiful food, spirited conversation and scarce elbowroom.
Then the 74-year-old man with the fiery blue eyes stepped to the center of the living room of a small apartment here.
And the moment that the man, Khaim Krivoruchko, began speaking, it was no longer just another party.
"The philosophers argue about what is wealth, but today I have the answer," he said, his Russian words interpreted by a granddaughter.
"Today, I am a rich man. A rich man has friends, and here in this new country my friends are all around me."


Rough Landing
A private plane bearing Yasir Arafat and a dozen bodyguards crash-landed in a remote corner of Libya last week after it was caught aloft in a desert sandstorm.
For half a day, the chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization was out of contact with the world, leaving governments concerned with the Middle East to speculate on the implications of Mr.
Arafat's fate, whatever it was.
When the plane was found, its three-member flight crew was dead, a half-dozen of Mr.
Arafat's bodyguards had been injured, and the P.L.O. chairman had suffered some cuts and bruises.
There was rejoicing among Palestinians in the Occupied Territories, but P.L.O leaders said that Mr.
Arafat's accident underscored the need for designating a line of succession within the organization, at the very least.
"I think Arafat has probably concluded many things from this accident, too," said Bassam Abu Sharif, a senior political adviser to Mr.
Arafat.
"For example -- God forbid -- if he dies, what then?"


Q and A
Russel Wright's House
Q.
Is it possible to visit Russel Wright's home, Dragon Rock, at Manitoga in New York State? -- Bernice Tabbat, Bronxville, N.Y.


Sunday Dinner; A Chinatown Bonanza: Its Chefs Are in Full Swing
Chinese restaurateurs have yet to hear about a workweek that is shorter than seven days, or at least they refuse to believe in it.
This leads to a bonanza for Sunday diners who can stroll Chinatown and pick from dozens of restaurants featuring Cantonese, Sichuan, Hunan and Beijing cuisine.
Here are three recommendations.
Oriental Pearl
103-105 Mott Street, (212) 219-8388 -- This Chinese restaurant can be recommended for the same reason Chinese families flock there: the predominantly Cantonese food is very good, and the service is prompt.


Editorial Notebook; The Horror Files
People throughout Eastern Europe struggle with the question of how to deal with the contents of Big Brother's files.
Is there a middle ground between total amnesty and wholesale purges in post-dictatorial societies?
What seems to be a morally defensible answer emerged at a conference I attended recently in Salzburg.
Politicians, lawyers and scholars from very different countries in Europe and Latin America joined to appraise a common problem.
Ordinary people who have suffered under different brands of tyranny -- Communist or rightist military juntas -- understandably seek retribution.
Yet doing so may shatter social peace, divide new democracies and punish the innocent as well as the guilty.


Devils Kick Their Heels, Then Skate
The players and management of the Devils brushed aside all questions today about details of hockey's new labor agreement, saying that the game itself was the big winner in the settlement of the dispute and that everyone was happy to have the team playing again.
All the Devils players, including Bruce Driver, the captain and team representative with the players' union, declined to discuss who had come out ahead in the confrontation.
Hockey, the players said, was their focus now.


Think Again Before Scuttling Chapter 11
To the Editor:
The reform to Chapter 11 reorganization proposed in "Time to Scuttle Chapter 11" (Forum, March 8) is unfair and unworkable.


Election-Year Gridlock Fouls Washington Mood
So far this year, Congress and President Bush have made one important law, enacting a second extension of unemployment benefits.
The rest of the time they have been exchanging partisan insults and political declarations, sometimes in the form of bills and veto messages.
The House of Representatives, rarely a place for bipartisan legislative cooperation in the best of times, has been preoccupied for weeks with its dubious checks and uncertain re-election prospects.
The Senate has been much more civil, but distracted by a sense that in times of staggering deficits there is little a legislative body can do about the nation's deepest problems.


Miss Rickin Marries
Roseanne Ricklin, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Ricklin of Denver, was married last evening to Andrew D. Tenenbaum, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen Tenenbaum of Bel Air, Calif., and New Rochelle, N.Y.
Rabbi Gerald Serotta officiated at the Park Hyatt Hotel in Washington.
Mrs.
Tenenbaum, 27 years old, is an administrator at the Cardio Diagnostic Center in Chevy Chase, Md.
Mr.
Tenenbaum, 29, is a lawyer with the Washington firm of Cohen &amp; White.


NORTHEAST NOTEBOOK: Newport, R.I.; Meeting Needs At the Low End
THIS city is working with Rhode Island's housing agency and a private developer on a project of 30 one-family houses for first-time home buyers of low to moderate income.
Ground will be broken next month on the three-and-a-half-acre Beacon Street project, which should be completed within a year, said Bruce Bartlett, the city's director of Planning, Zoning and Development.


Reyna Kushner Plans to Wed
Dr. and Mrs.
Jack Kushner of Annapolis, Md., have announced the engagement of their daughter Reyna Kushner to Laurence H. Pratt, the son of Mrs.
Charles F. Gill of New Hartford, Conn., and Laurence O. Pratt Jr. of Orinda, Calif.
A September wedding is planned.
The couple, both 26 years old and former teachers at the Berkshire School in Sheffield, Mass., are in graduate school in Washington.
Ms.
Kushner, a graduate of Wellesley College, is working toward a Ph.D. in physics at George Washington University.
Mr.
Pratt, a graduate of Harvard University, is working toward a master's degree in political science at Georgetown University.


Swing Time


Kapp to Lead Philharmonia Virtuosi in Baroque Selections
NEXT weekend will be devoted to special Easter and Passover celebrations, but a pre-holiday rush is on today with a dozen or more programs in the county.
The earliest downbeat is supplied by Richard Kapp at 2 P.M. at Iona College in New Rochelle.
The maestro will lead a chamber ensemble from his Philharmonia Virtuosi on a tour of the Baroque, from the Albinoni "Concerto a Cinque" to Zelenka's "Hipocondria," with additional works by Corelli, Purcell and others.
Call 693-5595 for more information.


Competing for Shoppers: Coupons Proliferate
IF it takes longer to get through the supermarket lines these days, it is because more people are using coupons.
And they have more coupons to choose from as marketers compete more than ever for customers.
The increase in promotional activity has led to an increase in business for sales and marketing consulting concerns, one of the few industries showing growth during the recession.


Majority of Immigrants Capable and Decent
I'm infuriated!
How dare Donald Haverstrom  [ Letters, March 8 ]  bunch all aliens as unskilled and uneducated illegal aliens.
Just because we are forced by circumstance to do work that is not considered prestigious but is humane, are we to be labeled unskilled and uneducated?
The majority of us are very capable, decent, well educated.
Just because of the lack of official recognition, we are forced into taking humble positions while waiting for the unraveling of red tape, are we therefore to be labeled unskilled and uneducated.
What lack of good judgment I must accuse Mr.
Haverstrom of having!
Poor prejudiced man!
It's people like him who make life insufferable for us who want to become "good useful American citizens." J. BAPTISTE Belle Harbor


For Design and for Nature
MONDAY -- The National Museum of Fashion at the Fashion Institute of Technology previewed an exhibition of the clothes of 36 black designers.
The show, called "Tribute to the Black Fashion Museum," begins with designs by Ann Lowe, who made Jacqueline Bouvier's dress for her wedding to John F. Kennedy.
It ends with a group of rap-inspired clothes from Cross Colors, a California design house.
The styles are from designers, clients, the Black Fashion Museum in Harlem and the Fashion Institute.
The exhibition runs through May 2.
At the Metropolitan Museum of Art, the arrival of spring was celebrated with a fund-raising dinner and dance for trustees and guests in the Carroll and Milton Petrie European Sculpture Court.


Three New Malls? Here's Where Proposals Stand
PLANS for two new malls in the city are moving ahead, their developers report.
A 277,000-square-foot mall at the site of the former Alexander's at the T intersection formed by North Broadway and East Post Road has been proposed by Fischer Reese.
One of the principals, J. Michael Divney, said the shopping center, which would be called the Westchester Pavilion, would cost $40 million.
A construction loan of $23 million was obtained this month from Friesch-Groningsche Hypotheekbank of the Netherlands.


THE ORACLE OF CROWN HEIGHTS
The article on Rabbi Schneerson seems to suggest that the Rebbe is engaging in political influence peddling in Israel.
This, of course, is his right, but it begs the question of why the Lubavitchers then do not have to account adequately for the supposed hundreds of millions flowing into their organization.
It seems to me that what people do, not what they call themselves, is what allows for the privilege of religious exemption.
We deserve the right to know how extremist religious institutions here are influencing the political process in Israel, and exactly how much tax-free money is being spent on it.
COLLIN PERRY
New York, N.Y.


If You're Thinking of Living in: Bay Shore
BAY SHORE is a hamlet of wealth alongside poverty -- of mansions on the Great South Bay waterfront a mile from low-income housing.
Like many Long Island communities, its downtown was hard hit in the early 1960's by the opening of nearby shopping malls.
Residents say, however, that it offers quiet, well-kept streets, a respected school system and waterfront recreation.


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York
Senate
1.
Defense Budget: Vote on a Democratic effort to cut President Bush's proposed $292.2 billion defense budget by $4 billion.
Rejected 50 to 45, April 9.
1
Connecticut
Dodd (D) . . .
N
Lieberman (D) . . .
N
New Jersey
Bradley (D) . . .
Y
Lautenberg (D) . . .
Y
New York
D'Amato (R) . . .
N
Moynihan (D) . . .
Y
House
1.
Campaign Finance: Vote on passage of a Democratic-sponsored measure that would limit spending in Congressional elections.
Approved 259 to 165, April 9.
2.
House Management: Vote on adoption of a Republican-sponsored plan to overhaul the management of the House's internal operations.
Rejected 254 to 159, April 9.
3.
House Management: Vote on passage of a Democratic-sponsored plan to overhaul the management of the House's internal operations.
Approved 269 to 81, April 9.
1
2
3
Connecticut
1. Kennelly (D) . . .
Y
N
Y
2. Gejdenson (D) . . .
Y
N
Y
3. DeLauro (D) . . .
Y
N
Y
4. Shays (R) . . .
Y
Y
Y
5. Franks (R) . . .
N
Y
N
6. Johnson (R) . . .
N
Y
P
New Jersey
1. Andrews (D) . . .
Y
N
Y
2. Hughes (D) . . .
Y
N
Y
3. Pallone (D) . . .
Y
N
Y
4. Smith (R) . . .
Y
Y
N
5. Roukema (R) . . .
N
Y
N
6. Dwyer (D) . . .
Y
A
A
7. Rinaldo (R) . . .
Y
Y
Y
8. Roe (D) . . .
Y
N
Y
9. Torricelli (D) . . .
Y
N
Y
10. Payne (D) . . .
Y
N
Y
11. Gallo (R) . . .
N
Y
N
12. Zimmer (R) . . .
Y
Y
N
13. Saxton (R) . . .
N
Y
N
14. Guarini (D) . . .
Y
N
Y
New York
1. Hochbrueckner (D) . . .
Y
N
Y
2. Downey (D) . . .
Y
N
Y
3. Mrazek (D) . . .
Y
N
Y
4. Lent (R) . . .
N
Y
N
5. McGrath (R) . . .
N
Y
Y
6. Flake (D) . . .
Y
N
Y
7. Ackerman (D) . . .
Y
N
Y
8. Scheuer (D) . . .
Y
N
Y
9. Manton (D) . . .
Y
N
Y
10. Schumer (D) . . .
Y
N
Y
11. Towns (D) . . .
Y
N
Y
12. Owens (D) . . .
Y
N
Y
13. Solarz (D) . . .
Y
N
Y
14. Molinari (R) . . .
N
Y
N
15. Green (R) . . .
Y
Y
P
16. Rangel (D) . . .
Y
N
Y
17. Weiss (D) . . .
Y
N
Y
18. Serrano (D) . . .
Y
N
Y
19. Engel (D) . . .
Y
N
Y
20. Lowey (D) . . .
Y
N
Y
21. Fish (R) . . .
Y
Y
P
22. Gilman (R) . . .
Y
Y
Y
23. McNulty (D) . . .
Y
N
Y
24. Solomon (R) . . .
N
Y
P
25. Boehlert (R) . . .
Y
Y
N
26. Martin (R) . . .
A
A
A
27. Walsh (R) . . .
N
Y
N
28. McHugh (D) . . .
Y
N
Y
29. Horton (R) . . .
N
Y
N
30. Slaughter (D) . . .
Y
N
Y
31. Paxon (R) . . .
N
Y
N
32. LaFalce (D) . . .
Y
N
Y
33. Nowak (D) . . .
Y
N
Y
34. Houghton (R) . . .
N
Y
N
KEY: Y Yea; N Nay; (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.


Campaign Trailese
Bill Clinton is good at
sophistry
," sneered Jerry Brown, who surfaces every 16 years to win a few late primaries on the solipsism platform. "It means 'to make the weak word stronger,' " he added to reporters unfamiliar with coverage of a vocabularian. "Look it up."
I did.
Sophistry
means "false argument; fallacious reasoning." It can be extended to "scholarly-sounding deception; the abuse of learning to mislead." Perhaps some dictionary somewhere can be found to back up Mr.
Brown's meaning, but that sense is not in the history of the word in the Oxford English Dictionary.


Sexual Harassment, With TV as the Jury
Sexual harassment and date rape.
No issues are being brought more forcefully into the public arena.
And from sitcoms to dramas to the coverage of real trials, television has become a powerful conduit in the process -- sometimes in curiously offbeat ways.
Following the Clarence Thomas-Anita Hill hearings last year on her charges of sexual harassment, the CBS series "Designing Women" wasted no time in producing a scathingly outspoken episode, including clips from the Senate subcommittee sessions, that came down unmistakably on the side of Ms.
Hill.
A few weeks ago, with an obvious nod to the rape trial of the former heavyweight champion Mike Tyson, "L.A. Law" on NBC had Grace Van Owen (Susan Dey) irritating her colleagues by agreeing to defend a baseball player accused of rape.
The final twist found the acquitted athlete admitting to a troubled Van Owen that he was indeed guilty.
Surrounded by adoring groupies, he walked off with a sheepish smile.


Review/Theater; Brother vs. Brother in a Dangerous Game
"Blood Knot," the 1961 two-character drama that established the reputation of the playwright Athol Fugard, is not an easy play.
A rambling, two-and-a-half-hour dialogue between Morris and Zachariah, two South African brothers of mixed racial background, it is as austere and claustrophobic as one of Samuel Beckett's metaphysical meditations.
Rituals of daily life -- the symbolic ringing of Morris's alarm clock; Zachariah's soaking of his tired feet in bath salts at the end of each workday -- are repeated and drawn out with a solemnity that borders on tedium.
Not until well into the second act of "Blood Knot" do its carefully set up emotional fireworks begin to detonate.
But the play, which the Acting Company, the long-running touring repertory group, has revived at the John Jay Theater in performances that continue through Wednesday, is also a classic.
Slowly and methodically, it compiles a shattering vision of the horror of apartheid that erupts when the brothers playact the racial antagonisms that have tragically divided their country.
Donning a business suit and twirling an umbrella that becomes a vicious weapon, Morris, who is light-skinned enough to "pass" as white, pretends to be a white boss humiliating his darker-skinned brother.
The game is so emotionally loaded that the two players quickly become carried away.


'Father' of SoHo
To the Editor:
I would like to comment on your article on March 15 headed "The Irascible 'Father' of SoHo."


Nothing Magical
To the Editor:
Daniel Goleman's article presented creativity as "magic" and "unimaginable perfection," but it seems to me that creativity is as much a mixture of motivation, hard work and dogged persistence.
Although magic is appealing, it is a word that makes creativity unapproachable and leads to the widespread belief that some have the ability to be creative and some do not.


Ms. Hamburg, A Lawyer, Wed
Jeanne Melissa Hamburg, an associate in the New York law firm of Coudert Brothers, and Dr.
Jay Alan Schechtman, a resident in rehabilitation medicine at the Mount Sinai Medical Center in New York, were married last evening at the Sephardic Temple in Cedarhurst, L.I.
Rabbi Arnold B. Marans officiated.
Ms.
Hamburg, who is 25 years old and is keeping her name, graduated magna cum laude from Wellesley College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She got her law degree from Columbia University, where she was an editor of The Law Review.
She is a daughter of C. Bruce Hamburg and Stephanie Barbara Hamburg of Forest Hills Gardens, Queens.
Her father is a founding partner of the New York law firm of Jordan &amp; Hamburg and an author of several books on patent law.
Her mother is a school psychologist in Long Island City, Queens.


The Executive Life; Honk If You Love My New Wheels
In this city, where what you leave in your clearly marked studio parking space or in the hands of a valet parking attendant tells the world who you are, even the law yields to the hierarchy of car culture.
"When you come to a four-way stop in Beverly Hills, between Santa Monica and Sunset, you defer to whoever has the snazziest car," says the screenwriter Floyd Byars, "If they see any marks on your car, they're going first."


Easter Dinner as an Evocation of Spring
EASTER dinner is as much a celebration of spring as a religious festival.
But we have become so used to produce being available year round, that it is easy to forget what comes into season when.
Asparagus, morels, baby lamb and strawberries are at their peak now, and the following is an Easter dinner to remind us that spring, along with the first crocuses and daffodils in the garden, has finally arrived.
Morels are highly prized mushrooms; they are dark brown with honeycombed caps and a meaty taste.
Most of them come from the Pacific Northwest, Michigan, Wisconsin and some parts of the East Coast.
Their season begins now and runs into July.
They make a delicious first course simmered in light cream and served with asparagus.


Israeli Troops Destroy 7 Houses in Lebanon
Israeli troops have demolished seven houses in southern Lebanon belonging to Shiite Muslim families whose members were suspected of aiding Muslim guerrillas, security officials said here today.
The officials said Israeli soldiers assisted by their client militia, the South Lebanon Army, had blown up the homes in the town of Houla, where guerrillas ambushed an Israeli military convoy this week, killing two soldiers and wounding five others before they themselves were killed.


Jennifer Tierney Wed
Jennifer Elizabeth Tierney, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Kenneth Tierney of Norwalk, Conn., was married yesterday in New York to Michael Dennis Melaniff, a son of Madelyn Melaniff of Islip, N.Y., and the late Robert D. Melaniff.
The Rev.
Charles Quinn officiated at the Roman Catholic Church of Our Saviour.
Mrs.
Tierney Melaniff, 24 years old, is the assistant manager for public relations of Lancome Paris in New York.
Mr.
Melaniff, 30, is a foreign exchange dealer for Standard Chartered Bank in New York.


Campaign Ditties
For years candidates have used particular songs to set the tone of a campaign and underline its message.
But the notion has yet to take hold among this year's candidates.
President Bush, Patrick J. Buchanan and Edmund G. Brown Jr. don't have official tunes, though Gov.
Bill Clinton's aides say they are searching for a theme song for their candidate.
Perhaps they can take some inspiration from Terry Waldo and the Convention Stompers, his jazz ensemble.
At Michael's Pub in Manhattan through Saturday, the band is celebrating campaign songs of the past.
Here are a few.


Feminism and the Wild Man
To the Editor:
I have no problem at all with the gist of Jill Johnston's essay "Why Iron John Is No Gift to Women." I question why she didn't point out that both "Iron John" and Robert Bly's pandering to male inadequacy are even less a gift to men.


Amy G. Schmitt Married in West
Amy Gillette Schmitt, the daughter of Paul F. Schmitt of Novato, Calif., and Anne G. Briggin of Menlo Park, Calif., was married yesterday to Andrew Waldron Faulkner, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Winthrop W. Faulkner of Washington.
The Rev.
Joan Hull, a Unitarian minister, officiated at Beaulieu Gardens in Rutherford, Calif.
Mrs.
Faulkner, 28 years old, teaches at the Old Mill School, an elementary school in Mill Valley, Calif.
She graduated from California College of Arts and Crafts and has a teaching credential from Dominican College.
Her father owns Schmitt &amp; Company, a real-estate developer in Novato, Calif.
Her mother is the associate director of the San Francisco International Visitors' Center.


Streetscapes: Casa Italiana; Renovating a Campus Curio
IN recent decades it has been in eclipse, a tall palazzo with a slightly foggy purpose, isolated from the campus that physically surrounds it.
But now Columbia University's 1927 Casa Italiana is scheduled for a restoration aimed at burnishing both its physical and its intellectual presence on the campus.
According to research by the Landmarks Preservation Commission, which designated the building in 1978, Casa Italiana had its roots in an Italian Club for students founded at Columbia in 1914.
This was a time when Italian immigration formed a new laboring class in New York City and Italians faced widespread discrimination.
By the 1920's, the club had expanded and an entire building was proposed as a center for Italian studies.


Alicia J. Hoyt To Wed in June
Mr. and Mrs.
Harvey R. Hoyt of Greenwich, Conn., have announced June wedding plans for their daughter, Alicia Jeanne Hoyt, and Richard Nicholas Hamilton, the son of Margo Goetz of Denver and Dr.
Richard Hamilton of Littleton, Colo.
Ms.
Hoyt, 25 years old, graduated from St.
Lawrence University and is a media planner for the J. Walter Thompson Company in Denver.
Her father is a senior vice president of Kidder Peabody &amp; Company in Greenwich.
Her mother, Alice Hoyt, is a real-estate broker at Sally O'Brien Associates in Greenwich.


Face Lift for Galleria in White Plains
LIKE many shopping centers of its vintage, the Galleria at White Plains has begun to show its years.
The 880,000- square-foot enclosed mall in the heart of the city's urban downtown area is due for a face lifting, say its owners, who are planning to spend $8 million on the project.
"Times change," said Gerald M. Cope, a Philadelphia architect who has been hired to design changes for the mall, which was completed in 1980.
"The Galleria is looking a bit tired. It needs to be more contemporary, more upbeat." Most shopping centers, the architect said, need refurbishing every 10 or 12 years to keep pace with shifts in marketing and consumer trends.


Making a Difference; Another Side To Upside
When Anthony B. Perkins created Upside magazine three years ago, one of the role models he chose for the scrappy Silicon Valley monthly was Forbes.
Last week, Forbes returned the compliment by forming a joint venture with Upside to create a new quarterly technology supplement, to be called Forbes ASAP.
"Forbes represents corporate America; Upside represents technological America," said Mr.
Perkins, a 33-year-old former banking executive and political organizer who co-founded the magazine with Richard Karlgaard, the editor in chief.
"We perceived there is an information gap that exists between the two worlds."


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester; Recent Sales
Norwalk, Conn. 427,500
20 Covewood Drive  4-bedroom, 3-bath colonial; layout suited to home office, views of Long Island Sound, 0.5 acre; taxes $5,883.
Wallingford, Conn. 164,000
412 North Main Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 82-year-old Dutch colonial; plaster walls, new furnace, walk to town, 0.33 acre; taxes $2,381.
Wilton, Conn. 360,000
4 Holly Place  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 25-year-old gambrel colonial; newly painted interior, solar hot water, 1.9 acres; taxes $4,344.
Armonk, N.Y. 327,000
15 Byram Brook Place
5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 27-year-old ranch; fireplace, eat-in kitchen, family room, den, 1.2 acres; taxes $5,520.
Briarcliff Manor, N.Y. 850,000
67 Ridgecrest Road
5-bedroom, 4-bath, 45-year-old ranch; fireplace, stone terrace, den, Jacuzzi, indoor lap pool, wine cellar; taxes $18,935.
South Salem, N.Y. 303,000
East Street  6-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 16-year-old colonial; formal dining room, eat-in kitchen, deck; taxes $4,400.
OTHER AREAS Bayport, L.I. 170,000
7 Cole Court  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 6-year-old contemporary; eat-in kitchen, den, 1-car garage; taxes $5,400.
Absecon, N.J. 205,000
1025 Marlborough Avenue
5-bedroom, 3-bath, 28-year-old colonial, three porches, landscaped; taxes $4,582.
Egg Harbor City, N.J. 97,000
339 Philadelphia Avenue
4-bedroom, 3-bath, 50-year-old colonial; skylights, new kitchen, full basement; taxes $2,637


Deborah Platt To Wed in June
Sidney Platt of Glen Cove, L.I., has announced the engagement of his daughter Dr.
Deborah Platt to Dr.
Jeffrey Weiss, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jesse Weiss of Fairfield, Conn.
A June wedding is planned.
Dr.
Platt, 33 years old, is an attending anesthesiologist at the Nassau County Medical Center in East Meadow, L.I.
She graduated from the University of Massachusetts and received her M.D. from the University of Health Sciences in Kansas City, Mo.
Her father is a founder of Data Communication Inc., an engineering services concern in Plainview, L.I.
Her mother was the late Sally Platt.


POINT COUNTERPOINT ON I.B.M.
In an article on the Forum page on March 22, Webster Brown, a former engineer with International Business Machines Corporation, wrote about his 26 years with I.B.M.
He told of how the optimism with which he signed on in 1964 for what probably would be a lifetime career eroded to the point that two years ago he took voluntary retirement at the age of 54.
He said he feared that had he stayed at the company, he would be weeded out by an employee appraisal system "which gets tougher each year, that seems designed to sweep the company clean of employees who, however loyal and competent, no longer fit in at I.B.M."


Cruise to Focus On the Palate
A voyage with a French chef and a wine expert that will lead passengers to vineyards and kitchens in France, Spain and Portugal is scheduled aboard the 80-passenger Aurora II.
The chef, Jacques Pepin, author of "The Short Cut Cook," will give two cooking demonstrations at sea and lecture on the legacy of nouvelle cuisine.
David Rosengarten, a wine writer, will discuss matching wine with food.
The trip, from Aug. 30 to Sept. 12, starts with two nights in Bordeaux, France.
From nearby Pauillac the ship sails for Bilbao, Spain, and then calls at Oporto and Lisbon in Portugal, and, in Spain, Cadiz and Motril (there is an optional excursion to Granada) and Barcelona.
Fares range, depending on the cabin, from $3,845 to $5,245 a person, double occupancy, and include two nights' accommodations with breakfast at a hotel in Bordeaux, all meals on board and the lectures and demonstrations.
Air fare is not included.
Classical Cruises, sponsors of the trip, says it has arranged round-trip air fare from New York to Bordeaux and from Barcelona to New York for $995.
Classical Cruises is a division of Travel Dynamics, 132 East 70th Street, New York, N.Y. 10021; (212) 794-3200 or, out of state, (800) 252-7745.


Technology; A Celebration of Isaac Asimov
I reached the point where I could not bear to read another science fiction novel one spring day during my freshman year of college.
It was the height of the Vietnam War and science fiction suddenly seemed irrelevant.
I remember that moment now because I had just reread Isaac Asimov's "Foundation" trilogy for the third time.
In fact, in the preceding eight years, I had read little else besides science fiction.
There were countless trips to the library and an untold number of Ace doubles, two science fiction novels bound as one, purchased at the local junk store for 10 cents and sold back for 5.
There were books by Robert Heinlein, Arthur C. Clarke and Andre Norton, but above all there was Asimov.
His endless stream of stories about space adventures and robots were far more compelling than anything television could offer.


Abroad at Home; The British Message
Any Democrat who thinks it will be easy to beat George Bush because this country is in a recession should look at the British election results.
Economic misery is worse in Britain and has been going on far longer.
Yet the Conservatives, in power for 13 years, won again.
Why?
Of course there are many reasons for the Tory victory.
But first among them, I am convinced, is that millions of Britons are now middle-class property-owners, more interested in raising their own living standards than in alleviating public squalor.


Virginia Caucuses Begin


Park Named for Wounded Police Officer


A Vintage Monteux Concert Surfaces
Here's to the mysterious ways of the record world.
On May 31, 1963, Pierre Monteux conducted the London Symphony Orchestra and the pianist John Ogdon in an all-Tchaikovsky concert at the Vienna Festival, comprising "Romeo and Juliet," the First Piano Concerto and the Fifth Symphony.
For reasons no one has been able to reconstruct, the American Vanguard label recorded the performance but then filed away the tapes.
Monteux died 13 months later.
Ogdon, who in 1962 had shared the Tchaikovsky Competition's gold medal with Vladimir Ashkenazy, made a respectable career as an individualistic interpreter with a huge technique, and died in 1989.
Some of the London Symphony's principals -- Barry Tuckwell, for example, who rendered the horn solo in the Andante Cantabile of the Fifth Symphony with velvety smoothness -- went on to greater glory as soloists.
But the tapes lay forgotten until Vanguard reorganized its archive last year, and the concert is only now being released on disk (Vanguard Classics OVC 8031/2; two CD's).


CAMPUS LIFE: Princeton; 4-Year Colleges Might Diminish Dining Clubs' Role
PRINCETON - For more than a century, eating clubs have been critical to the social life for juniors and seniors at Princeton University.
The clubs have provided students with a place to eat, with an automatic circle of friends and with a tie to the university after they graduate.
But this may come to an end.
A committee has recommended that the university study moving to a four-year college system from its two-year system.
The committee, appointed by the university president, Harold Shapiro, said in a report that the university is studying, that the system could "strengthen the interaction between undergraduate residential life and the university's basic academic mission."


Joshua Lerman and Christina Frank to Marry
June wedding plans have been announced for Christina Bess Frank, an associate editor at The New York Times Syndication Sales Corporation and a freelance writer, and Joshua Carl Lerman, an associate editor at Skiing magazine, both in New York.
Ms.
Frank, 28 years old, is the daughter of Mrs.
John A. Frank of New York and the late Dr.
Frank.
Mr.
Lerman, 29, is the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul Lerman of Teaneck, N.J.


Corrections
The Wall Street Column last Sunday, about health care stocks, misstated the drop in admissions to psychiatric hospitals owned by National Medical Enterprises of Santa Monica, Calif.
Admissions fell 35 percent in Texas, Florida and New Jersey and were down 4.7 percent nationally in the three months ending Feb. 29, 1992, compared with year-earlier levels.


Adrienne Marshall Plans Wedding
Dr. and Mrs.
Joseph G. Marshall of Falls Church, Va., have announced the engagement of their daughter Adrienne Jo Marshall to Thomas Phillip Boschwitz, a son of Ellen and Rudy Boschwitz of Minneapolis and Washington.
A September wedding is planned.
Ms.
Marshall, 23 years old, is a sales associate at Neiman Marcus in Minneapolis and a graduate of Macalester College.
Her father is a gynecologist in Washington.
Her mother, Linda Marshall, is a microbiologist in Washington.


Business Diary/April 5-10
INTERNATIONAL Worry Around the World as Japan's Stock Market Wobbles


Style Makers; Julienne Dolphin-Wilding, Furniture Designer
Julienne Dolphin-Wilding designs and builds her furniture in an 18th-floor apartment in London.
It is no palace, but some of the chairs she designs look more like primitive thrones than conventional furniture.
Miss Dolphin-Wilding, 31, who is 6 feet tall and has dreadlocks Medusa would have prized, makes chairs from found or recycled materials.
"The sizes range from the normal to the gigantic," she said.
She uses driftwood of elm and yew, plain or carved logs and planks, bits of metal and ship fittings, and wraps them with twine in a variety of colors.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Behind the Scenes; To President's Campaign Manager, It's Been a Season of Smooth Sailing
Public approval of George Bush's Presidency has been scraping along at historic lows for two months.
A third of all Republican voters have consistently rejected the President through the spring's primaries.
A drumbeat of news reports is depicting the White House as adrift and bereft of bright ideas.
And the prevailing view of Mr.
Bush's campaign performance is that it has been, ah, uneven.
Not to worry, says Robert M. Teeter.


Trenton Frees Trash Haulers to Alter Fees
A NEW era will dawn on Tuesday for New Jersey's waste haulers and for the millions of homes and businesses that use their services.
On that day, the state will begin to loosen its grip on an industry that has been subject to some of the nation's strictest, most pervasive regulations.
For the first time in 20 years, trash haulers will be free to raise or lower the fees they charge customers, within certain limits, without obtaining state approval.


Outpouring of Sympathy For Dog, but Not Master
When a taxi jumped a curb in midtown Manhattan on Monday, two bystanders were struck and seriously injured.
Since then, one victim has received four get-well cards and a handful of visitors.
The second has received hundreds of cards; 300 to 400 people have called each day to ask about him, and well-wishers have contributed hundreds of dollars to insure that he receives good care.
The first victim is an elderly blind man. The second is his dog.


TALES FROM THE BABY FACTORY
As is the case with all developing fields, advanced reproductive technology has its share of unanswered questions, and some practitioners and clinics are more skilled than others.
What women need are facts so that they can make informed choices.
They need to ask specific questions:
1.
How many women of my age and with my problem have had a live birth under the clinic's supervision or under the doctor's care?
2. How was this achieved?
3.
What are the known side effects and possible future side effects of the treatment? 4.
What emotional and educational supports are available?


Linda Wrigley Marries Nicholas Rizopoulos
Linda Wrigley, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John F. Wrigley of Egg Harbor, N.J., was married in New York yesterday to Nicholas Xenophon Rizopoulos, the son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Xenophon Rizopoulos of Athens, Greece.
Jacqueline Silbermann, an administrative judge of the New York City Civil Court, officiated at the home of Sherwin M. Goldman.


More Power to Feiner And His Approach
Town Supervisor Paul J. Feiner of Greenburgh can do no right, according to the article "From Gadfly to Supervisor, a Rocky Path for Feiner" on March 29.
As an example, it reports that one policy that generates "intensely negative reaction is his prohibition of driving town cars home at night" and says this policy has been linked to destruction of vehicles at the town garage, even though five out of six such vehicles were vandalized before Mr.
Feiner took office.
It adds that Mr.
Feiner's private car was vandalized during his first month in office, the implication being that he somehow brought it on himself.


The Colonial Splendor of Guanajuato
AS they rode over the dry hills that fold into what is now the city of Guanajuato, 16th-century Spanish colonizers must have sensed something familiar.
The flaxen landscape, bleached by white rocks and livened only by the olive scrub, could have covered parts of the Castilian plateau.
The sun, though cooler at 6,700 feet, was nearly as bright.
And beneath the surface of the land lay the sort of riches they had seen in dreams.
The discovery of silver sometime in the mid-1550's brought Guanajuato into being.
A series of later strikes turned it from a fortress stop on the Camino Real between Mexico City and the great mines of Zacatecas into a rich, vibrant city with few rivals anywhere in the colonies.
Its wealthiest citizens took Spanish titles, built lavish churches and elegant haciendas and kept up on the gossip in Madrid.
But they also raised schools, seminaries and a university that kept current on the more radical ideas coursing through Europe.
And at the end of the 18th century, when Mexicans began to assert their independence from the crown, Guanajuatenses were in the forefront.


Reporter's Notebook; Call Is Out to Iran's Rich: Cut Excess
They are the revolutionary rich, a cast of thousands who have monopolized foreign trade, manipulated the exchange rates and made fortunes on the 13-year reign of the ayatollahs.
Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini built his 1979 revolution on promises to lift Iran's "oppressed" out of grinding poverty, and until his death in 1989 he lived in a modest home on a diet of mostly rice, raisins and yogurt.
But there is nothing un-Islamic about getting rich, and under his regime, many people made a lot of money.


MEMO TO THE REPUBLICANS
In his "Memo to the Republicans" (March 15), Roger J. Stone says the Democrats oppose Government support of vouchers that could be used for private schools because they "oppose choice and empowerment." But what Stone neglects to mention is that such vouchers would pay only a fraction of a student's private-school tuition, leaving thousands of dollars a year to be paid by the family.
Only the well-to-do would be able to take advantage of the "choice" offered by such a plan.


Glorious Roses Require Careful Tending
FORSYTHIA in bloom and pruning of roses seem to go together as far as gardeners are concerned.
The reason for this is patience.
By waiting until the forsythia blooms, gardeners can see which rose buds are sprouting and where the winter was severe.
Sometimes rose canes are killed by tough winters, and this one had low temperatures and no snow cover.
Many rose canes and the buds were killed.
Those buds that do sprout may be inner buds.
If left to grow, they would be inside stems.


TALES FROM THE BABY FACTORY
As a couple who've experienced infertility for more than seven years, we have come to know another insidious side of the quest to conceive.
Although the stress caused by financial burdens, medications, schedules and perhaps failure is real, it is also somewhat short-term.
With termination of infertility therapy, much of this stress disappears.
What remains is the conditioning of scheduled lovemaking, and decisions based on maximizing fertility.
What is lost is romance and spontaneity.
It is here that the truly devastating tales of the baby factory lie.
JIM AND MARY ELLEN SLADE
Manalapan, N.J.


A Growing Movement Fights Diets Instead of Fat
To a growing number of diet-weary American women and to a vanguard of weight-loss professionals, the recent assessment of the National Institutes of Health confirmed something they already knew.
"Diets don't work," said Susan Wooley, director of the eating disorders clinic at the University of Cincinnati and a professor of psychiatry there.
"Evidence suggests that weight-loss regimes do more harm than good."


Straying From Country's Straight and Narrow
If country music were a road, Lyle Lovett and K. D. Lang would be standing somewhere deep in the fields on either side.
The country style, so reverent of its traditions, evolves along a straight and narrow course, outlined by strict principles of tempo (achingly slow ballads, gently rocking upbeats), instrumentation (dripping pedal steel, a touch of fiddle) and subject matter (relationships, family, a hard day's work).
Modern country allows for individualism, but only in tandem with an overriding respect for tradition.
The more skillfully a singer reworks the formula to his or her advantage, the better the chance of finding gold on the highway (and having a hit on country radio).
Right now, Garth Brooks is hurtling along the yellow line.
Since Mr.
Lovett and Ms.
Lang made their debuts in the mid-1980's, they have steadfastly refused to stay within country's predetermined boundaries; both have new albums that continue in this direction.
Gifted with clear, strong voices and possessed of two of the sickest senses of humor to hit country since Minnie Pearl forgot to remove her price tag, both have warped and bent country traditions to suit their own peculiar visions.
Neither even looks the part of a country singer.
Put a cowboy hat atop Mr.
Lovett's tall, sculpted do, and it would sit a few inches above his head; plop one on Ms.
Lang's short, shorn locks, and she would seem bald.
"I ain't never been no cowboy," sings Mr.
Lovett in "Cowboy Man," from his 1986 eponymous debut album.
"Heaven knows I've tried."


Dollar Is Down Against Pound
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
132.90
133.40
136.30
per Dollar
German Mark
1.6365
1.6260
1.6830
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.1868
1.1885
1.1509
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.7655
1.7421
1.7782
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$340.65
$340.70
$359.50
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Jewish, Irish, Cuban: It's Music to His Ears
Andy Statman lives in the Flatbush section of Brooklyn, in a modest house filled with children and musical instruments.
It is a home resonant with delightful sounds.
Mr.
Statman is a man of many talents and strong faith.
And he makes time everyday for his music and his faith.
He plays the mandolin, the clarinet, the saxophone and the guitar, and he studies the Torah.


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester; Affordable Housing Law Brews a Storm
A RISING storm has begun to swirl around Connecticut legislation that was designed to shift some of the responsibility for affordable housing from overburdened cities to the suburbs.
The law is aimed at towns in which fewer than 10 percent of the dwellings are classified as affordable.
At least a dozen resulting lawsuits, with dozens more expected, are winding through the courts on the heels of the first one to reach a judicial decision early last month.


Peruvian Official Assails Pressure From U.S.
In an interview before his departure for talks in Washington, Peru's Foreign Minister bitterly criticized the Bush Administration for putting pressure on other governments to isolate President Alberto Fujimori, who seized broad power last Sunday in what many people are calling a civil-military coup.
The Foreign Minister, Augustino Blacker Miller, said in the interview late Friday night that Mr.
Fujimori's action had wide popular support among Peruvians and wondered how the United States could be so "naive" as to lump Peru's situation with the military takeover in Haiti last year.


Grabbing for Royalties in the Digital Age
If i were a member of Congress in this election year, I would have grave doubts about voting for a bill that imposes a new tax, constrains a common form of home entertainment and yields revenue not to the government but, primarily, to multinational corporations -- two in Japan and one each in Germany, the Netherlands, Great Britain and the United States.
Amazingly enough, the proposed Audio Home Recording Act has a good chance of slipping through Congress this spring.
The bill, which has a large, bipartisan roster of sponsors, does not affect the analog tapes used in millions of home cassette machines and exempts video recording and computer disks.
It assesses a royalty on blank digital cassettes and blank disks as well as home digital recorders -- which means, for the moment, digital audiotape recorders (DAT) and two devices soon to be introduced, the digital compact cassette (DCC) and the mini-disk, a CD that can also record music.
It also requires manufacturers of home digital recorders to include a "serial copy management system," an electronic marvel that prevents people from making more than one copy of a piece of music.
With wonderful legal double talk, the bill says it guarantees consumers the right to non-commercial digital copying -- but for a price.


Coins
The Mint's Mistakes
The United States Mint makes every effort to catch its own mistakes.
Yet errors do slip through.
In fact, so many things can go wrong that it's surprising that any good coins are produced.
But they are, and 15 billion of them are sent out each year from mints in Philadelphia and Denver.


Penny Harvest Raises Money for Charities
Theodore Faro Gross has a thought for your pennies.
Last year, Mr.
Gross, a 42-year-old playwright and an author of children's books, founded Common Cents.
Enlisting schoolchildren and other volunteers, the group went door to door collecting more than $103,000 in coins that had accumulated in pockets, drawers and jars.
He put the proceeds to better use helping the poor and the homeless.


Does Critic Have What It Takes Teach?
When the going gets rough, people start bashing the teachers.
Witness the Letter to the Editor by Martin Davis  [ March 22 ] .
For years, teachers were among the lowest paid of the professions and the valuable work that they do.
Yet the old myths continue: "they enjoy short workdays," and those "who have reached the 15th step now get approximately $77,000 a year in salary and benefits."
Maybe some administrators make outlandish sums; few teachers do.
I have two master's degrees and have been teaching for 24 years, which puts me near the top of my district's salary scale.
Believe me, my pay is nowhere near the figure cited by Mr.
Davis.


When Presidential Slogans Meet the Realities of Government
To the Editor:
Presidential campaign slogans are surprisingly consistent.
Recent White House aspirants have extended the litany of these exercises in political hyperbole.
Pat Buchanan's "America First," Bill Clinton's "New Covenant," Tom Harkin's "New New Deal" and Paul Tsongas's "New American Mandate" typify the sloganeering that has characterized the style of the Presidential terrain:


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
JEWISH folk tales and Jewish stories belong in the library alongside the tales of other peoples, alongside Andersen and Grimm, Norse adventures and Indian myths.
Every culture invents stories, shapes them to fit a communal soul, tells them to its children and passes them down through the generations.
Reading these traditional stories we recognize one another's fears and triumphs; we recognize our own.
A story can turn strangers into friends.


Editorial Notebook; The Horror Files
People throughout Eastern Europe struggle with the question of how to deal with the contents of Big Brother's files.
Is there a middle ground between total amnesty and wholesale purges in post-dictatorial societies?
What seems to be a morally defensible answer emerged at a conference I attended recently in Salzburg.
Politicians, lawyers and scholars from very different countries in Europe and Latin America joined to appraise a common problem.
Ordinary people who have suffered under different brands of tyranny -- Communist or rightist military juntas -- understandably seek retribution.
Yet doing so may shatter social peace, divide new democracies and punish the innocent as well as the guilty.


Taking Care of Some Million-Dollar Knees and Shoulders
AFTER Dwight (Doc) Gooden underwent surgery last fall on his shoulder, the operation set off months of speculation by baseball fans as to the ability of the Mets pitcher to play this season and to recover fully.
Nobody knows the condition of Mr.
Gooden's shoulder better than Dr.
David W. Altchek of Mamaroneck.
"It's coming along great," Dr.
Altchek said of Mr.
Gooden's shoulder.
"Doc is very motivated and has built up the musculature very well during the off season. He has done all he can to protect that shoulder, and he should do well."


Players Learn to Look For the Inside Pitch
Andres Galarraga had worked so diligently all spring, he had regained the batting stroke that had made him a productive hitter in the four seasons before last year.
Lenny Dykstra was ready to resume his role as an everyday player after collisions with a tree and an outfield fence limited him to 63 games in 1991.
Derek Bell eagerly wanted to show why he was such a widely heralded rookie.
But only days into the season, all three -- Galarraga, Dykstra, Bell -- had their plans disrupted.
All were victims, in effect, of culture shock, baseball style.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: April 12, 1992
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
11
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
2
11
FRIED GREEN TOMATOES AT THE WHISTLE STOP CAFE, by Fannie Flagg. (McGraw-Hill, $6.95.) An elderly woman reminisces about six decades of life in rural Alabama.
3
3
LONGSHOT, by Dick Francis. (Fawcett, $5.99.) An author of survival guides attempts to write about the world of horse racing.
4
49
THE PRINCE OF TIDES, by Pat Conroy. (Bantam, $5.99.) Complex family relationships in South Carolina's low country and New York City.
5
8
LOVES MUSIC, LOVES TO DANCE, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Pocket, $5.99.) Two women get caught in the snare of a serial killer.
6
4
THE SHERBROOKE BRIDE, by Catherine Coulter. (Jove, $5.99.) A tangled romance in which a man marries the sister of his intended bride.
7
8
HEARTBEAT, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $6.50.) A chance meeting of a man and a woman, both successful in television, brings them happiness.
8
2
PASTIME, by Robert B. Parker. (Berkley, $5.99.) The private eye Spenser helps a young man rescue his mother from the toils of a shady boyfriend.
9
21
JURASSIC PARK, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A biotechnician clones dinosaurs for use in a theme park.
10
3
PERFECT PARTNERS, by Jayne Ann Krentz. (Pocket, $5.50.) The romance of a woman who inherits a giant business and the man who runs it.
11
3
CHAINS OF COMMAND, by W. A. McCay and E. L. Flood. (Pocket, $4.99.) "Star Trek" 's Enterprise is caught in a conflict between extraterrestrial humans and a birdlike race.
12
6
DAMAGE, by Josephine Hart. (Ivy, $5.99.) A British gentleman is mesmerized when he meets the woman his son plans to marry.
13
6
EYES OF PREY, by John Sandford. (Berkley, $5.99.) A serial killer in the Twin Cities.
14 *
6
THE DRUID OF SHANNARA, by Terry Brooks. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $5.99.) Continuing the story of life in the fantasy land of Shannara.
15
2
BODY OF EVIDENCE, by Patricia D. Cornwell. (Avon, $5.99.) A Virginia medical examiner probes the grisly death of a reclusive writer.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
5
YOU'LL NEVER EAT LUNCH IN THIS TOWN AGAIN, by Julia Phillips. (Signet, $6.99.) Life in Hollywood as experienced by an Academy Award-winning producer.
2
4
IF YOU REALLY LOVED ME, by Ann Rule. (Pocket, $5.99.) The bizarre family relationships behind the murder of the wife of a California entrepreneur.
3
47
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak and how the sexes can understand each other better.
4
8
IRON JOHN, by Robert Bly. (Vintage, $11.) The passage of the male from boyhood into manhood, as practiced in various cultures.
5
39
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France, as described by an Englishman who went there with his wife and their dogs.
6
440
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist. (LP)
7 *
5
PREDATOR, by Jack Olsen. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) The story of a serial rapist in Washington State.
8
11
AND THE SEA WILL TELL, by Vincent Bugliosi with Bruce B. Henderson. (Ivy, $5.99.) An enigmatic 1974 murder case involving two American couples on a Pacific atoll.
9
124
ALL I REALLY NEED TO KNOW I LEARNED IN KINDERGARTEN, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspirational essays.
10
3
PLAIN AND SIMPLE, by Sue Bender. (HarperSanFrancisco, $10.95.) An urban woman finds peace of mind and a satisfying way of life through visits to Amish communities in Iowa and Ohio.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
4
ATTACK OF THE DERANGED MUTANT KILLER MONSTER SNOW GOONS, by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $8.95.) "Calvin and Hobbes" cartoons.
2
35
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
3
83
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.50.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
4
64
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles for success.
5
32
THE T-FACTOR DIET, by Martin Katahn. (Bantam, $4.95.) A regimen for weight loss.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


From Above the Andes
Marilyn Bridges's striking black-and-white aerial photographs taken in Peru during 1988 and 1989 give an otherworldly view of a country too often noted for cholera, inflation, economic scandals and political terrorism.
Flying over the country's majestic terrain, Ms.
Bridges recorded abstract patterns and forms, concentrating on archeological traces of earlier Andean peoples.
PLANET PERU: An Aerial Journey Through a Timeless Land (Kodak/Aperture, $35) conveys an atmosphere of stillness and wonder quite unlike the usual arid archeological images.
From her elevated perspective, Mrs.
Bridges uses the raking light of early morning and late afternoon to delineate and animate adobe pyramids, ancient roadways and terraced fields.
A large section of the book is devoted to geoglyphs -- drawings and geometric markings made many hundreds of years ago that stretch for miles over the land.
The few photographs that include vestiges of modern life -- a truck on a coastal highway, a desert billboard, a cement factory -- share with the others a concern for formal beauty and the elemental power of nature.
John Hyslop, an archeologist with the Institute of Andean Research and the American Museum of Natural History, provides the accompanying historical commentary on Incan and pre-Incan civilizations, and Fernando Belaunde Terry, a former president of Peru, offers an introduction.
Although the photographs are attractively reproduced, the design of "Planet Peru" does not serve them well.
The horizontal images seem to run together across the pages, and the book's brash Day-Glo cover undermines the seriousness and artistry of its contents.


Driving Safety
To the Editor: Thank you for enhancing the public's awareness of the benefits of day running lights, or D.R.L.'s ("Belts, Lights and Other Aids to Auto Safety," Practical Traveler, Feb. 22).
I have read about their benefits since before Sweden required them in 1982, and I installed them on my cars with considerable benefit.
Installing day running lights is easy in my Volvo 240-S because Volvo incorporated this feature in its parking/turn-signal lamps (rather than the headlights) for its Scandinavian and Canadian markets and merely left out some components for U.S.-bound cars.
I fabricated the missing parts, and now when my engine is on and the regular lights are off, I have a pair of front D.R.L.'s lit by the brighter filament (unused in U.S. cars) of a standard two-filament parking/turn-signal bulb, the same as the brake filament used in combination tail-stop lights.


Fans File a Complaint, But Wilkins Cites Defense
Gerald Wilkins is not deaf.
He has heard the Knicks fans who have booed him for missing jump shots.
He has heard people complain that his play is inconsistent.
But while Wilkins hears the criticism, he has turned a deaf ear.
The way Wilkins sees it, his primary job is to help the Knicks win.


Laura Wessner to Wed Lawrence Policastro Jr.
Mr. and Mrs.
Ernest R. Wessner of Kutztown, Pa., have announced the engagement of their daughter Laura Mary Wessner to Lawrence Joseph Policastro Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Policastro Sr. of Freehold, N.J.
A June wedding is planned.


Other Views On Animal Rights
In response to the animal activist article: These people are not representative of our population and are merely a small, noisy one-dimensional group.
To give up leather to wear canvas -- now, isn't that just nice?
Do they also give up heating their food and homes, or wearing or using synthetics or plastics?
Surely, polluting our environment is of more consequence.
How about the use of leather and fur?
Both are biodegradable, natural resources that we do not deplete.


Jill Klein Is a Bride
Jill Susan Klein, a daughter of Cindy and Kenneth Klein of New Rochelle, N.Y., was married there last evening to Mark Howard Berger, the son of Carol and Joel Berger of Boca Raton, Fla.
Rabbi Melvin Sirner officiated at Beth El Synagogue.
The couple, 26 years old, work at New York advertising agencies, Mrs.
Berger as a print production coordinator for Angotti, Thomas, Hedge, and Mr.
Berger as a media buyer at D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles.


Yugoslav Army Taking More Territory in Bosnia
The Yugoslav Army carved out new territories in Bosnia and Herzegovina today as relief agencies worked frantically to help thousands of refugees fleeing the fighting.
Before dawn, army units invaded the Muslim-Slav town of Modrica, which lies in a strategic corridor linking important Serb enclaves.
This was the clearest indication yet that the partition of Bosnia and Herzegovina is a coordinated effort by the army and the Serbian Government.


Political Talk
Long-Distance Grudge
With all the headaches he has endured as New Jersey's Governor, Jim Florio might feel like hitting the highway for some time away in the Southern sun.
Just tell him to close his eyes when the car gets near Selma, N.C.


149 Guggenheim Fellows Named
The John Simon Guggenheim Memorial Foundation has named 149 artists, scholars and scientists as winners of its 68th annual competition for awards totaling $3,925,000.
Joel Conarroe, the foundation's president, said its six-member Committee of Selection had made its choices from among 3,162 applicants.
He said the Guggenheim Fellows were chosen on the basis of achievement and future promise in their fields.


All About/H.I.V. Testing; The Business of Tracking Deadly Viruses
Last week, when the tennis star Arthur Ashe announced he had AIDS, apparently contracted from a blood transfusion, it dramatized the need for reliable blood testing.
In the United States, about 47 million units of blood were tested last year for H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS, according to David Gurry, president of North American Biologicals Inc., one of the largest independent testing laboratory in the country.
According to the World Health Organization, 10 million to 12 million people around the world are infected with H.I.V.


Q and A
Fire Rating for a Building  Question: I am a member of the board of managers of my condominium.
Our buildings were converted to a condominium after a gut rehabilitation in 1987.
According to our prospectus, we are classified as a nonfireproof, Class 3 complex.
We were issued a certificate of occupancy.
We thought that this would not have been done if the buildings did not meet the city standards.


Life Can Be Sweet on Europe's Subsidized Farms
Standing in the midst of the great green wheat fields of Picardy with the pungent stench of fertilizer in his nostrils, Dominique Mathieu condenses the myriad intricacies of Europe's agricultural policy into a single phrase:
"The more wheat I produce, the more I'm paid," says this French gentleman farmer in a tawny jacket.
"It's as simple as that."


A. T. Gardner to Marry Ms. Harris
Mr. and Mrs.
T.
R.
Harris of Kimberley, Ontario, have announced the engagement of their daughter, Kimberley Patricia Harris, to Andrew Tobias Gardner, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Allan D. Gardner of Chappaqua, N.Y.
A December wedding is planned.
Ms.
Harris and her fiance, both 25 years old, graduated from Harvard University.
She is a health-care consultant with the Wilkerson Group in New York.
Her father is the vice president of finance of Canadian Shipbuilding and Engineering Ltd. in St.
Catharines, Ontario.
Her mother, Noni Harris, is a registered nurse in Kimberley.


A June Bridal For Laura Oot
Mrs.
Terence R. Blackwood of Centreville, Md., has announced the engagement of her daughter Laura Leighton Van Oot to John Daniel Sheridan, a son of Mrs.
Thomas P. Sheridan of the Bronx and the late Mr.
Sheridan.
Miss Oot is also a daughter of the late Albert P. Oot Jr.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Oot, 29 years old, is a cost engineer for Bechtel Inc. in Boston.
She graduated from Brown University.
Her father was the president of the Northeastern Culvert Corporation in Westminster, Vt.
Her stepfather is a farmer in Centreville.


Miss Hawkins Plans Wedding
Mr. and Mrs.
Benjamin Hawkins of Verona, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Cynthia Karen Hawkins, to Daniel Edward Stryker Jr., a son of Mr.
Stryker of Spokane, Wash., and Rosemarie Stryker of Everett, Wash.
A December wedding is planned.
Miss Hawkins, 34 years old, is the manager of finance at Salthouse-Torre-Norton Inc., an advertising agency in Rutherford, N.J.
She graduated from Montclair State College.


Kathy Weilbaecher, Student, Weds
Katherine Nelson Weilbaecher and Michael Hirsch Tomasson, students at the Stanford University Medical School, were married yesterday at the Woodside (Calif.) Village Church.
The Rev.
Albert A. Grosskoff, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony.
The bride, who is 26 years old and is keeping her name, is known as Kathy.
She is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Robert G. Weilbaecher of New Orleans.
She and her husband are to become residents in internal medicine at the Stanford University Medical Center in Palo Alto, Calif., in July.
She graduated magna cum laude from Harvard University.
Her father is an oncologist and her mother, Sharon Weilbaecher, a former medical illustrator, is an artist, both in New Orleans.


First a Raid, Then a Guard
To the Editor:
Barbara Lyne's amusing piece on cellars (The Executive Life, March 22) could give people the wrong impression.
Although Ms.
Lyne merely reports what one customer of Nat Sherman's was told about the disappearance of his cigars, the inference made by the customer is wrong and unfortunate.


Hong Kong-China Fence: No Barrier to Commerce
The wire fence between Hong Kong and China is as sturdy as ever, but it no longer seems to be much of a barrier.
Telephone operators for Hong Kong may soon be based in China, and already some citizens here are finding that it would be cheaper to spend eternity in a burial plot in China.
With the growing integration of Hong Kong and southern China's Guangdong Province, an economic partnership is emerging that in the coming years may become a formidable force in Asia.
Hong Kong is becoming the financial capital for southern China, and it sometimes seems that Hong Kong is taking over China instead of the other way around.


Traveling Heavy
To the Editor: I enjoyed Susan Allen Toth's article "Traveling Heavy" (Feb. 16) because I, too, went through a period of feeling that I must travel "light." And then I always felt guilty when I couldn't.
I always ended up with a suitcase full of "what if's." What if there is a sudden cold spell (heat wave)?
What if it rains even though it is the dry season?
What if I get invited to a formal dinner and only have a spare pair of jeans?
What if I come down with Lyme disease in a country that doesn't know what it is?
My current solution is to plan for any eventuality, and I usually come home with the original creases in half my clothes because I never removed them from the suitcase, and a cosmetic bag full of expensive medicines that I will have to throw away because they will be outdated before I go on my next trip.


Mary Anne Terdiman Is Married
Mary Anne Terdiman, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Allen M. Terdiman of Mamaroneck, N.Y., was married last evening to Steven Phillip Borowka, the son of Carol Billow of Chatham, N.J., and David L. Borowka of New York.
Rabbi Henry Weiner officiated at the Harmonie Club in New York.
Mrs.
Borowka, 26 years old, graduated from the University of Michigan and is a public relations manager at the Kimco Hotel and Restaurant Management Company in San Francisco.
Her father is a psychiatrist in New York.
Her mother, Jo Ann Terdiman, is the president of It's Jo Ann's Tag Sales in Scarsdale, N.Y.


New &amp; Noteworthy
I REMEMBER BALANCHINE: Recollections of the Ballet Master by Those Who Knew Him, by Francis Mason. (Anchor/Doubleday, $15.) The author interviewed more than 85 of the choreographer's colleagues and friends, ranging from Rudolf Nureyev to a men's wardrobe supervisor at the New York City Ballet.
"This book is less than a biography, yet it catches more of the man than any of the Balanchine biographies to date," Alastair Macaulay said here last year.
THE SATANIC VERSES, by Salman Rushdie. (The Consortium, $10.) The novel that earned its author a death sentence has at last been issued in paperback.
When the book was first published in 1989, the Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini of Iran denounced it as blasphemous to Islam and put a bounty on the head of Mr.
Rushdie and all those associated with its publication.
The offense lay partly in the author's retelling of episodes in the life of Mohammed from the perspective of one of his characters, who experiences much of the novel's action in his dreams.
The author, who at first opposed a paperback edition of "The Satanic Verses" in hopes of softening the decree, has since endorsed the venture; an anonymous group calling itself the Consortium has backed it.
Three years ago our reviewer, A. G. Mojtabai, said, "What lives most vibrantly, for this reader, are the scenes that are grounded -- the places where magic doesn't overwhelm the realism -- the moments when Mr. Rushdie looks 'history in the eye.' "
LOST TRIBES AND PROMISED LANDS: The Origins of American Racism, by Ronald Sanders. (Harper Perennial, $13.) This book, now with a new foreword by Michael Dorris, explains that Western Europeans' attitude of superiority toward other cultures and races can be traced back as far as the Middle Ages.
In 1978 our reviewer, D. B. Davis, found it "studded with fascinating details, well-told anecdotes and bold speculations."
SCUM, by Isaac Bashevis Singer.
Translated by Rosaline Dukalsky Schwartz. (Plume, $9.) In this novel, the Nobel Prize-winning author examines the dark side of Krochmalna Street in Warsaw, his own boyhood neighborhood.
"The plot of 'Scum' is simple," our reviewer, Bette Pesetsky, said last year, "but Mr. Singer twists it until its vision is new and unexpected."
ANGELS' VISITS: An Inquiry Into the Mystery of Zinfandel, by David Darlington. (Owl/Holt, $10.95.) The book's title derives from a quotation by a 19th-century California horticulturist, who observed that the best zinfandels were similar to angels' visits: "few and far between." But this book is about more than the United States' only indigenous fine-wine grape.
"It weaves history, geography, wine and some of the fascinating people who make it into a downright enthralling tale," Frank J. Prial said here last year.
Also for oenophiles -- and perhaps soap-opera fans -- is the best seller NAPA, by James Conaway (Avon, $12.50).
Here, you can read all about the Mondavi brothers' fistfight and the marital problems of the couple who used to own Inglenook.
In 1990 our reviewer, Richard Flaste, called it "a strong insider's view of this astonishing valley."
THE NEVER-ENDING, by Andrew Hudgins. (Houghton Mifflin, $9.95.) This poetry collection, a finalist for the 1991 National Book Award, ranges in inspiration from the sacred to the profane, sometimes mingling the two.
"In all the best of these precise, controlled poems," one critic said, "the tone is by turns furious and affectless, and the subject both elegant and grotesque."
THE WORK OF NATIONS: Preparing Ourselves for 21st-Century Capitalism, by Robert B. Reich. (Vintage, $12.) A Harvard economist argues that Americans must improve their own skills to compete successfully.
In a new afterword, he also examines the effect of the Soviet Union's demise.
Mr.
Reich "wisely warns against a zealous economic nationalism that would not help us and might hurt the world economy," Robert J. Samuelson said in The Book Review in 1991.
HOW TO MAKE AN AMERICAN QUILT, by Whitney Otto. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A young woman about to be married observes the intricate interweaving of the histories of the participants in her grandmother's quilting circle.
Last year our reviewer, Jill McCorkle, called this first novel "remarkable," adding that "it is an affirmation of the strength and power of individual lives, and the way they cannot help fitting together."
CONSCIENTIOUS OBJECTIONS: Stirring Up Trouble About Language, Technology, and Education, by Neil Postman. (Vintage, $10.) In 18 essays, the author deplores, among other things, the adoration of popular culture at the expense of the written word.
His commentary "is as funny as it is thoughtful and well argued," Andrea Barnet said here in 1988.
THE FACE OF ANOTHER, by Kobo Abe.
Translated by E. Dale Saunders. (Kodansha International, $11.95.) This novel by the acclaimed Japanese author consists of the notebooks of a scientist who has been terribly disfigured in a laboratory accident.
He invents a way to fashion a new face for himself, only to find it assuming an identity of its own.
In 1966 our reviewer, Edward Seidensticker, called the book "an intricately contrived fantasy."
THE TOMCAT'S WIFE: And Other Stories, by Carol Bly. (Harper Perennial, $9.) Hypocrisy and cruelty run through these eight stories, which examine rural lives that have surrendered to mediocrity.
"James Joyce's 'Dubliners' comes to mind sometimes," Louis B. Jones said here last year, noting that "everything from symbol to diction works to effect."


Feminism and the Wild Man
To the Editor:
As a man who has been involved with the men's movement since my first son was born 22 years ago, I would like to offer my perspective on Jill Johnston's essay.
I can well understand Ms.
Johnston's being "beguiled and moved by Robert Bly after watching Bill Moyers's 90-minute profile of him on public television." I can also understand her disappointment, after reading "Iron John," that "he has no apparent interest in what the fathers' teaching -- or lack of it -- might mean for daughters entering the world."


The Quest for a New Zoning Plan
THERE may never be a better time to overhaul the Zoning Resolution that governs the physical evolution of New York City.
But that does not mean that it will -- or can -- be changed.
The current ordinance, enacted in 1916, encouraged the development of tall towers set in broad plazas, introduced floor-area restrictions as a way of controlling density and divided the city into residential, commercial and manufacturing districts.
Since its last thorough revision in 1961, however, it has become so heavily laden with amendments and revisions that it now seems a mass of contradictory impulses, no longer embodying a vision or plan.


Conner, Caught in a Crucial Spot, Clings to Hope of Turning the Tide
America's Cup trial racing took on a life of its own this week as Dennis Conner struggled to hang on to an era he created in yachting nearly two decades ago.
And as the pressure mounted to win, so did his dread of loss.
Stars &amp; Stripes moved a step closer to the brink today after losing a fierce battle with Bill Koch's yacht America3 for a place in the defense finals.
The lead changed four times in today's match, which America3 finally won by 44 seconds.
Conner has one more chance, in a sailoff Monday against Kanza.


Margaret Weingart Planning to Wed
August wedding plans for Margaret Sharon Weingart and Adam Jack Berger, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Allan A. Berger of Lake Success, L.I., have been announced by the bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Norman A. Weingart of Syosset, L.I.
Ms.
Weingart, 24 years old, is an assistant actuary at William M. Mercer Inc., a benefits consulting concern in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Yale University, as did her fiance, 25.
Her father is the vice president of Communications Specialties, a maker of computer video peripherals, in Hauppauge, L.I., and the vice president of Mission Sciences, a research and development concern in Commack, L.I.
Her mother, Ellen Weingart, is the director of human resources management at Kings Park Psychiatric Center in Kings Park, L.I.


Making a Difference; Mr. Perenchio's Dream Deal
For years, A. Jerrold Perenchio, one of the most astute investors in Hollywood, has seen great potential in the Spanish-language broadcasting industry.
After briefly owning two small Spanish-language stations in the late 1970's, he bid unsuccessfully for five large stations in 1987, losing out to Hallmark Cards Inc.


Sharon Ann Wolpoff: Designer of Beaded Handbags
There was no thought of creating a new art form or fashion item, and certainly not of building a new business, when Sharon Ann Wolpoff of Kensington, Md., began working with beads just about a year ago.
An artist who had always been fascinated with the interplay of light and color, she initially thought of her foray into beads as just another way of expanding her knowledge and experience of color.
That was the original objective, said Ms.
Wolpoff, who took her first art class when she was 5 years old.
But the primary objective soon became peripheral, she said, as the beading took on "a life of its own." Soon that life developed into a collection of unusual pouch bags, inspired by the traditional crafts produced by the American Indians.


For the Garage Door, An Automatic Opener
RECALLING winter weather or a sore back may be evidence enough that it is time to invest in an automatic garage-door opener.
They can be installed on virtually any overhead door that operates smoothly.
If the current automatic opener was installed before 1982, consider replacing it with a safer model that complies with the Underwriters Laboratories standards, which were upgraded in 1982.


Money: The Root Of All Art?
To the Editor:
The historical record hardly supports the statement cited by Daniel Goleman that "great wealth, geographic expansion, a centralized nation-state and waging wars all have little or nothing to do with producing a creative society."


For the Garage Door, An Automatic Opener
RECALLING winter weather or a sore back may be evidence enough that it is time to invest in an automatic garage-door opener.
They can be installed on virtually any overhead door that operates smoothly.
If the current automatic opener was installed before 1982, consider replacing it with a safer model that complies with the Underwriters Laboratories standards, which were upgraded in 1982.


Andrea Heil to Wed Robert L. Sand
Andrea Lauren Heil, a reporter for The Valley News in Lebanon, N.H., and Robert Leonard Sand, a state prosecutor in Windsor County, Vt., are planning a June wedding.
Ms.
Heil, 36 years old, graduated cum laude from Ohio University and worked in the White House press office during the Carter Administration.
She is a daughter of Beverly and Harold Heil of Englewood, Fla.
Her father, who is retired, was a quality-control engineer for the Hamilton Standard aerospace equipment company.
Her mother, also retired, was an elementary-school teacher.


THE PRIMAL PIZZA
SOME TALK ABOUT THE FIRST TIME THEY SLURPED AN OYSTER, or their introduction to sauce bearnaise, but pizza was my first epicurean experience.
I don't remember the precise moment of encounter.
I know that from the beginning, pizza was extracurricular eating, consumed for its taste and texture and for what it represented, rather than as a regularly scheduled meal.
Pizza was, therefore, an excellent medium on which to cut connoisseur's teeth.
Pizza is primitive.
The earliest prototypes were probably dough cooked over an open fire; modern pizzas are still an antidote to the civilizing forces you railed against in early adolescence.
By sixth grade, pizza was firmly established as freedom food among my friends.
The oil-drenched delivery boxes thrilled us.
The smell of oregano was the very essence of self-determination.
Pulling apart the pieces of the pie was one of life's early roulettes.
You apologized profusely if the piece you pulled happened to bring along the cheese and pepperoni of a neighboring slice.
But full restitution was as rare as a lottery winner's returning the prize.


Forrest Sawyer, Gathering the Spoils of War
Forrest Sawyer, who ricochets across the globe as a correspondent for ABC's "Nightline," with time out to serve as substitute inquisitor for Ted Koppel and anchor of the network's "World News Sunday," describes himself as a "utility infielder."
And until slightly over a year ago, he was just that: one of ABC's intrepid, interchangeable players who beamed back the news from the hot spot of the week.
But the Persian Gulf War took Mr.
Sawyer, who is 43 years old, from pinch-hitter to power slugger.
Never mind that NBC's Arthur Kent, a k a the Satellite Dish, reaped publicity and amorous fan letters for his leather-jacketed updates from the roof of his Dhahran hotel.
It was Mr.
Sawyer, puffy-eyed with fatigue and in rumpled khakis, who broke away from the press pool to link up with the Saudi and Egyptian forces, filing the first footage of deserters and the first live report from the front.


Easter Dinner as an Evocation of Spring
EASTER dinner is as much a celebration of spring as a religious festival.
But we have become so used to produce being available year round, that it is easy to forget what comes into season when.
Asparagus, morels, baby lamb and strawberries are at their peak now, and the following is an Easter dinner to remind us that spring, along with the first crocuses and daffodils in the garden, has finally arrived.
Morels are highly prized mushrooms; they are dark brown with honeycombed caps and a meaty taste.
Most of them come from the Pacific Northwest, Michigan, Wisconsin and some parts of the East Coast.
Their season begins now and runs into July.
They make a delicious first course simmered in light cream and served with asparagus.


POINT COUNTERPOINT ON I.B.M.
In an article on the Forum page on March 22, Webster Brown, a former engineer with International Business Machines Corporation, wrote about his 26 years with I.B.M.
He told of how the optimism with which he signed on in 1964 for what probably would be a lifetime career eroded to the point that two years ago he took voluntary retirement at the age of 54.
He said he feared that had he stayed at the company, he would be weeded out by an employee appraisal system "which gets tougher each year, that seems designed to sweep the company clean of employees who, however loyal and competent, no longer fit in at I.B.M."


An Earful


Lucy Buxton Wed in South
Lucy Wilson Buxton, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Julian T. Buxton Jr. of Charleston, S.C., was married yesterday to Lewis Alan Lukens, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Alan W. Lukens of Chevy Chase, Md.
The Rev.
William Skilton officiated at Grace Episcopal Church in Charleston.
Mrs.
Lukens, 27 years old, graduated from Princeton University and was until recently the assistant director of public relations at the Evening Post Publishing Company in Charleston.
Her father is a surgeon in Charleston and a trustee of Princeton University.


Manhattanville College And Russian Enterprise
Regarding the article on the joint effort of the Volunteer Development Council for United Nations Delegations and the Manhattanville College Entrepreneurial Center  [ "Lighting Russia's Entrepreneurial Spirit," March 29 ] :
The Volunteer Development Council, as its name suggests, exists to foster the American concept of voluntarism worldwide.
Its "goal" is not "fostering volunteerism to stimulate business worldwide." Your reporter was given a description of the organization in the interview and a brochure that describes the range of volunteer activities and objectives of the Development Council.


Resort Reopens In Vermont
The Equinox Resort in Manchester Village, Vt., is scheduled to reopen on June 1 after three months of interior renovation and improvements costing $9 million.
Also scheduled to reopen in June is the resort's golf course, which has been closed for a year during extensive rebuilding under the direction of Rees Jones that will cost an additional $3.3 million.
Equinox Resort Associates bought the resort in April 1991 and immediately set out to renovate the property, which dates to 1769.
The Marsh Tavern, situated at one end of the long main building, remains from the original and is still operating.


You Can't Have It 2 Ways
To the Sports Editor:
In "Disproportion in the Sweet 16" (The Times, March 27), Robert Lipsyte decries the fact that most members of teams representing schools in the final rounds of the National Collegiate Athletic Association basketball tournament are largely of African-American descent.
He finds it immoral and hypocritical that universities with such minute black representation in their student bodies field teams that are 80 percent nonwhite.


Review/Dance; Two Major Revivals By Juilliard Ensemble
The Juilliard Dance Ensemble does more than provide students of the Juilliard Dance Division with theatrical experience.
It contributes to the entire dance community by offering world premieres and important revivals.
The two major revivals it presented Monday night at the Juilliard Theater dated from 1953.
Each was by a distinguished modern-dance choreographer and exemplified a different esthetic trend.
Whereas Doris Humphrey's "Ruins and Visions" was a spare dance-drama, Alwin Nikolais's "Tensile Involvement" was an abstract fantasy.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
JOHN BROWN
John Brown, the abolitionist leader who was born in Torrington in 1800, had strong convictions that slavery was a sin.
In October 1859 he led the seizure of the Federal arsenal at Harper's Ferry, Va., and was hanged for treason.


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Absecon 205,000
1025 Marlborough Avenue
5-bedroom, 3-bath, 28-year-old colonial, three porches, professionally landscaped; taxes $4,582.
Egg Harbor City 97,000
339 Philadelphia Avenue
4-bedroom, 3-bath, 50-year-old colonial; skylights, new kitchen, full basement; taxes $2,637.
Galloway Township 125,000
725 Second Street
4-bedroom, 2-bath, 3-year-old bi-level; 3-car garage, full basement, eat-in-kitchen; $2,000.
Leonia 153,000
208 Grand Avenue
3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 60-year-old colonial; fireplace, large property, full attic; taxes $3,961.
Mahwah 193,000
17 Long Avenue
4-bedroom, 2-bath, 41-year-old Cape Cod; fenced yard, fireplace, walk to transportation; taxes $2,622.
West Milford 156,000
20 McCormick Road
4-bedroom, 2-bath, 36-year-old colonial Cape Cod; new kitchen, new baths, fireplace; taxes $3,988.
OTHER AREAS Wilton, Conn. 360,000
4 Holly Place  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 25-year-old gambrel colonial; newly painted interior, solar hot water, 1.9 acres; taxes $4,344.
Armonk, N.Y. 327,000
15 Byram Brook Place
5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 27-year-old ranch; fireplace, eat-in kitchen, family room, den, 1.2 acres; taxes $5,520.
Bayport, L.I. 170,000
7 Cole Court  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 6-year-old contemporary; eat-in kitchen, den, 1-car garage; taxes $5,400.


Corrections
The Guide column last Sunday misstated the site of a panel discussion about "The Contemporary American Immigrant Experience in Art." It will be held on Tuesday at 7:30 P.M. at the College of New Rochelle, not Iona College.


Networking; Why Novell's Rivals Sing Its Praises
A popular spectator sport at computer trade shows, like Spring Comdex held here last week, is reading the tea leaves as companies unveil new products and announce strategic alliances.
Discerning the patterns was tricky because of the twin promotional juggernauts surrounding the release of Windows 3.1 by the Microsoft Corporation and of OS/2 2.0 by the International Business Machines Corporation.
While both companies are going after individual desktop computer users, each would also like to see its product running on the rapidly growing number of desktop machines hooked into networks.
But in the networking world, the tussle is not as simple as pitting one against the other.


Public &amp; Private; Journalism 2001
I feel like one of those cartoon characters who has a little angel on one shoulder and a little devil on the other.
The reporter -- the one some people would say is carrying the pitchfork -- says one thing, the human being another.
There's a lot of this going around.
The subject is Arthur Ashe; the news is AIDS.
This week the gentleman tennis player became a reluctant symbol.
He had known since 1988 that he'd been infected by a transfusion, but he and his wife and a few close friends kept the secret for an obvious reason: they feared the shunning.
Then someone tipped USA Today, and USA Today called and asked.
Confirm or deny.
That's how we do these things.
Mr.
Ashe called a press conference and went public.


Players Learn to Look For the Inside Pitch
Andres Galarraga had worked so diligently all spring, he had regained the batting stroke that had made him a productive hitter in the four seasons before last year.
Lenny Dykstra was ready to resume his role as an everyday player after collisions with a tree and an outfield fence limited him to 63 games in 1991.
Derek Bell eagerly wanted to show why he was such a widely heralded rookie.
But only days into the season, all three -- Galarraga, Dykstra, Bell -- had their plans disrupted.
All were victims, in effect, of culture shock, baseball style.


Local United Way Trying to Provide Answers
"IN the light of all the excesses I've been reading about, I'd think twice now about giving to United Way," Selma Crowe of Harrison, the owner of a mail-order gift business, said recently.
"I always assumed most of the money they collected went to help the needy, not to make their executives rich."
It is not known how many potential donors to the United Way of Westchester and Putnam Counties share that sentiment, but its president, Ralph Gregory, acknowledges that it is a concern.
"People want to know about our financial structure," Mr.
Gregory said.
"The big question is, 'Where is my money going?' We're trying to give answers."


J. Edgar Hoover, Literary Critic
ALIEN INK  The FBI's War on Freedom of Expression.
By Natalie Robins.
Illustrated. 495 pp.
New York:  William Morrow &amp; Company.


Celebrating Chic Deluge At Bendel's
It's not your mother's Bendel's any more.
To celebrate the first anniversary of Henri Bendel's move to its Fifth Avenue location, Jean-Paul Gaultier devised a dress-up party that brought the downtown crowd uptown for a night.
Inspired by the invitation in the shape of a corset, men and women got done up in bras, girdles, garter belts and fishnet stockings to bury forever the image of understated chic that long prevailed at the store's former spot on 57th Street.
How Apropos
"What a fabulous crowd!" said Susan Falk, the store's president, who wore a black lace ballerina dress by Bob Evans.
Since she took over, the store has started carrying flamboyant fashion, including Gaultier's underwear-inspired clothes, so it was fitting that she asked him to be her co-host.


CAMPUS LIFE: Georgia; Emus and Ostriches Studied as Future Food
ATHENS, Georgia - When hunger pangs hit, most people wouldn't normally think of ordering an ostrich or emu burger to go with their french fries and soda.
But a researcher at the University of Georgia says such skeptics have their heads in the sand.
"There is a huge market for ostrich hides, feathers and meat," said Dr.
Kenneth Page, an avian venterinarian who has been working with Georgia's rapidly growing ostrich and emu industry for more than a year.
It is $100 million to $200 million-a-year industry.


Nets Play Nearly Perfectly In Their Run for Playoffs
On March 28, after the Nets let the Golden State Warriors escape from Byrne Arena with a 153-148 overtime victory, Coach Bill Fitch said that if his team was going to make the playoffs for the first time since 1986, it would have to win its next 12 games, which meant a perfect run for the rest of the regular season.
Well, nobody's perfect, especially the Nets, who have suffered injury after injury recently.
With the exception of shooting guard Drazen Petrovic, the only player on the team to start all 77 games this season, all of the starters have been stricken in some way.
Forward Derrick Coleman has been out with a boil, forward Chris Morris has had the flu, center Sam Bowie has had a sore right tibia and point guard Mookie Blaylock has had a bruised thigh.


This Week
Spring Into Action
O.K., it's finally spring (maybe), so plant those peas!
Get that spinach and chard in the ground.
Roto-till, double-dig or don't dig at all, but get out there in the dirt.


TALES FROM THE BABY FACTORY
Those who claim that the focus should be on caring for "AIDS babies, crack babies, low birth-weight babies" rather than providing insurance coverage for the infertile miss the point.
We must apply resources to all family-building issues, with the goal of widening everyone's available options.
It seems particularly cruel to deny assistance to those struggling with the problems of infertility while these infertile couples continue to pay for maternity care and sterilization procedures for fertile couples.
DIANE D. ARONSON Executive Director, Resolve
Somerville, Mass.


Outpouring of Sympathy For Dog, but Not Master
When a taxi jumped a curb in midtown Manhattan on Monday, two bystanders were struck and seriously injured.
Since then, one victim has received four get-well cards and a handful of visitors.
The second has received hundreds of cards; 300 to 400 people have called each day to ask about him, and well-wishers have contributed hundreds of dollars to insure that he receives good care.
The first victim is an elderly blind man. The second is his dog.


In Case of Illness or Death: Airlines' Fare Policies
FEW letters to this department register more pain and frustration than those concerning flights to a funeral or deathbed of a family member when the fare seemed outlandish.
The same distress is expressed when travelers have to cancel their plans because of illness or death and discover that even then a nonrefundable ticket cannot be cashed in.
Airlines' policies have been changing, and while there are a hundred variations, here are the basics of how airlines deal with trips to funerals or to visit the seriously ill in the United States, and their policies on nonrefundable tickets that can't be used because of illness or death.


BEST SELLERS: April 12, 1992
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
5
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $22.50.) A woman law student seeks to discover the truth about the murder of two Supreme Court justices.
2
2
9
RISING SUN, by Michael Crichton. (Knopf, $22.) The mysterious death of a young woman leads to an investigation in which technology and the American-Japanese rivalry play major roles.
3
3
5
THE ELF QUEEN OF SHANNARA, by Terry Brooks. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $22.) The third volume in a series about a fantasy land.
4
4
7
THE ROAD TO OMAHA, by Robert Ludlum. (Random House, $23.95.) A retired general and a lawyer scheme to take possession of the state of Nebraska on behalf of an obscure Indian tribe.
5
5
8
VOX, by Nicholson Baker. (Random House, $15.) A man and a woman learn about each other through a telephone conversation on an "adult party line."
6
7
16
DISNEY'S BEAUTY AND THE BEAST. (Gallery Books/Penguin USA, $6.98.) A retelling of the classic fairy tale in words and pictures.
7
6
4
PROBE, by Margaret Wander Bonanno. (Pocket, $18.95.) The crew of "Star Trek" 's Enterprise confronts a force that threatens galactic peace.
8
9
2
ACTS OF FAITH, by Erich Segal. (Bantam, $23.) The stories of three Brooklyn natives, one of whom rises high in the Roman Catholic hierarchy, two who break with their traditional Jewish heritage.
9
8
5
OUTERBRIDGE REACH, by Robert Stone. (Ticknor &amp; Fields, $21.95.) A man tries to relieve the frustrations of his lifetime by participating in a solo sailing race.
10 *
10
27
SCARLETT, by Alexandra Ripley. (Warner, $24.95.) The sequel to "Gone With the Wind."
11
12
5
TREASURES, by Belva Plain. (Delacorte, $21.) The loyalties of a brother and two sisters are tested by the changing values of the past two decades.
12
11
3
TRIAL BY FIRE, by Harold Coyle. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) The United States Army in a war against Mexico, a conflict marked by revolutionary forces, drug lords and bungled intelligence.
13
15
103
OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr. Seuss. (Random House, $12.95.) Verse and pictures.
14
13
5
THE CAT WHO MOVED A MOUNTAIN, by Lilian Jackson Braun. (Putnam, $18.95.) Jim Qwilleran tracks down the murderer of a millionaire.
15
7
GUARDIAN ANGEL, by Sara Paretsky. (Delacorte, $20.) The private eye V. I. Warshawski probes a case involving pet dogs, a man's disappearance and Chicago scandals.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
11
REVOLUTION FROM WITHIN, by Gloria Steinem. (Little, Brown, $22.95.) The reflections of a feminist on the struggle to achieve self-esteem.
2
3
21
BACKLASH, by Susan Faludi. (Crown, $24.) A journalist contends that the media and political groups are staging a war against women's rights.
3
2
6
DOUBLE CROSS, by Sam Giancana and Chuck Giancana. (Warner, $22.95.) Two relatives of the late Sam Giancana recall his life in the Mafia.
4
4
4
ROGUE WARRIOR, by Richard Marcinko with John Weisman. (Pocket, $22.) The memoirs of the retired commander of a counterterrorist unit.
5
5
26
DEN OF THIEVES, by James B. Stewart. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) How four men plundered and created havoc on Wall Street.
6
7
15
BROTHER EAGLE, SISTER SKY: A Message From Chief Seattle, illustrated by Susan Jeffers. (Dial, $14.95.) An environmental warning.
7
6
19
MEMORIES, by Ralph Emery with Tom Carter. (Macmillan, $19.95.) The autobiography of a country-music broadcaster.
8 *
13
21
MOLLY IVINS CAN'T SAY THAT, CAN SHE? by Molly Ivins. (Random House, $23.) Political essays.
9
12
7
THE TEXAS CONNECTION, by Craig I. Zirbel. (Texas Connection/Ingram, $21.95.) An attorney says L.B.J. was involved in the death of J.F.K.
10
14
13
PLAUSIBLE DENIAL, by Mark Lane. (Thunder's Mouth/Publishers Group West, $22.95.) The case for C.I.A. involvement in the death of J.F.K.
11 *
29
ME: Stories of My Life, by Katharine Hepburn. (Knopf, $25.) The actress's memoirs. (LP)
12
1
REINVENTING GOVERNMENT, by David Osborne and Ted Gaebler. (Patrick/Addison-Wesley, $22.95.) How every level of government can be restructured to operate more efficiently.
13 *
9
7
UNTO THE SONS, by Gay Talese. (Knopf, $25.) A journalist traces his Italian heritage.
14
10
2
THE DISUNITING OF AMERICA, by Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr. (Norton, $14.95.) A historian considers the current emphasis on ethnicity.
15 *
16
9
SEIZE THE MOMENT, by Richard Nixon. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) The challenges America faces.
16 *
11
6
THE OVERWORKED AMERICAN, by Juliet B. Schor. (Basic, $21.) The diminishment of Americans' leisure time, and its consequences.
17 *
4
THE END OF HISTORY AND THE LAST MAN, by Francis Fukuyama. (Free Press, $24.95.) Where two powerful historical forces are now leading us.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
8
A RETURN TO LOVE, by Marianne Williamson. (HarperCollins, $20.) Inspirational advice about ways to replace feelings of fear with feelings of love in daily life.
2
2
19
MORE WEALTH WITHOUT RISK, by Charles J. Givens. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) An updated and expanded volume of financial advice by a Florida entrepreneur.
3
3
14
AWAKEN THE GIANT WITHIN, by Anthony Robbins. (Summit, $20.) Ways to take control of your emotional, physical and financial destiny.
4
4
19
HOW TO SATISFY A WOMAN EVERY TIME, by Naura Hayden. (Bibli O'Phile/Dutton, $14.95.) Sexual advice for married couples.
5
9
FRENCH FOR CATS, by Henry Beard and John Boswell. (Boswell/Villard, $9.95.) A cat's life, told in French, English and pictures.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,050 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
And Bear in Mind
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
JAZZ, by Toni Morrison. (Knopf, $21.) In this novel, Ms.
Morrison conjures up with absolute authority the Harlem of the 1920's, its scenes and its inhabitants, especially Joe and Violet, a couple who learn again and again that life does not keep its promises.
PLAYING IN THE DARK: Whiteness and the Literary Imagination, by Toni Morrison. (Harvard University, $14.95.) With her critic's hat on, Ms.
Morrison argues for a literary scholarship (called "American Africanism") that will bring the black experience to all Americans, casting off the polite habit of ignoring race.
AFTER APARTHEID: The Future of South Africa, by Sebastian Mallaby. (Times Books/Random House, $22.) A British journalist who has covered Africa extensively believes the hardest parts will be achieving democracy and raising living standards.
FIELDS OF GLORY, by Jean Rouaud. (Arcade/Little, Brown, $18.95.) This accomplished first novel, which has sold more than half a million copies in France, deals with the wounds wrought by World War I on a French provincial family.
PARADISE NEWS, by David Lodge. (Viking, $21.) In Mr.
Lodge's witty, entertaining ninth novel, a herd of English people descend on Hawaii for a two-week holiday, while a family death and a few other ugly things try to develop in their midst.
AMERICA: WHAT WENT WRONG? by Donald L. Barlett and James B. Steele. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, paper, $6.95.) This expanded newspaper series by two Pulitzer Prize winners finds that the economy has been altered to favor the already favored.
PRIMITIVE PEOPLE, by Francine Prose. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $20.) Everyone is pretending, disguising, dressing up in a novel so funny it hardly matters that it's about a society in decay.


Want to Speed on the L.I.E.? You'd Better Keep a Sharp Eye Behind You
THE speed limit on the Long Island Expressway is 55 miles an hour.
Drive at that speed and you feel like the rabbit dangled before a pack of racing greyhounds.
For a moment you may take the lead, moving along in the right-hand lane.
But a glance in the rear-view mirror shows that the frenzied racers are closing ground.
Soon one nips at your tail as if to say, "Can't you go faster and make this more of a game?"


Rafting: Yukon And Montana
Canadian River Expeditions, an outfitter with more than 20 years' rafting experience, has scheduled a series of 12-day expeditions this year in western Canada along the Tatshenshini and Alsek Rivers.
Rafters float from high in Canada's Yukon Territory through the wilderness of British Columbia and out to the open Pacific in Alaska.
They will see bald eagles feeding on salmon runs and spot grizzly bear, the organizers say.


'Faust' in West Hartford
AT 2:30 this afternoon Gounod's "Faust" will be presented by the Hartt Opera and Music Theater in the Millard Auditorium in West Hartford.
The production is staged by Adelaide Bishop and conducted by Sidney Harth. (For information call 243-4228.)
At 3 this afternoon audiences can choose between free programs in New Haven and Danbury.
The guitarists Michael Newman and Laura Oltman have chosen several Elizabethan pieces, a suite by the Baroque composer William Lawes and an arrangement of John Lennon and Paul McCartney's "Fool on the Hill" for their recital at the Yale Center for British Art in New Haven (432-2850).
At the Danbury Music Center a chamber-sized ensemble of the Danbury Symphony Orchestra is being led by James Humphreville in three concert favorites: Bach's Brandenburg Concerto No. 1, Wagner's "Siegfried Idyll" and Tchaikovsky's "Serenade for Strings" (748-1716).


Nancy Gardner, Lawyer, Weds
Nancy Christine Gardner, an associate at the law firm of Weil, Gotshal &amp; Manges, and Edward Joseph Garofolo, a vice president at Reliance National, an insurance concern, both in New York, were married yesterday.
Msgr.
Anthony J. Barretta officiated at St.
Paul the Apostle Roman Catholic Church in Brookville, L.I.
Ms.
Gardner, 33 years old, is keeping her name.
She graduated magna cum laude from both Duke University and Georgetown University Law Center.
She is the daughter of Marianne and Charles B. Gardner Jr. of Brookville.
Her father is the president of C. B. Gardner Associates, a graphic services company in New York.
Her mother is a real-estate broker at Prudential Long Island Realty in Locust Valley, L.I.


Basic Bach


Ms. Goldstein, Student, to Wed
Marianne Goldstein, a daughter of Jeremy and Barbara Goldstein of Elkins Park, Pa., and Richard Alan Feifer, a son of Dr.
Irwin and Betty Feifer of Wantagh, L.I., are planning a June wedding.
Ms.
Goldstein, 25 years old, is a graduate student in educational research at the University of Pennsylvania, from which she graduated, and a coordinator at the Johnson Research Foundation for molecular biology there.
Her father is a partner in the Philadelphia law firm of Mesirov Gelman Jaffe Cramer &amp; Jamieson.
Her mother is an assistant instructor at Penn's graduate school of education and a mathematics instructor at Montgomery County Community College.


Beating Trial Is the Talk of 2 Towns
On Royce Street, as in much of this town, modest, well-kept homes and carefully tended gardens sit cheek-by-jowl with crumbling stucco houses rising out of weed-choked yards.
Metal bars guard the windows and doors of some residences, hinting at the drug-fueled violence that occasionally erupts on the street.
Rodney G. King lived much of his life on Royce Street, unknown to the world at large.
Then, on March 3, 1991, Mr.
King, who is black, was beaten and kicked by white Los Angeles police officers as an amateur cameraman captured the scene on videotape.
He immediately became a celebrity of sorts and left Royce Street, the location of his new residence a closely guarded secret.


The Merely Regal, Touched by the Divine
There are few more persuasive emblems of kingship than the sculptured images of the Sumerian ruler Gudea, created in the area of present-day Iraq, in the second millennium B.C.
Standing or seated, he is a figure of suave monumentality.
His wrap-around robe, which tucks under one arm leaving his shoulder bare, falls to his ankles.
The exposed right arm rendered with subtle command of naturalistic musculature gives an impression of tensile strength.
The hands, with their slender fingers and tiny square nails, are folded in front of his chest in a reposeful gesture that signifies he is engaged in worship.
At the same time, the heavy, wheel-shaped crown on his head is a fitting symbol for a man who was perceived as standing at the center of the cosmos, very like the gods themselves.


Brazil Picks Experience and Age for Cabinet
Choosing experience over youth, Brazil's President has completed a thorough Cabinet shake-up intended to give new momentum to his troubled two-year-old Government.
Jettisoning his inaugural dictums that no minister should be over 40 years old and that no minister should have served in previous governments, President Fernando Collor de Mello on Friday chose a Cabinet of seasoned administrators and conservative politicians with party support in Congress.


Are Cartoon Stills Still a Hot Ticket?
During the art boom of the 1980's, Herbert Black, a Montreal industrialist, paid record prices at auction for Impressionist art, Chippendale furniture, a John Lennon guitar and Walt Disney celluloids, known as cels.
In the more sober 1990's, Mr.
Black is hanging on to Renoir's "Little Gypsy Girl," which he bought for $1.8 million in 1980, then the record for an Impressionist painting.
And his collection of 18th-century English antiques is intact.
But the Lennon guitar, for which he paid $19,800 in 1984, is gone, raffled to benefit a charity.
And he is selling the part of his holdings -- Mickey Mouse, Donald Duck and Snow White cels -- that so far has remained recession-proof.


THE ORACLE OF CROWN HEIGHTS
I am a liberal Christian who found Michael Specter's article "The Oracle of Crown Heights" (March 15) comforting and encouraging.
The Lubavitchers really believe the kingdom of heaven is at hand, and their picture of it is not terrifying and punishing but ecstatic and happy.
We should envy a faith so centered that it doesn't just work to bridge the material and spiritual worlds but acts as if the gulf weren't even there.
PAUL BABITTS
New York, N.Y.


Madrid Prices
To the Editor: For years I have been cheerfully tolerant of the "Where to Eat" and "Where to Stay" sections in the "What's Doing in . . ." page, even though the prices are so high I am sure they they are of practical interest to no more than 2 percent of your readers.
The article on Madrid, however, ("What's Doing in Madrid," March 8) takes away my equanimity.
The only "budget choice" hotel you recommend is described as a former brothel in which the rooms "have retained their bawdy decor," situated on a "seedy" street.


Sarah Deffeyes Has Wedding
Sarah Stover Deffeyes, the daughter of Prof. and Mrs.
Kenneth S. Deffeyes of Princeton, N.J., and Robert Joseph Gralewski Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gralewski of Wilmington, Del., were married yesterday in Princeton.
The Rev.
Vincent E. Keane, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at the Princeton University Chapel.
Mrs.
Gralewski, 22 years old, is an assistant at the America's Cup International Center in San Diego, Calif.
She graduated from Princeton University, where her father is a professor of geology.


What A Show! But How Low Can the Fed Go?
You want action?
You want quick profits?
You want embarrassed market analysts?
Just step right up and place your bets.
Anybody can win.
All you need is timing, or luck.
The world's financial markets may not be quite ready to hire carnival touts, but they might as well.
Last week's action, with its reversals of fortune, may seem more familiar to denizens of Las Vegas than to readers of treatises on the efficient market theorem.


New York City Rethinks Parades
New York City is preparing to rain on some parades.
Last year, the city's congested streets were closed for 765 parades, large and small, at a cost of more than $9 million for police supervision and cleanup.
But with the city in dire financial straits, the administration of Mayor David N. Dinkins is considering issuing fewer parade permits and allowing traffic and park agents to supervise some parades to cut costs.
In 1989, 3,237 police officers turned out to keep the peace for the St.
Patrick's Day Parade.
The resulting overtime cost the city $473,000.
In 1990, the Sanitation Department estimated that it cost an extra $30,000 per event to clean up after the Puerto Rican Day, Macy's Thanksgiving Day, St.
Patrick's Day and the Brooklyn West Indian Day parades.
Police costs are even higher.
For the Steuben Day parade, not an outsized event, the police bill in 1990 was $67,205.
A Right to March
The city's policy has been that any group, no matter how large or small, constitutes a parade party and has a constitutional right to march.
Deciding the basis on which a parade could be denied a permit, and then translating that policy into which groups to offend, is a constitutional and political minefield that aides to Mayor Dinkins say they are studying.


Residential Resales
Closings in the week that ended March 28  MANHATTAN  Fort Washington 54,500
100 Overlook Terrace  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 820-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; renovated kitchen, L-shaped living room; maintenance $393, 53% tax-deductible (Broker: Stein-Perry Real Estate)  Greenwich Village 280,00
63 East 9th Street  (Randall House)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,600-sq.-ft. postwar duplex, penthouse co-op; 24-hr. doorman, dining area, 600-sq.-ft. wrapped terrace, 4 exposures; maintenance $1,576, 55% tax-deductible (Broker: Freda Green &amp; Associates)  Greenwich Village 420,000
59 West 12th Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,400-sq.-ft. co-op in a prewar building; 24-hr. doorman, dining foyer, fireplace, windowed kitchen and bath; common charge $885, taxes $3,960 (Broker: J.I. Sopher &amp; Co.)  TriBeCa 715,000
168 Duane Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 3,338-sq.-ft. triplex, penthouse condo in prewar building; 30-ft. central atrium, terrace, Hudson River view; common charge $946, taxes $12,966 (Broker: Halstead Property Co./Kanelba &amp; Robilotti)  Upper East Side 165,000
213 East 71st Street  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 950-sq.-ft. duplex co-op; dining area, remodeled kitchen, fireplace; maintenance $714, 67% tax-deductible (Broker: H.F. International Realty Ltd.)  BRONX  Wakefield 100,000
957 East 231st Street  2-family, semi-attached frame house; 1 bedroom, 1 bath, dining area; private driveway, 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,800 (Broker: Broker: Charles G. Brophy &amp; Associates)  Williamsbridge 160,000
1462 Arnow Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, single-family, attached, brick house; dining room, hospitality suite in finished basement, 1-car garage, 17- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,200 (Broker: Century 21/Best Match Real Estate)  BROOKLYN  Brooklyn Heights 215,000
160 Henry Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,400-sq.-ft. co-op in a prewar building; 24-hr. doorman, manned-elevator, maid's room, dining room, fireplace, butler's pantry, maintenance $1,261, 45% tax-deductible (Broker: Frederick Lee Real Estate)  Park Slope 180,000
448 11th Street  2-family, 3-story, frame house; 3 bedrooms, 2 baths in primary unit; 1 bedroom, 1 bath, den in simplex, 17- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,126 (Broker: Sommers Real Estate)  Windsor Terrace 202,500
51 Sherman Street  2-family, brick town house built in 1907; 3 bedrooms in primary unit, 2 bedrooms in other, 1 bath, dining room, walk-in closet in each; rear garden, full basement, 20- by 100-ft, lot; taxes $1,411 (Broker: Elaine Gay Real Estate Ltd.)  QUEENS  Briarwood 49,000
83-11 139th Street  (Broadmore)  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 750-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; windowed-kitchen, dinette, 2 exposures; maintenance $375, 52% tax-deductible (Broker: Kraham Realty)  Elmhurst 265,000
85-39 58th Avenue  2-family, attached, brick house; 3 bedrooms, 1 bath, balcony in each unit; hospitality suite on first floor, 1-car garage, 22- by 95-ft. lot; taxes $2,630 (Broker: Kremer Real Estate)  STATEN ISLAND  St.
George 87,000
20 Bay Street Landing  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,450-sq.-ft. co-op former prewar warehouse; dining area, Jacuzzi, skylights, free-parking, harbor view; maintenance $703, 54% tax-deductible (Broker: Gateway Arms Realty)  Westerleigh 170,000
115 Levit Avenue  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, single-family, semi-attached house; laundry room, c/a, rear deck, additional 84- by 68-ft. building lot, in-ground pool, 40- by 80-ft. lot; taxes $1,452 (Broker: Salmon Real Estate)


Islanders' Mission: Save Face
The telephone at Glenn Healy's Brookville, L.I., home rang around 12:30 yesterday morning.
On the other end of the line was his former Islander teammate Ken Baumgartner, calling to tell Healy that the National Hockey League Players Association had ended its 10-day strike and that the regular season would resume Sunday.
"I was relieved to hear that the issue had been settled," said Healy, an Islander goaltender.
"From the outset, the players never wanted this thing to get to the point of a work stoppage."


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Voters; These Voters Want Change, But Don't Have a Candidate
Like most everyone at the Northeast Bronx Senior Citizens Center, Anita Sollino did not bother to vote in New York's Presidential primary on Tuesday, even though she has been a Democrat for more than 50 years.
"I'm a registered Democrat," Mrs.
Sollino said over a card game on Thursday, "but that doesn't mean I vote Democratic. I vote for the man."


Complaints on Center Shouldn't Be a Surprise
Your reporter wrote a fair article on the Wayside Home  [ "Proposal to Expand Girls' Home Fought," March 15 ] .
But Mr.
Juliani and Mr.
Gutheil created some misleading impressions concerning being "surprised" at our "complaints."
Many people from Elmont and North Valley Stream told me that they have called Wayside over the past several years, with no response.
These same people, plus many more, signed three different petitions.
Two petitions sent to Wayside with over 200 signers complained about poor supervision, cursing noise and neglect of the property.
The third petition, with over 500 signers, protested Wayside's proposed expansion, until they can control what they already have, with efficiency.
The last petition was submitted, along with individual letters, at the hearing before the State Mental Hygiene Department on Feb. 6, 1992.
Both Mr.
Gutheil and Mr.
Juliani were present.


For the Garage Door, An Automatic Opener
RECALLING winter weather or a sore back may be evidence enough that it is time to invest in an automatic garage-door opener.
They can be installed on virtually any overhead door that operates smoothly.
If the current automatic opener was installed before 1982, consider replacing it with a safer model that complies with the Underwriters Laboratories standards, which were upgraded in 1982.


Wall Street; Building a Better Nuclear Nest Egg
The Yankee Atomic Electric Company in Bolton, Mass., announced recently that it will pull the plug on its controversial Yankee Rowe nuclear power plant.
The utility decided it was simply impractical to spend the money required to refurbish the 32-year-old facility, whose continued operation has been opposed by environmental activists for years.
For the combatants in the long battle over Yankee Rowe, as is the case in most arguments about atomic energy across the country, the question of what to do about aging nuclear power plants provokes answers framed by politics, by economics, by scientific and environmental concerns.


Campaign Tries to Find Arsonists at Early Age
A FIRE rages, and firefighters rush to the scene.
In the shadow of a nearby tree, a child watches wide eyed.
He wears a plastic fireman's hat and clutches a teddy bear.
Is he an innocent onlooker, or did he start the fire?
Robert M. Maccarone, director of Criminal Justice Services for Westchester County, said that more than one-third of the arson fires in the county are set by children younger than 16.
Because many are accidents caused by children playing with matches, these fires have often been dismissed as childish behavior, Mr.
Maccarone said.
Now, however, a concerted effort has begun among fire and police officials and child welfare workers in the county to identify serious young arsonists and prevent them from starting new fires.


Penelope Spheeris: From Carny Life To 'Wayne's World'
Before paramount tapped Penelope Spheeris to direct "Wayne's World," she had started another project.
Ms.
Spheeris was interviewing mass murderers for a television special.
But what she really wanted to do was direct a comedy.
And that's why, when Lorne Michaels, the producer of "Wayne's World" and "Saturday Night Live," proposed her name to Paramount Pictures, she begged for the job.
She begged from wherever she happened to be.
Quite often that was inside the Patten State Hospital for the criminally insane in Riverside, Calif.
"I'm on the phone with Paramount," the 46-year-old Ms.
Spheeris recalls, "and this guy is sitting in the other room saying, 'I've been smearing you-know-what on the walls, and I know they don't like it very much, but it reminds me of what my dad did to my mother,' and I'm in the hallway saying, 'Listen, I swear to God, I can do a funny movie. I swear to God.' "


Grief That Lasts Forever
AT WEDDINGS AND WAKES  By Alice McDermott. 213 pp.
New York: Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
GAMES WE USED TO PLAY  A Lover's Quarrel With the World of Sport.
By Roger Kahn.
Ticknor &amp; Fields, $21.95.


Sunday Outing; Shad's on Hudson Valley Menu for Next 2 Months
As much as the bloom of forsythia, the return of shad to the Hudson River is a sure sign of spring in the Hudson Valley.
Between now and the end of May, those who relish the taste of the fish and its roe can find all they can eat at fish markets, restaurants and festivals along the river front.
From New York City north to Kingston, volunteer groups have scheduled a dozen shad bakes as part of a program to raise public awareness of the beauty of the Hudson River and of its bounty.
At most of them, free samples of smoked, pickled and baked shad and shad roe are offered; a few provide full shad dinners, usually for about $5.


TRANSACTIONS
Football World League FRANKFURT GALAXY -- Activated Billy Poe, guard.
OHIO GLORY -- Activated Karl Coles, guard.
Hockey National Hockey League ST.
LOUIS BLUES -- Recalled Guy Hebert, goalie, from Peoria of the International Hockey League.
College NAVY -- Named Don DeVoe men's basketball coach.


Even After Overtime, Strike Ends in Tie
After six months of saber-rattling and a 10-day strike, what exactly did the hockey players' union gain in a settlement with team owners that was announced at midnight Friday in the Plaza Hotel?
Plenty.
They retained permission to drink fluids on the bench and to use a private restroom during intermission.
They get most of the summer off.
They got amnesty for the strikers.
And they kept the right to buy good tickets for most of the big games.


Traveling Heavy
To the Editor: I, too, have learned by experience, it is better to travel heavy than do without.
Susan Allen Toth evoked memories of being referred to as the Flying Pharmacy by tourmates.
Not only have I saved many a day for myself, but for fellow travelers, as well.
All this with over-the-counter medication.


TALES FROM THE BABY FACTORY
I read Ellen Hopkins's article "Tales From the Baby Factory" (March 15) a mere two days after getting negative results from our second attempt at in vitro fertilization.
My husband and I wonder if we should try one more time.
Three years ago, an infertility specialist told me my chances of becoming pregnant were near zero.
I had lost one tube to an ectopic pregnancy, and the other one was blocked.
I was devastated.
A month later, we took a one-month trip to Italy.
When we returned, I was pregnant.
Unfortunately, I lost my baby at five months.


Calling Forth the Shock of Recognition
FOR the last three or four years it has been one thing after another -- the student revolt in Tiananmen Square, the collapse of the Berlin Wall, the disintegration of the Soviet Union.
Mandela came out of jail; Noriega went in.
Haiti, having ousted the long-running Duvalier family, elected Aristide only to lose him in a coup.
This list is short but the one represented by news photos and clippings in the Gallery at Hastings-on-Hudson (478-4141) is long -- so long that it covers all the walls and several partitions.
It was compiled by Jo Anne Seador, a photographer teaching at the School of Visual Arts and since 1987 the editor in charge of the library at Magnum Photos, both in Manhattan.


Robbin Mitchell, Student, to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Bert N. Mitchell of Laurel Hollow, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Robbin Elizabeth Mitchell to Jeffrey Matthew Scruggs, the son of Prof. and Mrs.
Otey Scruggs of Syracuse.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Mitchell, 27 years old, graduated from Stanford University and is a graduate business school student at Harvard University.
Her father is the chairman and chief executive of Mitchell/Titus &amp; Company, a New York accounting concern.
Her mother, Carole Mitchell, is a social worker in Oyster Bay, L.I.


POINT COUNTERPOINT ON I.B.M.
In an article on the Forum page on March 22, Webster Brown, a former engineer with International Business Machines Corporation, wrote about his 26 years with I.B.M.
He told of how the optimism with which he signed on in 1964 for what probably would be a lifetime career eroded to the point that two years ago he took voluntary retirement at the age of 54.
He said he feared that had he stayed at the company, he would be weeded out by an employee appraisal system "which gets tougher each year, that seems designed to sweep the company clean of employees who, however loyal and competent, no longer fit in at I.B.M."


Why Japan's Influence Doesn't Match Its Economic Power
In East Asia no less than anywhere else, the collapse of the Soviet Union and Communism was supposed to lead to vast new influence for Japan, the region's economic superpower.
But recent months have shown, instead, just how deeply Japan remains mired in the debates and anxieties of the past.
At least to its neighbors, the new Japan looks suspiciously like the old Japan.
And in Japanese eyes, Asia is still a place for caution, if not paralysis.
"The cold war is at an end, but Japanese don't really know how to disengage from it," said Terumasa Nakanishi, professor of international relations at the University of Shizuoka.
"We lack any kind of national consensus on how to act."


Hispanic Politicans Seek a Recipe for Raw Numbers
The "geraldomander" is what some in Texas call the 29th Congressional District, which was created for the express purpose of giving Houston's Hispanic voters a voice in Washington.
Zigging and zagging across the city to encompass Hispanic enclaves, its jagged lines are said to resemble a drawing of the winged Aztec god Quetzalcoatl.
Across the country Hispanic groups are bidding for increased political power through the redistricting process, based on the 1990 census, to demand greater representation at every level of elected office from school boards to Congress.


'Pistols' Sets Up Run for The Roses
Long shots ruled the road to the Kentucky Derby today when Pistols and Roses won the $500,000 Blue Grass Stakes by the length of his neck over Conte Di Savoya and Ecstatic Ride, with the favored Dance Floor fourth.
So, with the Derby only three weeks away, the road was getting littered with beaten favorites and broken dreams.
And no horse in the East was charging forward to challenge the great Arazi, who dominated France's racing scene in 1991 and who remains the runaway choice to dominate America's racing scene, at least on May 2 at Churchill Downs.


Hudson Bass Running, but Off Limits to Fishermen
In an annual rite of spring, shad and striped bass are returning to the Hudson River to spawn.
For the dwindling number of commercial fishermen on the river, the fish, although plentiful, are a mixed catch -- a legacy of a 16-year-old controversy about toxic PCB's in the river.
The bass, considered unfit for human consumption, must be thrown back while the shad are kept for sale as a gourmet delight.


Bus Carrying L.I. Students Crashes; At Least 2 Die
A chartered bus carrying students from a Long Island middle school slid off Interstate 87 in the Adirondacks yesterday and tumbled over a steep embankment, killing at least two people and injuring 29, the police and emergency rescue officials said.
The bus -- carrying the driver and 27 students and 3 teachers from Woodland Middle School in East Meadow, L.I. -- crashed at 4:45 P.M. on a desolate slush-covered section of Interstate 87 between Schroon Lake and Pottersville, about 95 miles north of Albany.


Panel of 7 Sets Sentencing Rules
The Sentencing Reform Act of 1984 abolished the United States Parole Commission, created a United States Sentencing Commission and directed it to draft what it called "guidelines" for the Federal courts.
Since the courts are bound to follow the guidelines, the term is something of a misnomer.
Though the guidelines officially took effect in November 1987, many Federal judges initially deemed them unconstitutional, and they began following them only after the United States Supreme Court upheld their legality in January 1990.


Southampton Spawns 14th Fulbright Scholar
ALTHOUGH C. W. Post certifies more teachers and counselors each year than any other college in New York State, and and the Arnold and Marie Schwartz College of Pharmacy in Brooklyn has graduated one of five pharmacists in the state, Long Island University's tiny Southampton College has produced more Fulbright Scholars than almost any other school its size in the country.
Last month Patrick Joseph Perl, a 22-year-old honors student from Strykersville, N.Y., also known as P. J., became the 14th Fulbright Scholar from Southampton since 1975.
All the scholars entered L.I.U. as marine-science students, the nationally known program at Southampton that is by far the school's largest.


Devils Kick Their Heels, Then Skate
The players and management of the Devils brushed aside all questions today about details of hockey's new labor agreement, saying that the game itself was the big winner in the settlement of the dispute and that everyone was happy to have the team playing again.
All the Devils players, including Bruce Driver, the captain and team representative with the players' union, declined to discuss who had come out ahead in the confrontation.
Hockey, the players said, was their focus now.


Keiretsu From Another Vantage Point
To the Editor:
There was a notable omission in "A Recent Assault on Keiretsu" by Donald I. Baker and Donald B. Ayer (Forum, March 22).
The article criticized a plan by the Justice Department to use United States antitrust laws to open up Japan's keiretsu system of economic relationships between companies.


Soviet Collapse Endangers Indian Power Projects
Major hydroelectric projects across India aimed at boosting the energy-hungry country's power supply by as much as 10 percent have been jeopardized by the loss of the Soviet Union as a financial benefactor and by bitter environmental disputes.
Two of the largest projects are the Tehri Dam, in the Himalayan foothills 200 miles north of here, and a more ambitious series of dams along the Narmada river, which flows through central and western India.


INSIDE
The Paul Lozano Mystery
The case of a Harvard medical student who sought psychiatric help, told his family of a sexual relationship with his doctor and later committed suicide has drawn notice far beyond the Cambridge campus.
Page 38.
A Footnote to U.S.
History
In 1860, John Wilkes Booth wrote a manuscript that revealed much about him.
Had the authorities known of it, scholars now believe, Lincoln might not have been assassinated.
Page 26.
Taking Yeltsin Down a Peg
After tangled debate, the Russian Parliament adopted a resolution that could curtail some powers of President Boris N. Yeltsin.
Page 10.
The Puck Starts Here
With the settlement of the National Hockey League strike, players gathered for practice and the resumption of regular season play.
SportsSunday.


Rough Landing
A private plane bearing Yasir Arafat and a dozen bodyguards crash-landed in a remote corner of Libya last week after it was caught aloft in a desert sandstorm.
For half a day, the chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization was out of contact with the world, leaving governments concerned with the Middle East to speculate on the implications of Mr.
Arafat's fate, whatever it was.
When the plane was found, its three-member flight crew was dead, a half-dozen of Mr.
Arafat's bodyguards had been injured, and the P.L.O. chairman had suffered some cuts and bruises.
There was rejoicing among Palestinians in the Occupied Territories, but P.L.O leaders said that Mr.
Arafat's accident underscored the need for designating a line of succession within the organization, at the very least.
"I think Arafat has probably concluded many things from this accident, too," said Bassam Abu Sharif, a senior political adviser to Mr.
Arafat.
"For example -- God forbid -- if he dies, what then?"


Carolyn S. Bondurant Is Engaged
Mr. and Mrs.
Clarence R. Bondurant of Martinsville, Va., have announced September wedding plans for their daughter Carolyn Stone Bondurant and Timothy Hicks McCoy, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard P. McCoy of Boston.
Miss Bondurant, 27 years old, is an administrative assistant at Beacon Management, a real-estate concern in Boston.
Mr.
McCoy, 29, is a field manager at Colley &amp; McCoy, a family real-estate and restaurant investment company in Windham, N.H.
Both graduated from Rollins College.


Shari Slotnick and Ronald Pillar Are to Wed
July wedding plans have been announced for Shari Lynn Slotnick, a daughter of Mrs.
Howard Slotnick of New York and the late Mr.
Slotnick, and Ronald Scott Pillar, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Robert M. Pillar of North Woodmere, L.I.


Allison Bottom Wed in Texas
Allison Bottom, a decorative artist, was married yesterday to Thaddeus Ives Gray, an investment analyst at Abbott Capital Management, an investment advisory firm in New York.
The Rev.
James Glassman, a Presbyterian minister, officiated at Shary Memorial Chapel in Mission, Tex.
Mrs.
Gray, 30 years old, graduated from Rhodes College and attended the Ecole de Peinture in Brussels.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Elliott B. Bottom of Edinburg, Tex.
Her father is the president of First State Bank and Trust Company in Mission, Tex., and the Border Bank in Hidalgo, Tex.


Quotation of the Day
"Disarray stories are around, but, obviously, I don't believe them. In fact, I'm kind of surprised, because I think the campaign is running very well." -- ROBERT M. TEETER, President Bush's campaign chairman.  [ 32:1 ]


STANDOFF AT U.N. WITH A PROTESTER
A woman in a van held the police at bay throughout the afternoon and evening yesterday after she drove onto the grounds of the United Nations headquarters on First Avenue, then threatened to set herself on fire and detonate explosives she said were in the back of the vehicle, the police said.
The woman, who was seen pouring what was presumed to be a can of gasoline over herself, had a box of kitchen matches tied around her neck, the police said, and held matches in her hand.
She was identified as Linne Gunther, 35 years old, of San Lorenzo, Calif.


Italian Vote Puts Ex-Communists in Demand
Six days after they voted in an election billed as epochal, Italians are pondering one of the balloting's strangest anomalies: Their country's former Communists, divided among themselves, bruised by the elections and beached by the end of the cold war, are suddenly in demand after over four decades of exclusion from power.
The reason, however, is not that Italy is poised to loft the red flag anew over a continent where it has fallen, but rather simple electoral arithmetic.
The election left the governing four-party coalition with only 48.8 percent of the votes, too low to build a new governing alliance.
And the former Communists, who emerged as Italy's second biggest party with 16.1 percent of the ballot, are the only mainstream opposition party with the votes to contribute to a working majority.


Cuttings; And Mrs. Haupt, Seeing the Garden, Pronounced It Good
Enid Annenberg Haupt was having a good time refusing to sit on the rustic garden bench for the photographer.
The former editor of Seventeen magazine, now an octogenarian, complained that her elegant green suit did not make her look thin enough.
The annual Spring Flower Show, "The American Romantic Garden," had opened at the Enid Haupt Conservatory at the New York Botanical Garden in the Bronx, and Mrs.
Haupt was inspecting the flowers.


Spence, Eyestone and Kampainen: the Marathon Men
In a race that typified the American style of running, more caution than bravado, Steve Spence, Ed Eyestone and Bob Kampainen ran far off the lead for 22 miles of the Columbus Marathon today, before moving to the front and finishing within 11 seconds of each other to qualify for the 1992 United States Olympic team.
Their times, led by Spence in 2 hours 12 minutes 43 seconds, were modest by any historical comparison, nationally or beyond.
But they were clearly superior to any of the other 100 runners who started the race in unusually warm and humid conditions for this time of year.


A New Sporty Coupe From Mazda
WHEN I think of the car that I have most wanted in my life, it is a model that was neither particularly exotic nor very rare.
But it is still there in my fantasy, a new 1960 Cadillac coupe standing on the showroom floor at Mayo Motors in Trexlertown, Pa., glittering in its coat of dark turquoise paint.
At the time, and for me, the price was outrageous and the moment passed.
What is very much with us in 1992, though, is a resurrection of the long-gone Cadillac's color.
Along with a lot of other bright shades, blue-green is In with a capital I.


In Connecticut, It's a Whole New April 15
Everywhere else, tax season may be routine, but not here.
At Connecticut's Department of Revenue Services, the first-ever filing season for the state's first-ever tax on wages is an exercise in controlled panic.
Since the 4.5 percent flat-rate wage tax was passed by a razor-thin margin in the Legislature last August, the tax department has careered from one crisis-etched deadline to another -- with pressures made all the worse by the atmosphere of hostility among many residents and deep ambivalence in the Legislature.


Karen DuPont to Wed in September
Mr. and Mrs.
Jean R. DuPont of East Providence, R.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Karen Anne DuPont to Patrick Martin Beck, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Albert M. Beck of New City, N.Y.
A September wedding is planned.
Ms.
DuPont, 31 years old, graduated from the University of Rhode Island, where she is a graduate student in ecology.
She is also a landscape architect at Commonwealth Engineers and Consultants in Providence, R.I., and the president-elect of the Rhode Island chapter of the American Society of Landscape Architects.


Susan Kelley Wed in South Carolina
Susan Elizabeth Kelley, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Austin P. Kelley of Atlanta, was married yesterday to William Mark Conger, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William Kenneth Conger of Statesville, N.C.
The Very Rev.
James Fenhagen, the dean of the General Theological Seminary in New York and an Episcopal priest, officiated at Pawleys Island Presbyterian Church in Pawleys Island, S.C.
Mrs.
Conger, 29 years old, graduated from Hollins College and was, until recently, an account executive at Austin Kelley, an Atlanta advertising company owned by her father.


Feminism and the Wild Man
To the Editor:
Jill Johnston's commentary on the men's movement is fine as far as it goes.
But she fails to address the most evident fear of the men who have fallen under its sway: the fear of homosexuality.
The urgent need of virile but
sensitive
men to escape maternal influence is in fact a flight from being perceived as soft, effete, wimpy, womanish.
When applied to men, all of these are code words for "homosexual."  ALLEN ELLENZWEIG  New York


'Ritual Journey' of Assemblages at the University of Hartford
BETYE SAAR is the latest artist to transform the Joseloff Gallery at the University of Hartford, and she has done it with an installation and about 40 assemblages, large and small.
Semi-darkness reigns, except where works are picked out by spotlights or are illuminated from within, and the only thing missing is organ music.
The installation is titled "The Ritual Journey" (as is the show), and Ms.
Saar has put it together on the spot, using materials mostly at hand.
These include a canoe made of silvered fiberglass and patterned with eyes, and branches hung on the walls with camouflage netting and strewn on the floor.


Afterlife of a War
M.I.A.
Or Mythmaking in America.
By H. Bruce Franklin. 225 pp.
Brooklyn:  Lawrence Hill Books. $17.95.


Ashley Kiesel, Lawyer, to Wed
Dr. and Mrs.
John L. Kiesel of Lexington, Ky., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Ashley Kiesel, to Richard Elliott Rochman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Barton C. Rochman of Peoria, Ill.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss Kiesel and her fiance, both 29 years old, are associates in San Francisco law firms, she at Kindel &amp; Anderson and he at Morrison &amp; Foerster.
She graduated from the University of North Carolina and received a law degree from the University of Kentucky.
Her father is a pediatrician in Lexington, where her mother, Linda Kiesel, is an extension communications specialist with the University of Kentucky College of Agriculture.


UConn Gives Athletes Coaches for Classwork
THE basketball players were more than 1,000 miles from home.
On the following day they would be playing their biggest game of the season.
But on this Friday afternoon eight members of the University of Connecticut men's team were gathered in a conference room at a hotel in Cincinnati to review material from their psychology course with Doug Melody, a former UConn basketball star.
The players were missing four days of classes for the first round National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament, but Dr.
Melody was making sure that they were not neglecting their studies.
Before the team left the Storrs campus, he made sure that the players had not forgotten their school books.
Then, during the team's stay in Cincinnati, Dr.
Melody conducted several study sessions, lasting more than two hours each.


Out of the Kitchen


Honored in the Breach, as It Should Be
To the Editor:
Noting that governments are increasingly in noncompliance with their agreements with the International Monetary Fund, Doug Bandow ("Why Waste Aid on Russia?", Op-Ed, March 26) quotes the Harvard economist Jeffrey Sachs to the effect that most such agreements "are now honored in the breach."


Ms. Everett to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Torrey Everett 3d of Los Altos, Calif., have announced the engagement of their daughter Laura Bruce Everett to Kenneth Bruce Higgins, a son of Jeanne Higgins of Suffern, N.Y., and the late Patrick Higgins.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Everett, 26 years old, graduated from Smith College and is an elementary-grades teacher at the Town School in New York.
Mr.
Higgins, 37, graduated and received a master's degree from the Manhattan School of Music.
He teaches music at the Town School, and has composed music for film and television.


CAMPUS LIFE: Old Dominion; Ars Gratia Artis: Latin Professor To Teach Free
Prof.
Leland Peterson says he so much wants students at Old Dominion University in Norfolk, Va., to learn second-year Latin that he will teach it free of charge.
"I looked upon it as a modest volunteer effort," said Professor Peterson, who is an instructor of English at the college but has been teaching second-year Latin since 1980, when the university's only Latin professor left to seek a doctorate in classics.


Ex-Soviets to Get a $12 Billion Loan
The World Bank plans to lend $12 billion to $15 billion to the former Soviet republics by 1995 to bankroll food and oil-production projects and pay for critical imports like spare parts, according to the international lending institution's president.
The official, Lewis T. Preston, said that by the end of December, the World Bank expects to have lent $1.5 billion of the $24 billion in assistance pledged in a seven-nation package announced by President Bush and Chancellor Helmut Kohl of Germany on April 1.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: California; Responding to Call for Party Unity, Brown Says He Will Support Nominee
In a signal that he was prepared to temper the divisive tone of his campaign for President, Edmund G. Brown Jr. said today that he would back the Democratic Party's Presidential nominee.
"I will certainly offer my support for the nominee," the former California Governor told reporters here at the State Democratic Convention.


Lost Mets Get an Address From Torborg
The game was over and the clubhouse door was locked instantly, stranding a front-office official as well as a coach in a basement hallway underneath Shea Stadium.
A crisis in Queens?
Not quite, not yet.
But six games and four losses into the 1992 season, Manager Jeff Torborg felt it required that he address his club.


POINT COUNTERPOINT ON I.B.M.
In an article on the Forum page on March 22, Webster Brown, a former engineer with International Business Machines Corporation, wrote about his 26 years with I.B.M.
He told of how the optimism with which he signed on in 1964 for what probably would be a lifetime career eroded to the point that two years ago he took voluntary retirement at the age of 54.
He said he feared that had he stayed at the company, he would be weeded out by an employee appraisal system "which gets tougher each year, that seems designed to sweep the company clean of employees who, however loyal and competent, no longer fit in at I.B.M."


Data Update
MEDIAN RESALE HOUSE PRICES
Feb. 92
Jan. 92
Feb. 91
Nation
$ 103,800
$ 102,400
$ 95,000
Northeast
143,100
140,900
136,600
Midwest
82,500
80,600
76,300
South
92,000
88,700
83,900
West
150,400
152,400
140,800
*4*Source: National Association of Realtors
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
9.15
9.18
9.75
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.33
6.30
7.51
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
8.97
9.03
9.57
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.11
6.13
7.37
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
9.07
9.12
9.60
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.14
6.09
7.30
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
9.22
9.29
10.00
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.65
6.67
7.74
*4*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
4.50
4.64
6.26
National Mortgage Contract Rate
8.15
8.15
9.49
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes.  (Source: HSH Associates)


Perspectives: Apartment Layouts; Designing Buildings 'From the Inside Out'
THE architect Peter Claman is a quick man with a pencil.
Zip zip zip and he has sketched the floor of a residential building with its apartment layouts.
Then he firmly widens the space inside the front door by a few feet.
"You take the kitchen and slide it back a little," he says.
"You increase the size of the foyer, for a dining table, or a desk, or a hobby area."


Beware the Agenda of Den Fujita
To the Editor:
In "Den Fujita, Japan's Mr. Joint-Venture" (March 22), James Sterngold wrote of the willingness of executives of McDonald's, Toys "R" Us and Blockbuster Video to ignore Den Fujita's anti-Semitism on the ground that it does not "affect his business thinking."


Knights Coach Who Can Do More
The World League takes chances -- hiring the kinds of people the National Football League often did before it fell in love with its image on the TV screen.
And that includes the New York/ New Jersey Knights' bringing in as receivers coach a fellow who had not worn a football jacket since his Stanford days of 1969, who has as much fun playing the oboe as diagraming X's and O's, and who is the chairman of a glass company that has made him independent of the vagaries of a football paycheck.


CAMPUS LIFE: Boston College; Protest by Seniors Wins a Reprieve For the Mod Quad
What began as a week of controversy ended in triumph for Boston College seniors opposed to the destruction of their residential quadrangle to make way for housing.
Preliminary work on the quadrangle -- a favorite meeting place for seniors living in lower campus modular units -- was to begin last Wednesday.
But in the wake of student protests, and in advance of planned demonstrations, university administrators have deferred the work until after May graduation.
Digging up the so-called Mod Quad is part of Boston College's $240 million construction plan that includes eliminatiing 6 mods and relocating 14 -- 4 of them to the Mod Quad site -- to make room for two new residence halls and a dining hall.


116-Year-Old Company Thrives on Innovation
DESPITE 30 years of decline among Connecticut manufacturers, optimism reigns at Stanadyne Inc. in Windsor.
To understand why, it helps to consider the company's history.
Many other Connecticut business are just starting to learn about diversification and international markets.
But in 1947 the Hartford Machine Screw Company was adjusting to the slowdown in military contracts after the war and began making diesel-fuel injection pumps for cars and trucks.
In the 1980's, with the number of American-made diesel-powered cars dwindling, the company, now called Stanadyne, started selling its injectors in Japan and Europe.


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
Bayport 170,000
7 Cole Court  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 6-year-old contemporary; eat-in kitchen, den, 1-car garage; taxes $5,400.
Bohemia 153,000
3 Hill Drive  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 49-year-old ranch; basement, fireplace, 1-car garage, 0.5 acre; taxes $3,600.
Islip Terrace 145,000
15 Satelite Drive  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 28-year-old high ranch; dining room, family room, attic, deck; taxes $4,000.
Medford 132,500
337 Jamaica Avenue  6-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 12-year-old colonial; eat-in kitchen, dining room, den, basement, deck; taxes $3,900.
Patchogue 123,500
46 Pine Boulevard  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 27-year-old colonial; eat-in kitchen, den, attic; taxes $3,000.
West Sayville 138,000
27 Bartley Lane  4-bedroom, 1-bath, 25-year-old Cape Cod; eat-in kitchen, basement, inground pool; taxes $4,000.
OTHER AREAS Wilton, Conn. 360,000
4 Holly Place  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 25-year-old gambrel colonial; newly painted interior, solar hot water, 1.9 acres; taxes $4,344.
Armonk, N.Y. 327,000
15 Byram Brook Place
5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 27-year-old ranch; fireplace, eat-in kitchen, family room, den, 1.2 acres; taxes $5,520.
Absecon, N.J. 205,000
1025 Marlborough Avenue
5-bedroom, 3-bath, 28-year-old colonial, three porches, professionally landscaped; taxes $4,582.


Why 'Republic of Macedonia' Incenses Greeks
To the Editor:
I was astonished by the shockingly one-sided "Two Macedonias" (editorial, April 5), urging immediate recognition of a new state called Macedonia.
You fail to mention Greek concerns about recognition of a new state with the name Macedonia.


Glorious Roses Require Careful Tending
FORSYTHIA in bloom and pruning of roses seem to go together as far as gardeners are concerned.
The reason for this is patience.
By waiting until the forsythia blooms, gardeners can see which rose buds are sprouting and where the winter was severe.
Sometimes rose canes are killed by tough winters, and this one had low temperatures and no snow cover.
Many rose canes and the buds were killed.
Those buds that do sprout may be inner buds.
If left to grow, they would be inside stems.


In and Out in Villanova
Judging by the flurry of prospects flocking to Villanova you'd think that Athletic Director TED ACETO is trying to recruit an entire team, not a single coach to replace ROLLIE MASSIMINO.


Ms. Leslie Wed To Jon Samuels
Caren Michelle Leslie, the director of the FedKids Early Childhood Center in New York, and Jon Maynard Samuels, an audio engineer for RCA/BMG Records, also in New York, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Kenneth Gorsuch, a Reformed Church minister, officiated at a civil ceremony at West End Collegiate Church in New York.
Ms.
Leslie, 34 years old, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Smith College and has a master's degree from the Bank Street College of Education.
She is a daughter of the late James and Pearl Leslie of New York.


Cemex S.A.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


A. Schulman Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


They Shoot. They Don't Score.
Maybe if they had played six quarters today, the Knicks would have reached 100 points.
Then again, maybe they wouldn't have.
Making a jump shot became more difficult than threading a needle.
Making two shots in a row became reason for celebration.
And the saddest part for the Knicks was that if they could have scored 80 points, they would have won going away.


Quality Food Centers Inc. reports earnings for 12wks to March 21


Unusual Path To the Top At Mitsubishi
By the unwritten rules that dictate who rises to the top of Japan's corporate elite, Minoru Makihara should have long ago been scratched off the list of candidates to head the Mitsubishi Corporation, the crown jewel of Japan's most powerful business group.
In the years after World War II, when most of Tokyo's children were picking their way through the ruins of the city on the way to school, Mr.
Makihara was not in Japan at all; instead, he received his education at an elite prep school in New England.


CerProbe Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Agency Reinstates Tabulator of Iraqi War Deaths
A demographer whom the Census Bureau intended to dismiss after she made public her unclassified estimates on Iraqi civilian deaths during the Persian Gulf war will keep her job, the bureau said Saturday.
The demographer, Beth Osborne Daponte, estimated that American-led forces killed 13,000 Iraqi civilians during the war, more than twice the Census Bureau's subsequent calculations.
Ms.
Daponte made her figures public in January after The Associated Press asked for them.


Fare Cuts Announced By T.W.A.
Trans World Airlines defiantly counterattacked its larger competitors yesterday, reducing fares below the range of lower fares they announced on Thursday, to remain 35 to 40 percent cheaper than its rivals.
In addition, the carrier will give passengers double "frequent flyer" mileage for the next three months for flights through its St.
Louis hub.


Agency Group Gives Awards
The winners of the A+ awards at the 74th annual meeting of the American Association of Advertising Agencies proved to be popular choices.
At a presentation here Friday night, the audience applauded loudly, even cheering, when the recipients were announced.


Unitel Video Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Service Merchandise Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Dance in Review
Stefa Zawerucha  Bessie Schonberg Theater


Waiting for a Blessing


Vacation Spa Resorts reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Essay; The Stingers Stung
You are paying more for stamps these days to cover the salaries of postal inspectors who spend bureaucrat-years -- and hundreds of thousands of dollars -- trying to induce innocent customers into committing a crime by buying porn.
Something is wrong when law officers are allowed to go into the temptation business.


METRO DIGEST
WHEN THE RECESSION DOES NOT END
For tens of thousands of solidly middle-class men and women who have been thrown out of work by the weak economy, the recession has gone on too long.
Their unemployment benefits are running out.
Their savings are nearing exhaustion.
And eviction or foreclosure threats are turning up in the mail along with the piles of bills.
The effort to maintain a sense of control over their lives, emotions and dignity has become a daily challenge.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  WOMAN SURRENDERS AT THE UNITED NATIONS
Nearly 24 hours after she drove to the United Nations, doused herself with gasoline and threatened to set herself on fire as a protest against using taxes for military spending, a 41-year-old California woman surrendered to the police.
The woman, the daughter of a Nobel Prize-winning nuclear physicist, Owen Chamberlain, was taken to Bellevue Hospital.
B3.
THE TIMES AND DRIVERS REACH AGREEMENTS


First Chicago Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Rose's Stores reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 25


They Only Have Eyes on the Derby
The road to Louisville, about 75 miles from here on the map, suddenly seemed light years longer to some horses today after long shots outran favorites in the $500,000 Blue Grass Stakes on Saturday.
But neither defeat nor distance nor the hovering presence of the European champion Arazi deterred a few intrepid losers from taking the road to the Kentucky Derby.


Solar Financial Services reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


INSIDE
Winnie Mandela Accused
Winnie Mandela's driver told a newspaper that despite her denials, she ordered four young men kidnapped, helped beat them and later told him to "dump" the body of one.
Page A3.
Bank President Surrenders
Joseph Mollicone Jr., the bank president accused of touching off Rhode Island's banking crisis, surrendered to face embezzlement charges after 17 months in hiding.
Page A15.
Fatal Bus Crash Investigated
The authorities said excessive speed might have caused a bus crash in the Adirondacks that killed two students from Long Island.
Page B1.
A Different Pepsi
If it's clear, it must be light and refreshing, right?
That's what Pepsi-Cola is hoping the public will think as it rolls out Crystal Pepsi.
Page D1.


An Attempted Comeback for the Literary Salon
"Do animals have an unconscious?"
On a recent Sunday afternoon in a small apartment in the Bronx, Phil Rexon, a high school social studies teacher, posed that question to 11 people he had just met, among them a retired bank executive, a holistic healer and an owner of a real estate firm.


Keene Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


BF Enterprises Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Braintree Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Florafax International reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Traded Dick Schofield, shortstop, to the New York Mets for Julio Valera, pitcher, and a player to be named later.
Placed Chuck Finley and Scott Bailes, pitchers, on the 15-day disabled list.
Purchased the contracts of Steve Frey, pitcher, and Rene Gonzales, infielder, from Edmonton of the Pacific Coast League.
National League  PHILADELPHIA PHILLIES -- Placed Dale Sveum, infielder, on the 15-day disabled list, retroactive to April 8.
Purchased the contract of Jeff Grotewald, catcher-first baseman, from Scranton Wilkes-Barre of the International League.
SAN DIEGO PADRES -- Activated Larry Andersen, pitcher, from the 15-day disabled list.
Optioned Terry Bross, pitcher, to Las Vegas of the Pacific Coast League.


New Leadership Style at World Bank
The former commercial banker who now heads the World Bank has brought corporate American management practices to the international lending agency, revamping its vast and highly paid bureaucracy.
So far, he has forgone his predecessors' role in setting economic development priorities around the globe.
The reorganization by Lewis T. Preston, the former chairman of J. P. Morgan &amp; Company in New York who became president of the bank on Sept. 1, may have made the institution more nimble in responding to crises.


Wisconsin Southern Gas reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


National Mercantile Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Missing Youth Found in Foster Care
In the end, what matters to Pablo and Odilia Fuentes is that their son Pedro is home.
That, and the fact that the youth, who is mentally retarded, does not seem to have been harmed during the two years he was missing after mysteriously disappearing one afternoon a few blocks from the family's apartment here.
But the Fuentes admit that they are still puzzling over how their son, then 14 years old, could have been found wandering in the Bronx, 12 miles and across the Hudson from his home, shortly after he disappeared -- and then was placed in New York City's foster-care system -- without anyone notifying the police.


Nets' Playoff Hopes Still Partly Cloudy
On Saturday night, the Nets played their third consecutive game without 6-foot-10-inch power forward Derrick Coleman, and they lost, 118-98, in Atlanta.
Early today, the Nets arrived in the land of Disney not knowing if they could still make it to tomorrowland.
"It's cloudy here and there's no Coleman here," said New Jersey Coach Bill Fitch, whose team plays the Magic Monday night and is in sight of its first playoff appearance since 1986, with four games left in the regular season.
"That's the weather report and that's the scouting report."


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo; Bush May Get More Scrutiny After What Clinton Endured
As a battered Gov.
Bill Clinton nears the Democratic Presidential nomination, political analysts and politicians in both parties are debating whether President Bush will face a searching new inspection of his record, character, finances and conflict-of-interest issues involving his relatives, aides and associates.
Bush campaign aides said last week that they were braced for a renewed critique of the President because of the rough tone of the early primaries, the controversies about Mr.
Clinton's past and the Arkansas Governor's contention that he has been unfairly singled out.


GOLF: Sports of The Times; The Old Pro and the New Name
BY now, Fred Couples had been wearing his size-43 regular green jacket for nearly an hour.
As he talked about winning the Masters, he remembered being "more nervous than I've ever been in my life" when he was on the 12th tee.
And yet he remembered being "relaxed" because Raymond Floyd was the golfer he had to beat.
"All the things Raymond has told me," Couples was saying now, "I knew what he was going to do, like birdie the 13th. If it had been somebody else, it would've been a different feeling."


American Capital Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Harleysville National reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


GBC Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Digital Equipment Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-13  IRAN'S MODERATES LEAD VOTE
Early voting returns suggested that supporters of Iran's President were headed for a big victory over their anti-Western rivals in national elections.
The vote seemed to signal disenchantment with the radical goals of the Islamic revolution.
A1  KURDS TRIP PAST LAND MINES
Ranging from small ones that maim to spike-topped ones that kill, countless land mines threaten Kurds in Iraqi border areas.
A8  HANGING ON IN YUGOSLAVIA
Whatever shape Yugoslavia finally assumes, its immediate economic prospects are certain to be worse than those of the nation born in 1918 as an amalgam of "South Slav" peoples and religions.
A1
Alarmed by clashes, the U.N. plans to send observers to Bosnia.
A6  WINNIE MANDELA UNDER FIRE
A co-defendant told a South African newspaper that he lied last year to protect Winnie Mandela, wife of the African National Congress leader.
He said she indeed ordered four young men kidnapped, helped beat them and told him to dump the body of the youngest victim.
A3  COOLING TO AID FOR RUSSIA
The Russian Government's moves to slacken its tough economic reforms and hints by free-market advocates that they might resign could delay the flow of Western aid to Russia, economists say.
A12
Russian politicians haggle over reforms and power sharing.  A12
U.S. splits with Europe again over aid to former Soviet states.
A12  MEXICO'S SUPPLICANT CANDIDATES
Halfway into the incumbent's term, Mexico's silent presidential race has begun.
No one with ambitions to succeed President Salinas dares acknowledge them publicly.
A3  JAPAN WARNED ON NUCLEAR PLAN
The International Atomic Energy Agency has told Japan that its plans to import and store huge quantities of plutonium for its civilian nuclear program could pose "political and security problems" in Asia.
A2  EURO DISNEYLAND OPENS
Unruffled by muttering about cultural colonialism, Walt Disney opened its first European theme park 20 miles east of Paris.
Thousands of families flocked to the park despite warnings that their children's imaginations would be crushed.
A1  Prague Journal: From dissident to accused informant.
A4  Taiwan's leaders plan to relax curbs on political freedom.
A7  National A14-17, B8  FRAYED PENSION SAFETY NET
The share of America's work force covered by company pensions is shrinking, reversing a decades-old trend of steady growth.
Last year, an estimated 43 percent of workers participated in company pension plans, down from a peak of 49 percent in 1979.
The drop was steepest among younger, blue-collar men.
A1  EXAMINING THE INCUMBENT . . .
Aides to President Bush braced for a searching new inspection of his record, character, finances and conflict-of-interest issues as aides to Governor Clinton urge the news media to play fair.
A1  . . .
AND THE ICONOCLAST
The penchant of H. Ross Perot for riding to the rescue has taken him to the brink of a Presidential candidacy.
But the Texas billionaire shows vagueness when pressed on the issues, and closer examination of his business exploits suggest that not all were complete successes.
A1  AN ILLUSION OF AMITY SHATTERED
When whispers of mistrust erupted into a brawl between blacks and whites, a small Michigan college founded as a bastion of racial tolerance instead became an example of the tinderbox race can still be.
A14  CATERPILLAR CHIEF SPEAKS OUT
As chairman of Caterpillar Inc., Donald Fites is presiding over what many experts say is the most important labor battle in years.
It is an unusual position for Mr.
Fites, a marketing man who has been widely recognized for his ability to forge harmonious relations with colleagues and workers alike.
B8  BANK PRESIDENT GIVES UP
A Rhode Island bank president charged with embezzling $13 million from his bank and blamed for setting off the state bank crisis surrendered to the authorities after 17 months in hiding.
A15  CENSUS BUREAU BACKS OFF
The Census Bureau dropped its attempt to dismiss a demographer who made public her unclassified estimates on Iraqi civilian deaths during the Persian Gulf war.
A14  The Pope said he would visit Denver next year.
A14  Metropolitan Digest, B1 THE JOBLESS EX-MIDDLE CLASS
For tens of thousands of formerly solidly middle-class men and women thrown out of work by the weak economy, the recession has gone on too long.
The effort to maintain a sense of control over their lives has become a daily challenge.
A1
Business Digest, D1 Sports C1-10  Baseball: Yanks stretch streak to 5.
C1  Up, up and away goes Saberhagen e.r.a.
C1  Bonds and Smith lead Pirates to victory.
C6  Boston's Young pitches no-hitter . . . and loses.
C7  Basketball: Knicks reach a new low point.
C2  Nets' playoff hopes look cloudy.
C2  Boxing: Foreman escapes as a winner.
C9  Columns: Anderson on Couples and Floyd.C1  Football: Knights lose more than just the game.
C7  Golf: Couples wins Masters.
C1  Hockey: Devils lose to Capitals.
C4  Islanders eliminate the Leafs.
C4  Horse Racing: All eyes are on the Derby.
C9  Tennis: Sabatini keeps zooming along.
C3  Courier wins the Japan Open.
C3  Obituaries B9  Eve Merriam, writer  Arts/Entertainment C11-18  Hollywood titans clash.
C11  A Broadway dancer's life.
C11  Theater: "A Streetcar Named Desire."C11  Dance: In Review.
C12  Music: Continuum in works of Stefan Wolpe.
C11  Fugazi at the Ritz.
C12  Karen Akers sings.
C15  Word and Image: Literary salons are attempting a comeback.
C15  "Poethics," by Richard Weisberg.
C15  Editorials/Op-Ed A18-19  Editorials A18  Inspecting North Korea.
Get tougher with Peru.
Pornography and crime.
Diane Camper: Teens.
Letters A18  Leslie H. Gelb: Peru -- ideals in hell.
A19  William Safire: The stingers stung.
A19  William J. Taylor and Michael Mazarr: Defusing North Korea.
A19  John Hockenberry: Limited seating on Broadway.
A19


AlaFirst Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Applied Immune Sciences reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Review/Cabaret; Songs and Personal Asides
Karen Akers is as close as the New York cabaret world has come in recent years to spawning a home-grown answer to a European chanteuse.
Her regal, high-fashion appearance and musical tastes that run from Edith Piaf to high-toned American theater songs all suggest a musician who sees her material as an offshoot of European art song.
That taste extends to instrumental settings that treat almost everything as a kind of frilly semi-classical chamber music.
The singer's biggest challenge has always been how to transcend that image and do more than express an elegantly stifled angst.
And in her new show at the Ballroom (253 West 28th Street), which runs through Saturday, she has taken another small step toward becoming a genuinely communicative entertainer.
On Thursday the normally shy singer talked about her parents, her teen-age sons and her currently happy love life with an emphatic emotionality that at moments bordered on tearfulness.
The personal reflections were interwoven among performances of "More Than You Know," "If I Sing," "Unchained Melody" and others, in which Ms.
Akers projected an optimism that was almost vehement.


First Union Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


A Tattered Nation Tries to Emerge From the Wreckage of Yugoslavia
Crunching a fistful of Yugoslav dinars in his beefy hand, Dragan Schevo, a taxi driver here, explained the facts of living with the hyperinflation ignited by a year of civil conflict.
"Tomorrow, these will be worth 2 to 3 percent less," he said.
"In three days, 10 percent less. In 15 days, if I wait, I will have half. Prices are changed in the morning and then the afternoon. So, what you've got to get is Deutsche marks or dollars, at any price."


Baltimore Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Accounts
*
E.
I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Co., Wilmington, Del., to BBDO New York as its consolidated agency of record for the $75 million media buying account.
Participants in the review were not disclosed.


Racial Tension Erupts, Tearing a College Apart
Normally this is Olivet College's giddy season, the last few weeks of class at the small liberal arts college here that was founded as a bastion of racial tolerance and whose Gothic turrets dominate this tiny rural town.
But a week ago, a racial brawl brought unspoken hostilities to a boil and turned the campus of about 700 students into a living example of the tinderbox that race can still be in this country more than a generation after the civil rights movement.


Buttes Gas &amp; Oil reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Notebook; Brown Rally Goes Back to Future
"Take it back, America! Take it back!" Edmund G. Brown Jr. cries out to his supporters everywhere.
This time, they took it back.
About 25 years.
In an evening straight out of the 1960's, at least 4,000 people, many in tie-dyed shirts, men with pony tails and women with beads and big earrings, squeezed into a hangar at the Santa Monica Airport on Saturday night to see Mr.
Brown begin the California phase of his crusade for the Presidency.


Review/Rock; Going Beyond Dissonance In Hardcore From Fugazi
One of the stranger aspects of the rock culture of young whites is its steadfast fear of pleasure.
In the marginal styles of rock -- hardcore, speed metal -- confrontation and asceticism mix.
There isn't a soft sound to be heard all night.
These bands use only a few musical conceits, as if such a minimalist mix could somehow challenge the evils of industry, capitalism and on and on.
Guitar grind and noise are presented as superior to softer elements in pop music.
But music itself has no intrinsic value; dissonance and distortion have become signs of value for this particular culture.
Fugazi (pronounced foo-GAH-zee), which played at the Ritz on Wednesday night, is a bit different in that it keeps a hard core but also brings some light to the music.
Most post-punk or hardcore rock that goes musical and tries to present melodies or vary textures usually sounds like a bad mutation.
But the band, led by the guitarists Ian MacKaye and Guy Piccioto, has figured out how to make music beyond the standard rock and pop musical system.
It had the audience going wild.


Thruway Panel Is to Be Given Broader Power
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo will announce plans on Wednesday to expand the responsibilities of the New York State Thruway Authority as a way to stimulate economic development upstate, a top aide to the Governor said yesterday.
Under the plan, the semi-autonomous authority would assume control of the state's barge canal system, enabling it to collect new revenues from canal fees and long-term leases on land along the waterways, said Mary Ann Crotty, the Governor's director of policy management.
That revenue, along with money raised from bonds, tolls and other sources, would be invested in the canal system, the Gov.
Thomas E. Dewey Thruway and a variety of new projects throughout those parts of the state that abut the 641-mile highway, Ms.
Crotty said.


Ghost of Nazi Past Haunts the New Germany; Kohl's Arrogance
To the Editor:
As German students in New York we are embarrassed by Chancellor Helmut Kohl's meeting with Austria's President Kurt Waldheim.
We are particularly upset that the Jewish professors who teach us at the New School for Social Research found on the front page of your newspaper (March 28) a photograph of Mr.
Kohl engaged in conversation with Mr.
Waldheim, who is accused of having participated in World War II atrocities as a German army officer.
In his attempts to win votes on the extreme right wing of the electorate, Mr.
Kohl has repeatedly ignored Germany's special responsibilities toward neighboring countries and the international Jewish community.


Scimed Life Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Emerald Market Plan
Colombian emerald dealers are planning to set up a world emerald market here, a Bogota newspaper, El Tiempo, reported Saturday.
The newspaper said the idea was to set up a bourse that would regulate world trade in emeralds, worth about $1 billion a year.
Colombia is the world's biggest emerald producer.


Wilson Brothers reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Drivers Union Has Tentative Agreement With The Times
The New York Times and a major independent newspaper delivery company reached separate tentative agreements with the drivers union on Saturday that could insure labor peace in the wholesale distribution of New York's newspapers until the year 2000 and speed the opening of The Times's new printing plant in Edison, N.J.
The pacts cover 1,000 drivers for four wholesale distribution companies that deliver The Times, The Daily News, The New York Post, The Wall Street Journal and other publications to newsstands and other outlets in the city and suburbs.
The pending sale of the wholesale companies -- two to The Times and two to the independent company, Imperial Delivery Service -- made new agreements for their drivers necessary.


Bush Is Running, Always Running
When President BUSH comes to New York, he is provided with the same comforts he enjoys at the White House, when possible.
That includes an exercise machine, a $4,000 treadmill called a Trotter.
When the President is in town, it is rented from the Gym Source on East 51st Street between Fifth and Lexington Avenues, whose owner, RICHARD MILLER, reports it is made accessible for Secret Service inspection.


Russian Developments Could Delay West's Aid
The Russian Government's moves to slacken its tough economic reforms and hints by free-market advocates that they might resign could delay the flow of Western aid to Russia and the creation of a ruble stabilization fund, economists say.
The $24 billion aid package announced by President Bush just before the current meeting of the Congress of People's Deputies in Moscow was intended to help President Boris N. Yeltsin press ahead with changes, but his backtracking last week, caused largely by pressures from the hostile legislature, could delay important pieces of the package.


Limited Seating on Broadway
The show at the Virginia Theater, "Jelly's Last Jam," is in previews, and even though tickets are $60 for orchestra seats (the only option for patrons in wheelchairs), the price was a minor impediment to the prospect of an evening of Jelly Roll Morton's jazz.
The art community in New York City has a reputation for being progressive.
It is the forum and agent for challenging America's hardened perceptions about race, politics, class, gender, religion and, more recently, AIDS and homophobia.
In particular, the theater world likes to think of itself as a seeker of such challenges and is proudest when a play or musical becomes a vehicle for change.


B. M. Parker, 92, An Engineer, Rabbi And U.S. Official
Dr.
Benjamin M. Parker, who had a four-fold career as an engineer, rabbi, corporate lawyer and government official, died on Saturday at his home in Arlington, Va.
He was 92 years old.
He died of cerebral arteriosclerosis, his family said.


Wait Till This Week, Or Maybe Next Year
For Bret Saberhagen to reduce his earned run average to his career level by the end of the first month of the season, he would have to pitch three shutouts in his next four starts and allow only one run in the other start.
That's the kind of hole he has excavated for himself in his first two starts for the Mets.
Saberhagen, whose acquisition from Kansas City was one of the eye-opening deals of the winter, made his second start yesterday, and it bore an ugly resemblance to his first.
The two-time Cy Young award winner gave up seven runs for the second time as the Montreal Expos pummeled the Mets, 8-2, and completed a sweep of their three-game series.


Mercury Finance Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Centura Banks reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


West Point-Pepperell reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Rudman Hits Wrong Targets on Deficit
To the Editor:
Senator Warren B. Rudman is a knight in tarnished armor.
He announced his decision not to seek re-election to the United States Senate, expressing his often-used anger about the failure of Congress and the President to face the overwhelming budget deficit and its terrible consequences for the country (news article, March 25).
It was when he began to explain the reasons for the deficit that he became partisan and tarnished.
Placing the blame for the deficit on expenditures for entitlement programs is pure sophistry.
As an example Senator Rudman singled out Medicare and Medicaid programs without a word about a health-care system running out of control, and no politician really willing to face the reforms necessary to bring health care, and thus Medicare and Medicaid, under fiscal control.


Urbane Cowboys; City Slickers Take to Country Music
Country music has become America's latest obsession, twanging its way from truck stops and Texas beer halls to top Billboard magazine's album charts and to claim the covers of such mainstream magazines as Time and Forbes.
Ordinarily, people in fad-crazed New York City would pick up on such cues and elbow their way to the crest of the trend -- restocking their music collections, revamping their wardrobes and even switching Saturday night hangouts.
And they are. Sort of.


Czar Resources reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Tranzonic Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Bank of Granite reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Winston Resources reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


IRANIAN PRESIDENT APPEARS TO BEAT ANTI-WEST RIVALS
Supporters of President Hashemi Rafsanjani of Iran appeared today to be headed for a landslide against their anti-Western rivals in national Parliamentary elections, according to early returns.
President Rafsanjani's supporters had been expected to win a majority of the 270 seats in Parliament, but with about 12 percent of the paper ballots counted today, they were running ahead of projections and the official news agency was predicting an overwhelming victory.


Review/Music; Rehearing a Composer Who Personified His Time
There is a spirit of uncompromising antagonism in Stefan Wolpe's music.
With its atonal exclamations and craggy rhythms, it will never reach a large public, but it has a strong following and strong voice.
Among the music's more committed allies have been Cheryl Seltzer and Joel Sachs, pianists and directors of Continuum, who devoted their fifth program in 25 years to the composer on Saturday night in Alice Tully Hall.
Wolpe (pronounced VOHL-peh) followed an almost archetypal path as a 20th-century cultural figure.
In 1920's Berlin, he was friends with Paul Klee and Wassily Kandinsky (with whom he played chamber music).
He joined the Communist Party in 1925 and linked his "advanced" art to "advanced" politics.
He left Germany in 1933 and studied with Webern in Vienna before making his way to Palestine, where he was influenced by his Jewish heritage.
In 1938, he came to the United States where his music of opposition grew more refined until he succumbed to Parkinson's disease in 1972.
The range of his works and the facts of his life are just now being rediscovered.


Quotation of the Day
"I am not a legend. But I am a myth." -- H. ROSS PEROT.  [ A16:4. ]


Tigera Group Inc.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Cuomo Renews Call for Changes in Election Law
With the state budget wars behind him, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo today revived his plea for the Legislature to make sweeping changes in the state's election laws and stressed that such action would be "relevant" to whether or not he vetoes a legislative redistricting bill.
Mr.
Cuomo released a letter that he sent last Friday to the Assembly Speaker, Saul Weprin, and the Senate majority leader, Ralph J. Marino, imploring them to pass a number of bills he has supported for years.


Abbott Laboratories reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Couples Makes Masters His First Major Title


Lisa Archinow Wed to Jordan Katz
Lisa Jill Archinow, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Irving Archinow of Blue Bell, Pa., was married there yesterday to Dr.
Jordan Perry Katz, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles Katz of Brooklyn.
Rabbi Harold M. Kamsler officiated at Temple Tiferet Bet Israel.
Miss Archinow, 32 years old, is a manager in the restructuring and reorganization group at Ernst &amp; Young, the accounting firm in New York.
She graduated from the University of Chicago and received an M.B.A. degree from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father is a dentistin Norristown, Pa., and her mother, Sondra Archinow, is his office manager.


Yeltsin and Foes in Congress Step Away From the Brink
Russian Government and congress officials spent the day today in secretive huddles, seeking ways to retreat from the confrontation that took shape on Saturday when the country's highest elected council adopted a resolution limiting President Boris N. Yeltsin's right to name his officials.
After a meeting between senior members of Mr.
Yeltsin's Government and the Presidium of the Congress of People's Deputies, the two sides said in a statement that "as a result of constructive discussions, it became possible to narrow the positions and to agree on cooperation in advancing radical economic reform."


Baton Broadcasting (X) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Yonkers Pushes New Plan For Anti-Bias Housing
Seven years since a Federal judge ruled that housing in Yonkers was deliberately racially segregated, top city officials are trying to sell the idea of desegregation, over raised voices, for the first time in the city's history.
Yonkers' new Mayor, Terence M. Zaleski, and ranking City Council members are lobbying hard for a compromise housing plan, instead of one ordered by the judge, to correct what was found to be 40 years of intentional segregation in housing and education.
If approved by the City Council on Tuesday and accepted by the judge, city leaders say it will signal an acceptance of integration, both legally and emotionally.


KLLM Transport reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Foreman Escapes as A Winner
It wasn't easy.
Alex Stewart kept drilling the jab in George Foreman's face, which became distorted with swelling.
The scheduled 10-round heavyweight fight in the ring Saturday night was barely halfway done and there was Foreman with lumps beneath both eyes and the right side of his face distended, as if his jaw was broken.
He looked like the bad guy from a fright movie.


Review/Theater: A Streetcar Named Desire; Alec Baldwin Does Battle With the Ghosts
Depending on your feelings about "Long Day's Journey Into Night," "A Streetcar Named Desire" is either the greatest or second-greatest play ever written by an American.
But actors have to be half-mad to star in Tennessee Williams's drama on Broadway, where the glare is unforgiving and the ghosts of Elia Kazan's original 1947 production, as magnified by the director's classic 1951 film version, are fierce.
Stacked against Marlon Brando, the first Stanley Kowalski, and Jessica Tandy and Vivien Leigh, the stage and screen originators of Blanche DuBois, who can win?
The exciting news from the Ethel Barrymore Theater, where Gregory Mosher's new Broadway staging of "Streetcar" arrived last night, is that Alec Baldwin has won.
His Stanley is the first I've seen that doesn't leave one longing for Mr.
Brando, even as his performance inevitably overlaps his predecessor's.
Mr.
Baldwin is simply fresh, dynamic and true to his part as written and lets the echoes fall where they may.
While his Stanley does not in the end ignite this play's explosive power, that limitation seems imposed not by his talent but by the production surrounding him and, especially, by his unequal partner in unhinged desire, Jessica Lange's Blanche DuBois.


Foreign Affairs; Peru: Ideals in Hell
Peru has had little genuine democracy despite 10 years of elections.
It has no democracy now that President Alberto Fujimori has overthrown a weak, corrupt constitutional government.
And what the U.S. and others are telling him is that he will have no chance to restore order and combat corruption unless he first re-establishes democratic legitimacy -- and quickly.
Mr.
Fujimori, a stubborn and solitary technocrat, is not listening.
For the moment, his self-coup d'etat with military support seems wildly popular.
Peruvians have had it with politicians, poverty, drug lords and a losing fight against fanatical terrorists.


Larizza Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Dividend Meetings


Jayne Weinberg Wed in Baltimore
Jayne D. Weinberg, the daughter of Mrs.
Stanley E. Weinberg of White Plains and the late Mr.
Weinberg, was married in Baltimore yesterday to Eric B. Stillman, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Damie Stillman of Baltimore.
Rabbi Marc Loeb performed the ceremony at the Lloyd Street Synagogue.
Mrs.
Stillman is the administrator at the Manor Care nursing home in Plantation, Fla.
She graduated from George Washington University, where she also received a master's degree in gerontology.
Her first marriage ended in divorce.
Her mother, Helen Weinberg, is a supervisor of the social-work department at the Westchester County Medical Center in Valhalla, N.Y.


Carl Karcher Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 27


Levi Strauss Associates Inc.(X) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 23


St. Paul Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Checkpoint Systems reports earnings for Qtr to March 29


Health Equity Properties reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Man Killed and Daughter Wounded in Car
A 27-year-old man was shot and killed yesterday afternoon and his 5-year-old daughter was wounded when a man fired a single gunshot into their parked car as they sat on a street in Brooklyn, the police said.
The father, identified as Luis Ramos, was struck in the face by the bullet, which then grazed his daughter in the chest and hand, said Sgt.
Joseph Herbert of the 83d Precinct Detective Squad.
The girl, whose name was not released, was taken to Elmhurst General Hospital, where she was listed in stable condition, said a police spokeswoman, Sgt.
Tina Mohrmann.
The girl's injuries were minor, Sergeant Herbert said.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; A Big Spender Finds Fault With Agencies and Clients
REMEMBER how when E. F. Hutton spoke, everyone listened?
That same rapt attention was commanded by one of the advertising industry's most powerful clients when he discussed the creativity and effectiveness, or lack thereof, in the campaigns for which he spends $800 million a year.
"Excellent advertising, advertising that really does drive growth, is all too seldom achieved," Richard P. Mayer, chairman and chief executive of Kraft General Foods North America, told a session of the 74th annual meeting of the American Association of Advertising Agencies at the Ritz-Carlton Hotel here.
The meeting ended on Saturday.


Republic Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Dance in Review
Dances Patrelle  Gould Hall


Collective Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


A Costly Day: Knights Lose Game and Their 2 Quarterbacks
The New York/New Jersey Knights might as well have fought without swords or shields today as they lost both starting quarterbacks and their fourth consecutive World League game, 39-21, to the Orlando Thunder.
The Knights' starting quarterback, Reggie Slack, played despite a sprained left shoulder suffered the previous week.
In the first quarter, he completed all seven of his passes for 95 yards and scored on a 4-yard run for a brief 14-7 lead.


Circuit Research Labs Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Rhode Island Bank Chief Surrenders to Face Embezzlement Charges
Joseph Mollicone Jr., the former bank president accused of touching off the banking crisis that swept this state a year ago, surrendered here today after eluding the authorities for 17 months.
Mr.
Mollicone, who is charged with embezzling at least $13 million from the bank he headed, gave himself up at 1 o'clock this morning in the home of Thomas DiLuglio Sr., a prominent lawyer here.
He is being held at a state prison in Cranston, where he is to be arraigned on Monday.
Led to Bank Crisis
The 48-year-old banker disappeared on Nov. 8, 1990, after his son dropped him off at Logan Airport in Boston.
Attorney General James O'Neil said he did not know where Mr.
Mollicone had been since his disappearance, but added that he thought it was "far away." He suggested that the Providence banker might have returned to see his first grandchild, who was born several months ago.


Race Meets Race, but Fear Is Faster
THE day after Primary Day, when so many politicians were feeling sorry for themselves alone, a spontaneous outpouring of sympathy for two accident victims belied the reputation for insensitivity that New York had earned during the campaign.
So what if the 64-year-old blind man struck by a taxi on Fifth Avenue received fewer calls from well-wishers than his injured guide dog received?


Southern National reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Main Street Isn't Dead
To the Editor:
Re "The Heart of the City Now Beats in the Mall" (front page, March 27): Although Main Street may no longer serve as the retail center it was, it still serves in many other ways.
A proud history, strong tax base, developed infrastructure and ideal site allow our older commercial centers to offer services, office space, cultural events, specialty retailing and restaurants.
With help from the public and private sector, Main Streets around New York are doing much to prove that downtowns can continue to be the true focal point of community life.
NORMAN MINTZ President, New York Main Street Alliance New York, April 2, 1992


Greetree Software reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Race Meets Race, but Fear Is Faster
THE day after Primary Day, when so many politicians were feeling sorry for themselves alone, a spontaneous outpouring of sympathy for two accident victims belied the reputation for insensitivity that New York had earned during the campaign.
So what if the 64-year-old blind man struck by a taxi on Fifth Avenue received fewer calls from well-wishers than his injured guide dog received?


U.N. to Send 100 Observers To Bosnia and Herzegovina
Alarmed by the widening of the Yugoslav civil war, the United Nations plans to send observers into at least two regions of Bosnia and Herzegovina, United Nations officials said today.
Several thousand soldiers of a United Nations peacekeeping contingent expected to total 14,000 have been sent to the front lines in Croatia.
Their mission is included in an agreement on deployment of peacekeepers that was signed on Jan. 2 by Serbian and Croatian commanders at Sarajevo, the capital of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Provisions were made at the time for sending observers to possible flashpoints in Bosnia and Herzegovina, where fighting has flared in the last week.


Cott Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 25


U.S. Again Splits With Western Europe Over Aid to Eastern Lands
The tensions between the United States and Western Europe over who should take the lead in rebuilding the former Soviet states reappeared today as Treasury Secretary Nicholas F. Brady complained that the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development was going beyond its mandate.
The bank, with headquarters in London, was established a year ago to provide market-rate loans and equity investments for private enterprises in Eastern Europe, mainly to foster specific projects.
Headed by Jacques Attali, a French philosopher-banker close to President Francois Mitterrand, the bank has already committed $770 million to 20 ventures.


Wilshire Oil Co. of Texas reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Napier International reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Equity Offerings Planned for This Week
The following equity offerings are expected this week:
Adaptec Inc., 3 million common shares. Bear, Stearns.
Adesa Corp., 2 million common shares. Robinson-Humphrey Co.
Affinity Biotech Inc., 2 million common shares. Penn Merchant Group.
AGCO Corp., 3.75 million common shares. First Boston.
American Adjustable Rate Trust Inc. 1998, 2 million shares.
Piper, Jaffray &amp; Hopwood.
American Pacific Corp., 1.55 million common shares. Dean Witter Reynolds.
California Micro Devices Corp., 1.5 million units, each consisting of 1 common share and 1 warrant.
T.
R.
Winston &amp; Co.
Cardiovascular Imaging Systems Inc., 2 million common shares. Montgomery Securities.
Chromcraft Revington Inc., 2.9 million common shares. Robinson-Humphrey Co.
Conductus Inc., 1.8 million common shares. Alex. Brown &amp; Sons.
Corporate Software Inc., 1.25 million common shares. Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette.
Cosmetic Center Inc., 1 million common shares. Legg Mason.
Creative Biomolecules Inc., 3.5 million common shares. Goldman, Sachs.
Cummins Engine Co., 2 million common shares. Morgan Stanley.
Cygnus Therapeutic Systems, 3 million common shares. Robertson, Stephens.
First Mortgage Corp., 1 million common shares. Crowell, Weedon &amp; Co.
First USA Inc., 6 million common shares, with 4.8 million offered in the U.S.
Merrill Lynch.
Genpharm International Inc., 2.5 million common shares. Kidder, Peabody.
Heritage Media Corp., 4.5 million common shares. Goldman, Sachs.
Intergroup Healthcare Corp., 1.15 million common shares. Dillon, Read.
Kopin Corp., 1.8 million common shares. Tucker Anthony.
Laser Video Network Inc., 850,000 units, each unit consisting of 2 shares and 1 class A warrant and 1 class B warrant.
D.
H.
Blair.
Lennar Corp., 2.75 million common shares. Morgan Stanley.
McMillin Cos., 4.5 million common shares. Paine Webber.
Medarex Inc., 2.3 million common shares. First Boston.
Men's Wearhouse Inc., 1.5 million common shares. Bear, Stearns.
Metricom Inc., 2 million common shares. Cowen &amp; Co.
Minnesota Municipal Term Trust Inc.
II, 6 million common shares.
Piper, Jaffray &amp; Hopwood.
Morningstar Group Inc., 5.95 million common shares. First Boston.
Neozyme II/Genzyme Corp., 2.1 million units, each consisting of 1 callable share of Neozyme II and 1 warrant for 1 share of Genzyme.
Paine Webber.
North American Mortgage Corp., 1.9 million common shares. Merrill Lynch.
Oneita Industries Inc., 3 million common shares. Oppenheimer &amp; Co.
Option Care Inc. 3.25 million common shares. Alex. Brown &amp; Sons.
Oriole Homes Corp., 1.65 million class B shares. Paine Webber.
PDK Labs Inc., 1.55 million common shares. Stratton Oakmont Inc.
Parker &amp; Parsley Petroleum, 4.2 million common shares. Dean Witter Reynolds.
Payless Cashways Inc., 33.5 million global offering, with 27 million offered in the U.S.
Merrill Lynch.
Property Trust of America 5 million common shares. Salomon Bros.
Republic Bancorp Inc., 2.9 million shares. Keefe, Bruyette &amp; Woods.
Ringer Corp., 2 million common shares. Piper, Jaffray &amp; Hopwood.
Simula Inc., 1 million common shares. W. B. McKee Securities.
Software Etc Stores Inc., 2.7 million common shares. Robertson, Stephens.
Stein Mart Inc., 4 million common shares. First Boston.
Syntro Corp., 3 million common shares. Piper, Jaffray &amp; Hopwood.
Technology Equity and Income Trust, 2 million units, consisting of a basket of technology stocks.
Morgan Stanley.
Teledata Communications Ltd., 3.5 million common shares. Lehman Brothers.
Thomas &amp; Betts, 1.5 million common shares. Morgan Stanley.
Trimas Corp., 4 million common shares, with 3.2 million in the U.S. Lehman Brothers.
Visx Inc., 1.2 million common shares. Allen &amp; Co.
Watson Pharmaceuticals Inc., 3 million common shares. Morgan Stanley.
Worthington Foods Inc., 1.75 million common shares. William Blair.
Younkers Inc., 6.17 million common shares.
Goldman, Sachs. (Source: MCM CorporateWatch.)


UJB Financial Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Medicore Inc.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Mets Are Talking. Who's Listening?
The Mets, who have had more than their share of headlines recently, would like a little privacy, if you please.
The club has posted a notice in its Shea Stadium locker room asking that reporters recognize the clubhouse "is not a lounge or a reading room or a place for social exchange with other members of the media."


Medcross Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Ghost of Nazi Past Haunts the New Germany; No Waldheim Evidence
To the Editor:
"Mr. Waldheim's German Fans" (editorial, March 31) alleges that the Austrian Federal President, Kurt Waldheim, concealed his Nazi past.
The reference to a Nazi past implies membership and support for the Nazi Party and its doctrine.
Compare this with Nazi documents that describe Kurt Waldheim as "particularly hateful against our movement," a person to be considered unreliable.
The report of the British Ministry of Defense delivered upon request of members of the House of Commons states that "Dr. Waldheim was a mere junior staff officer and that there is no evidence of relevant delegated executive authority or of any causative overt act or omission from which his guilt of a war crime may be inferred." FRIEDRICH HOESS Ambassador of Austria Washington, April 6, 1992


Market Place; Supermarket Industry Has New Threats
PEOPLE literally tighten their belts during a recession -- buying less expensive brands and foods, for instance -- much to the misfortune of investors in supermarket companies.
During 1991, supermarket stocks had a poor year, appreciating less than 4 percent while the Standard &amp; Poor's 500 rose 26 percent.
Now, with signs of life in the economy, some investors are warily considering the food retailers.


People
*
James V. McConnell Jr., 51 years old, was named to the new position of vice president for advertising and public affairs at Frito-Lay Inc., Plano, Tex.
He was previously president and chief executive at J. Walter Thompson, Tokyo.


Speed of Bus May Be Cause Of Accident
State investigators said yesterday that excessive speed may have caused the crash of a chartered bus that slid off a wet, slushy highway in the Adirondacks Saturday and tumbled down a 70-foot embankment, killing 2 of 27 junior high school students heading home to Long Island from a trip to Montreal.
As State and Federal investigators examined the crash and family and friends mourned the deaths of the 12- and 13-year-old victims, some parents and school officials traveled upstate yesterday to be with the terrified young survivors.
Most of them returned home to East Meadow, L.I., last night on a chartered bus.


Standard Microsystems Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Sonoco Products Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 29


F&amp;E Resource Systems Technology Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Allied Bankshares reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Getting the Message To College Students
As the college spring-break season nears an end and marketers begin to pack up their promotional campaigns, Performance Research in Newport, R.I., has issued the results of a survey measuring the memorability of spring-break advertising.
Chrysler's Jeep/Eagle division was atop the list, mentioned by 33 percent of the students surveyed.
U S Sprint came in second, at 19 percent, followed by Anheuser-Busch, at 18 percent; Miller Brewing, at 15 percent; MTV, at 13 percent, and Hawaiian Tropic tanning lotions, at 10 percent.


Japan Is Cautioned on Plan To Store Tons of Plutonium
The International Atomic Energy Agency has told Japan that its plans to store huge quantities of plutonium here for its ambitious civilian nuclear program could pose "political and security problems" in Asia.
The agency has quietly urged Tokyo to place the stockpiles under international custody rather than keep them in Japanese hands.
The unusual caution to Tokyo last week by a senior official of the agency came just as Japan commissioned, amid considerable secrecy, a military escort ship to guard the highly toxic, radioactive plutonium when it is shipped from Europe to Japan beginning this fall.
Each shipment will contain roughly a ton of plutonium, enough to produce 100 to 150 atomic bombs.
Danger of Attack or Accident
Japan forswore the manufacture or possession of nuclear weapons after World War II, and few doubt the Government's contention that the plutonium will be used only for civilian purposes, part of a broad national policy to reprocess atomic waste and reuse it in conventional nuclear power plants and new "breeder reactors."


From Middle Class to Jobless: A Sense of Pride Is Shattered
Like a mantra said daily over the shambles of his life, Marvin Pedowitz repeats: "I'm not going to lose my cool. I am in control."
Only at moments of great stress, like the other morning when his car battery died and he could not drive to a job interview it had taken weeks to line up, do the words fail him.


Orion Pictures Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Corrections
An entry in the Executive Changes listing of Business Day on Friday misstated the new position of David L. Armstrong at the AEG Corporation.
He was named president of the AEG Automation Systems Corporation, a unit of the AEG Corporation.


Hancock Holding reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


All American Communications reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Stuart Entertainment reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Books of The Times; Why Law and Letters Shouldn't Be Strangers
Poethics and Other Strategies of Law and Literature  By Richard Weisberg  Illustrated. 312 pages.
Columbia University Press. $32.95.


Quality Products reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Television; The Networks Finally End Their Prime-Time Decline
ONE season may not end a trend, but after 15 years of steady erosion in their share of the prime-time audience, the three big broadcast networks finally have some evidence that they may not be in a permanent plunge.
For the first time since the 1976-77 season, the three networks have ended a television season with a larger share of the audience than they had the year before.


Genlyte Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Consulier Engineering Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Summit Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Sure, It's Clear; As for Taste . . .
What do two experts make of Crystal Pepsi, the new clear cola?
Even before the first sip, Molly O'Neill, who reports on food for The New York Times, said, "It's got large beads," noting the bubbles clinging to the side of the glass.


Westinghouse Credit Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Eve Merriam, 75, Poet and Author Who Wrote for Children, Is Dead
Eve Merriam, an award-winning poet, playwright and author of more than 50 books for adults and children, died on Saturday at St.
Vincent's Hospital in Manhattan.
She was 75 years old and lived in Manhattan.
She died of cancer, her family said.


Numac Oil &amp; Gas reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


TAIWAN TO RELAX LIMITS ON SPEECH
The authorities are expected to take major steps this year to ease the remaining curbs on political debate in Taiwan.
Pressed hard by the opposition, the Government is easing its ban on seditious speech and will free some political prisoners.
It is also expected to end its blacklist of Taiwan exiles, effectively fueling political debate.


Detroit &amp; Canada Tunnel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Safety-Kleen reports earnings for Qtr to March 21


PENSIONS COVERING LOWER PERCENTAGE OF U.S. WORK FORCE
The share of America's work force covered by company pensions is shrinking, reversing a decades-old trend of steady growth.
Last year, an estimated 43 percent of workers participated in company pension plans, down from a peak of 49 percent in 1979.
While women's participation in pension plans held almost steady, the drop for younger blue-collar men was far steeper than for the work force as a whole.


CHRONICLE
For anyone who didn't have enough Mozart during the bicentennial, there is now a book, whose publisher, LUKE IVES PONTIFELL, says is intended to last 500 years and serve as a time capsule.
The work, "Mozart: Portfolio of a Genius," published by Thornwillow Press, was printed by letter press and bound by hand in a limited edition of 500 copies.


In Chinese or Persian, It's in the Yellow Pages
Where do many new immigrants go when they want to get an immigration lawyer, a tax consultant or a physician they can talk to?
Where do they go to find their national food, or a newspaper or church service in a language they can understand?
Why to the Yellow Pages, of course, but not necessarily the telephone companies' books.
Many immigrants instead turn to any one of numerous ethnic directories.


Hartmarx Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Say No to Phone-Surveillance Surcharge
To the Editor:
William S. Sessions, the Federal Bureau of Investigation director, writes (Op-Ed, March 27) that we are entering an era when digital encryption (the electronic encoding of data to guard against unauthorized use) and digital telephone systems threaten the ability of the F.B.I. and other crime-fighting organizations to tap our telephones with ease, thus threatening their ability to fight crime.
The proposed solution to the problem of tapping digital telephones involves forcing phone companies to design systems with the ability to monitor any conversation easily.
The phone companies, not wanting to pay for this system have said they will pass the cost along to their customers.
The estimated cost will be 20 cents a month per telephone line.


First Bancorp of Ohio reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Medical Sterilization Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Canadian Foremost reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Numbers Don't Add Up as Devils Fall
The timing was off, especially in overtime, for the Devils in their first game back from the 10-day layoff as a result of the National Hockey League strike.
The worst miscalculation for the Devils came 2 minutes 15 seconds into the overtime period, when they got caught outnumbered in their zone and allowed Peter Bondra to score and give the Capitals a 4-3 victory at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
One man whose timing was on the button all night for the Devils was Chris Terreri, their premier goaltender, who played brilliantly in his return after missing five games with a sprained lower back.


Mr. Daly, Driving; Spring Dingers
The philosophy of golfer JOHN DALY is "Grip it and rip it." So when the 1991 P.G.A. champion produced a 40-minute instructional video, his motto was the logical title.
There were only three days available to shoot it, and it rained on the first.
No problem.
Daly roared through 90 different shots the next two days. . . .
When CECIL FIELDER struck three homers in the Tigers' first two games, it evoked home-run memories of past Aprils.
The best total for the month is 11, shared by three: WILLIE STARGELL with the 1971 Pirates, GRAIG NETTLES with the 1974 Yankees and MIKE SCHMIDT with the 1976 Phillies.
Stargell (with 48 in 1971) and Schmidt (with 38 in 1976) went on to lead the league but Nettles hit only 11 more the remainder of the season. . . .
The Negro League Baseball Players Association, headed by MONTE IRVIN, was established to help former players who have never had pensions, as well as to act as a clearinghouse of information for the public.
The group will sponsor a baseball card show and forum at the Meadowlands Hilton in Secaucus, N.J., on May 30 and 31.


Intel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Now Parachuting Into Shea
Dick Schofield, the Mets' newest player, is scheduled to arrive in New York shortly after 6 o'clock this evening.
If he gets to Shea Stadium in time, he could be the starting shortstop against Philadelphia.
That's how badly Jeff Torborg wants a completely sound player at short.
"In the middle of the defense, we've got to have a complete player," the manager said yesterday.


Liberty Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Braun's Fashions Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Untangling the Snarls at Olympia &amp; York
Representatives of more than 100 of the world's largest banks will gather in Toronto this morning to review for the first time a staggeringly complex financial mess: the troubled Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd.
And Olympia &amp; York will come to the meeting without the man it hired only weeks ago to lead its negotiations -- Thomas S. Johnson, the former president of the Manufacturers Hanover Bank.
Mr.
Johnson resigned yesterday as president of Olympia &amp; York, unable to satisfy himself with the company's compensation package and some of its strategies for dealing with the bankers.


First Virginia Banks reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Argonaut Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Independent Bankshares Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


The Soil Yields Terror for Iraq's Kurds
As Star Ahmad Suleiman set out across his field with a herd of sheep a few weeks ago, he thought it was perfectly safe.
Not long before, he cleared some 300 land mines from the area.
But there was one, hidden beneath the soft earth, that he had missed.
"I didn't see it," he said.


Dow Jones &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Dynamics Research Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Andover Togs reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Startel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


On Your Mark, Set, Chow Down
The unsinkable WILLIAM CAMPBELL doesn't look like other top-flight swimmers, whose shoulders are broad, waists negligible, hips all but missing.
Campbell, you see, calls himself the CHARLES BARKLEY of swimming, a big, round mound clearly visible above the water line.
University of Nebraska teammates call him Fridge.
One gave Campbell his own ZIP code.


Flagship Financial Corp. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Biogen Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Marble Financial Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Yanks Stretch The Streak to 5
No one has called the Yankees amazing, because they really are not.
No one has called them contenders, because they probably will not be when September arrives.
But call them surprising, call them refreshing and, most important, call them one of the two remaining undefeated teams in the major leagues after one memorable week.
This afternoon, the Yankees maintained this status by pounding the Tigers, 5-1, at Tiger Stadium and boosting their record to 5-0.


Worries Over Another Big Developer
Olympia &amp; York is not the only real estate developer that has bankers worried on both sides of the Atlantic.
Heron International, one of Britain's largest privately owned companies, is doing its best to counter fears that it is on the brink of collapse.
Last week, investors and investment bankers placed Heron's bonds into technical default, meaning that bondholders could demand immediate repayment, though a spokesman for Heron stressed that the investors had not done so and would not necessarily take such action.


Utility Suit Is Dropped
The Washington Public Power Supply System said Siemens A.G. had dropped a lawsuit against the system.
The lawsuit had addressed nuclear fuel contract provisions included the settlement of a $1.2 billion lawsuit brought by the system against the General Electric Company in 1985.
Siemens had argued that the settlment might exclude it from bidding to supply nuclear fuel to the system.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
Blazers Clinch Title  The Portland Trail Blazers locked up their second straight Pacific Division title yesterday with a 123-97 victory over San Antonio as Terry Porter scored 28 points and Kevin Duckworth tied his season high with 23.
The Blazers, even without Clyde Drexler, who is out with a sore right knee, never trailed. (AP) Cavaliers 114, Bullets 91: Brad Daugherty has 20 points and 14 rebounds, leading Cleveland over Washington in Richfield, Ohio. (AP)
AUTO RACING  Allison Overcomes Pain  Davey Allison, equipped with a flak jacket and a special seat to relieve pain, outraced Rusty Wallace over the final 50 laps to win the $551,921 First Union 400 yesterday in North Wilkesboro, N.C.
Allison's victory also gave Ford cars their seventh straight victory on the Nascar circuit this season and 11 in a row dating to last year.
The seven victories to start the season is a Nascar record.
Allison suffered rib injuries in a crash last week. (AP) Sullivan Nips Unser: Danny Sullivan survived a bumping incident with his teammate Al Unser Jr. four laps from the end to win the Toyota Grand Prix of Long Beach and end Unser's string of four straight victories on the downtown street circuit in Long Beach, Calif.
MARATHON  Pinto Wins in London  Antonio Pinto of Portugal won the London Marathon by five seconds yesterday while Olympic champion Rosa Mota was not a factor in the women's competition, dropping out at the halfway mark.
Pinto was clocked in 2 hours 10 minutes 2 seconds.
Katrin Dorre of Germany won the women's race in 2:29.39. (AP) ROWING  Yale Victorious  Yale's men's varsity heavyweight crew defeated Syracuse on a wind-swept Housatonic River course in Derby, Conn., yesterday to complete a weekend of rowing for both schools.
In what might be termed a growing doubleheader, both crews scheduled races on successive days, Yale was host to Dartmouth and Cornell on Saturday while Syracuse raced against Rutgers in New Brunswick.
On the Raritan River, the Orangemen defeated Rutgers in both the varsity and junior varsity races and lost the freshman race.
Yesterday against Yale, the results were reversed with Syracuse's freshmen preventing an Eli sweep of their dual meet.
In the varsity contest yesterday, Yale came up victorious with a 9.67 second, or 1 1/2 lengths, victory over the Orangemen.
YACHT RACING  Last Chance for Conner  A victory yesterday by America3 over its stablemate, Kanza, in the America's Cup defender trials off San Diego leaves only one more chance for Dennis Conner to keep his cup effort alive.
Conner's Stars &amp; Stripes must defeat Kanza today in a sailoff match, required under the rules to resolve the three-way tie that has developed between the Conner and Bill Koch defense teams.
If Stars &amp; Stripes loses the race, Conner will be shut out of the America's Cup defense finals.
America3 defeated Kanza by default yesterday after a gear failure aboard Kanza forced the newer of the Koch boats to retire midway through the race.


Allied Waste Industries reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


U.N. Protester Surrenders, Ending 24-Hour Standoff
Nearly 24 hours after she drove to the United Nations, doused herself with gasoline and threatened to set herself on fire as a protest against using taxes for military spending, a 41-year-old California woman surrendered yesterday morning to police negotiators.
The woman, identified as Linne Gunther, the daughter of a Nobel Prize-winning nuclear physicist, Owen Chamberlain, was taken to Bellevue Hospital for observation and later booked on charges of attempted arson, reckless endangerment and possession of an incendiary device.


Only the French Elite Scorn Mickey's Debut
Confident that the Old World is ready for its intensely American blend of processed magic, the Walt Disney Company opened its first European theme park today, unruffled by muttering about cultural colonialism from French intellectuals.
Mickey Mouse and his accomplices were there to welcome the first few thousand families to Euro Disneyland with fireworks, brass bands and well-rehearsed smiles, while Disney employees in medieval costume waved cheerfully from the rococo ramparts of Sleeping Beauty's Castle.





Paradise Is Paved on Big Screen
"White Men Can't Jump," directed by RON SHELTON, is a paean to playground basketball.
It is also the hottest movie around: Its first two-week gross figure made it the top money-making movie in the country.
Shelton, who wrote the script for the movie as well as directing it, said in a recent interview that he still plays basketball a few days a week.
He is also a former minor league baseball player, and his experience with the sport was the basis of the movie "Bull Durham." He knows what sports are about and what looks real on film.


UDC-Universal Dev. L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Corrections
An article on Friday about the relocation of indigenous people in Canada in the 1950's misidentified Andrew Orkin.
He is a lawyer and an assistant professor in the faculty of medicine of McGill University.


The Talk of Hollywood; 2 Titans Clash And All of Filmdom Feels Shock Waves
Forget Bill Clinton and Jerry Brown trashing each other.
Forget George Bush and Pat Buchanan.
In Hollywood terms, the most highly charged exchange is between two of the most powerful players, Michael Ovitz, the chairman of the Creative Artists Agency, and Jeffrey Katzenberg, the chairman of the Walt Disney studios.
Some film executives say it was actually a shouting match, which is the way people often talk to each other in this town.
But what gives the dispute particular resonance is the fact that both men are, despite their enormous success, very sensitive to criticism.
And when Michael and Jeffrey, as they are locally known, go at it over the phone, it has some of the same impact here as, say, George Bush in Washington picking up the phone and yelling at Mario Cuomo in New York.
The earth trembles.


Smart &amp; Final Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 22


East Orange Deaths Stir Fear and Prayer
They could see the yellow flash of the police lights from the parking lot today, but worshipers at the Church at the Crossroads here did not need another reminder that they were afraid.
Only a few hundred feet away, investigators were still combing the desolate shadowed areas of a major highway and railroad embankment where the bodies of four women have been found since Friday.
The police had not determined today whether those deaths were linked, or whether they were tied to the slayings of two other women since August in another part of the city.


Presstek Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Audrey Tepper, an Architect, Weds
Audrey T. Tepper, an architect in Falls Church, Va., and Michael I. Zisk, an architect in McLean, Va., were married yesterday at the Canfield Casino in Saratoga Springs, N.Y.
Rabbi Michael M. Szenes officiated.
Ms.
Tepper, 31 years old, is keeping her name.
She works for the National Park Service.
She graduated from Cornell University and received a master's degree in architecture from the University of Virginia.


Editorial Notebook; Adolescents, at Risk
Adolescence is a time of frustration -- for teen-agers and parents.
It is also a time when youngsters are at risk of school failure, violence, unsafe sex, substance abuse and other behavior that can derail their lives.
How to help adolescents, particularly 10- to 15-year-olds, lead healthier lives is the subject of a new book, "Fateful Choices," by Fred M. Hechinger, former education editor of The New York Times.
The book and its themes are being discussed by about 200 education and health experts at a conference sponsored by the Carnegie Corporation's Council on Adolescent Development in Washington, D.C., this week.


Prague Journal; Pilloried Czechs Cry Foul: Do the Archives Lie?
Jan Kavan depicts himself as the ultimate Kafkaesque victim: he went to sleep one February evening last year a revered anti-Communist dissident and woke up reviled as a secret police informant.
Members of the Czechoslovak Parliament who investigated Mr.
Kavan, and who are demanding that he withdraw from public life tell a radically different story.
They insist that he knowingly cooperated with the hated secret police while a student in Britain in 1969 and 1970 and that he is now waging an unjustified international campaign to clear his name, seriously harming Czechoslovakia's reputation in the process.


North Korea, Almost Nuclear-Free
Nuclear renegade.
That's what many feared North Korea would become -- a nation capable of producing a nuclear bomb, yet so isolated and paranoid that it would not listen to the world's pleas for sanity.
For months, however, North Korea has been moving steadily in sanity's direction.
If it can be persuaded to keep going, peaceful coexistence may yet replace years of hardened hostility on the Korean peninsula.
North Korea's one-time enemies can do much to achieve that objective.


The U.N. Today
General Assembly  Meets at 10:30 A.M.
COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION -- 3 P.M.
COMMISSION ON TRANSNATIONAL CORPORATIONS -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.


Treasury to Auction Only Bills This Week
This week's Treasury financings are limited to the regular weekly auction today of new three- and six-month bills.
By late in the day Friday, the interest rate of a three-month bill was 3.64 percent; a six-month bill was at 3.76 percent.


Concorde Career Colleges reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Witness Who Testified for Winnie Mandela Recants
Winnie Mandela, who was convicted last May as a kidnapper and accessory to assault, found her protestations of innocence dramatically contradicted today by a co-defendant who said Mrs.
Mandela indeed ordered four young men kidnapped in Soweto, helped beat them and later told him to "dump" the bloody body of the youngest victim, who was 14 years old.
The allegations by John Morgan, who was Mrs.
Mandela's driver, in a newspaper interview seemed bound to diminish further Mrs.
Mandela's credibility within the African National Congress, which is led by her husband, Nelson Mandela, and come at a time when the Mandelas marriage is reported to be in difficulty.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  None  Tuesday  Retail Sales . . .
March 10-Day Auto Sales . . .
Early April  Wednesday  Industrial Production . . .
March Capacity Utilization . . .
March Business Inventories . . .
Feb.
Thursday  Merchandise Trade . . .
Feb.
Weekly Jobless Claims Friday  Housing Starts . . .March


UniFirst Corp.  reports earnings for 13wks to Feb 29


Analysts Expect Another Fed Cut
The Federal Reserve Board has lowered short-term interest rates by six full percentage points over the last 34 months, but a substantial number of credit market analysts say the Fed has not yet finished easing monetary policy.
Last week's cut in the overnight Federal funds rate was seen by some analysts as insurance against possible renewed weakness in the economy.


Comdial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


H.E.R.O. Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Diversified Communications Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


J.A.M. Inc.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The share of America's work force covered by pensions is shrinking, reversing a decades-old trend of steady growth.
Last year, 43 percent of workers participated in company pension plans, down from a peak of 49 percent in 1979.  [ Page A1. ]
With today's renewed interest in executive compensation, a contest was organized last week to see who could best understand some proxy statements sent to the S.E.C.  [ D1. ]


Commerce Bank reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Volcano Eruption Forces 10,000 Nicaraguans From Their Homes


New York City's Sludge Record Doesn't Inspire Confidence
To the Editor:
Your discussion about New York City's sludge-disposal program (news story March 15) raises fair questions about the Department of Environmental Protection's long-term plan and its potential environmental harm.
In assessing this plan, New Yorkers should also look at the department's six-year, $1 billion interim plan, which has suffered from mismanagement, and needlessly cost taxpayers tens of millions of dollars.
While everyone supports the department's compliance with a Government mandate to cease ocean dumping of sludge by June 30, the execution has been a debacle.
Behind closed doors, Environmental Protection negotiated with five contractors (two of whom withdrew) and signed three contracts worth close to $1 billion for commercially available processes, despite overwhelming evidence -- from Comptroller Elizabeth Holtzman and my office -- that they were grossly overpriced.


Seaway Food Town reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Consolidated Papers reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


A Damaging Remedy for Sex Crimes
Should the courts forgive a rapist who claims that pornography caused him to commit the crime?
Definitely not.
That defense has no solid basis in science or psychology.
The link between pornography and sex crime is unproven and highly speculative.
But the Senate Judiciary Committee is now considering a bill that could indirectly help legitimate such a defense.
If so, that would be a bitterly ironic effect for a bill intended to help pornography victims.
Such flawed legislation cries out for rejection.
The proposed Pornography Victims' Compensation Act, introduced by Senator Mitch McConnell, Republican of Kentucky, would allow victims of sex crimes to sue producers of sexually explicit books, magazines or movies -- if the victims can demonstrate that the material caused the crime.
Astoundingly, this bill would allow suits against these third parties even when no criminal charges had been brought against the alleged perpetrators.


Convoy of 'Mitzvah Tanks' Celebrates Birthday of Rebbe
The Lubavitch Hasidim call them the "mitzvah tanks" -- vans bedecked with religious sayings that roam New York City, blaring Old World music out of loudspeakers and trolling for Jews who want to rediscover their religious roots.
Tomorrow morning a 90-strong caravan of them -- which may look to the uninitiated like a noisy parade of Winnebagos -- is to set out from the headquarters of the ultra-Orthodox Hasidic Jewish sect in Crown Heights, Brooklyn, in commemoration of the 90th birthday of the movement's ailing spiritual leader, Rabbi Menachem Mendel Schneerson.


First of America Bank reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


First Federal S&amp;L -Ft. Myers reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Trying to Decode Proxies? Read Very, Very Carefully
How can a company best avoid disclosing how much it pays its top executives?
The traditional way has been by listing salaries in the arcane argot of a proxy statement.
But with today's renewed interest in executive compensation, the proxy statements sent to the Securities and Exchange Commission and shareholders each spring are coming under new scrutiny.
Some investors and regulators even want them translated into conversational English.


Super Valu Stores Inc.  reports earnings for 13wks to Feb 29


Audio/Video Affiliates reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Fittingly, Couples Wins Green Jacket
Making clutch shots, key putts and being fortunate when he had to be, Fred Couples put the official stamp of a major championship on his standing as the best player in the world today by winning the 56th Masters.
In gaining the first major of his 12-year career on the PGA Tour, Couples shot a final-round two-under-par 70 over a surprisingly resistent Augusta National course for a 72-hole total of 13-under-par 275.
It was enough for a two-shot victory over Raymond Floyd, who duplicated his 1990 runner-up finish with a closing 71, and three better than Corey Pavin, who closed fast with a 67.


Ghost of Nazi Past Haunts the New Germany
To the Editor:
Your March 30 article about the exhibition "Judishche Lebensvelten" ("Patterns of Jewish Life") in Berlin is right on target in exploring the German reaction to this overview of Judaism's world history.
A German Jew, I was born in Berlin in 1919 and left hurriedly, steps in front of the Nazis, in 1934.
I vowed never to speak German again although it came in handy when as a company commander in United States Army Air Force intelligence I used my knowledge of the language to decipher codes used by the Luftwaffe, resulting in the destruction of many of their aircraft.


Connecticut Bank Is Seized
Regulators have seized the Fairfield County Trust Company and turned its $132 million of deposits over to Chase Manhattan Bank of Connecticut N.A. in Bridgeport.
Fairfield County Trust was formed by the merger of two sister banks by the Fairfield County Bancorp, in the hopes of creating a stronger institution that would be able to weather the state's real estate decline.
But in seizing the bank on Thursday, state banking officials said capital levels and real estate loan losses continued to be problems.


Carol Rosenthal, a Lawyer, Is Wed
Carol E. Rosenthal, a lawyer, and Dr.
Franklin Richard Schneier, a psychiatrist, both in New York, were married yesterday in Bedford, N.Y.
Rabbi Miriam Ancis officiated at Temple Shaaray Tefila.
Ms.
Rosenthal, 34 years old, is keeping her name.
She is a partner in Berle, Kass &amp; Case.
She graduated from Brandeis University and received a law degree from New York University.


First National Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


KU Energy Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Bandag Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


World Economies


Boddie-Noell Restaurant reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Player Came Back, But to What?
BRIAN HOLLOWAY played in three Pro Bowls and a Super Bowl.
But he is getting splinters on the bench as a backup tackle on the New York/New Jersey Knights (0-4) of the World League, who lost to Orlando, 39-21, yesterday.
"I'm like a finely tuned top gun coming in to a whole new operation, with all sorts of buttons and gadgets I've never seen before," he explained of his bench-warming on the run-and-shoot team.
"Any other team in the league, I'm a starter."


CHRONICLE
Six people were arrested after they tried to rush the stage during a live broadcast of "Saturday Night Live," the New York City police said yesterday.
A man who said he was a spokesman for the six told The Associated Press that the group was protesting the movie "Basic Instinct" and its star, SHARON STONE, who hosted the show Saturday.


As Many British Readers Relax on Saturdays, Their Newspapers Thrive
With its circulation and advertising shrinking, the British press has found one surprising success story: Saturday newspapers.
Once unpopular afterthoughts, Saturday newspapers are now selling more copies than their weekday counterparts and are challenging the weekend pre-eminence of the country's Sunday papers.
Over the last six years or so, Britain's five serious national dailies have expanded their Saturday papers, adding magazines and leisure and review sections that have won both readers and advertisers.


ComCentral reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Get Tougher With the Tyrant in Peru
It was a scene out of a fantastic film: In the wake of the coup in Peru, that poor, sad country's Congress convened secretly last week in a private house to impeach "the tyrant." That's what they bitterly, justifiably call President Alberto Fujimori, who last week used the military to take dictatorial powers.
The impeachment vote is a small, symbolic victory for principle, a beachhead for eventual return to rule of law.
Now the rest of the Western Hemisphere needs to be just as forthright in standing up for democracy.


Mexico's New Leader? The Whispering Begins
Mexico has turned again to the mysterious ritual that has defined its political past.
The silent presidential race has begun.
Following tradition, no one with ambitions to succeed President Carlos Salinas de Gortari dares acknowledge them publicly.
Mr.
Salinas, who is not permitted to run again, has nearly half his six-year term to serve, and in a system built to preserve his vast power any even remotely disloyal gesture by one of his aides could be an act of career suicide.


Health &amp; Rehabilitation Property reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


First Florida Banks reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Phonetel Technologies Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


New Executive For WCBS
Carl (Bud) Carey, a longtime New York television executive, will become the new general manager of CBS's flagship station in New York, WCBS, Channel 2, the network announced Friday.
Mr.
Carey, who has most recently been president of Times Mirror Broadcasting, was the general manager of NBC's New York station, Channel 4, from 1982 to 1989.


Bridge
Few players have risen as quickly in the tournament world as Andy Goodman of San Francisco.
Like many another, he learned the game's finer skills in New York's Mayfair Club, long presided over by Al Roth.
He then moved West to pursue a career as an investment manager, and made his first serious venture into tournament play a year ago.
He recruited four experienced professionals to form a team, and they had some minor successes.
And last month at the American Contract Bridge League's Spring Nationals in Pasadena, Calif., they shocked the bridge world by scoring three consecutive upsets of higher-ranked teams to capture the prestigious Vanderbilt title.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
General Electric Co., Fairfield, Conn., has filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for a shelf offering of up to $2 billion of debt securities and warrants.
*
Richardson, Tex., is offering $6.4 million in tax-exempt waterworks and sewer system revenue refunding and improvement bonds through underwriters led by Bear, Stearns.
Yields range from 3.3 percent in 1992 to 6.3 percent in 2002.
For zero-coupon bonds, which pay no interest, the yield is 6.8 percent for a bond due in 2003 and 6.9 percent in 2001 and 2002.
The financing is rated Baa-1 by Moody's Investors and A- by Standard &amp; Poor's Corp.
*
Williams Cos., Tulsa, Okla., has filed for up to $400 million of debt securities and warrants.
Common  *
Alco Health Distribution Corp., Malvern, Pa. has filed for an initial public offering of 7.5 million common shares through Morgan Stanley &amp; Co.
*
Fingermatrix Inc., North White Plains, N.Y., a company that supplies automated advanced biometric image-processing systems, plans to file for about 3.95 million common shares previously issued and outstanding that were sold in private placements to accredited investors and a pension fund.
Ratings  *
Fruit of the Loom Inc.'s senior unsecured debt rating has been upgraded to BB+, from B, and its subordinated debenture and note rating to BB+, from B-, by S.&amp; P. The company is based in Chicago.


Sabatini Shifts Gears and Learns to Enjoy the Ride
Fresh from volleying her way to a championship on Hilton Head Island, S.C., where she successfully defended her 1991 title a week ago, Gabriela Sabatini shrugged into her black leather jacket, mounted her black-and-hot-pink Honda motorcycle and made a happy solo traverse through Georgia on the black ribbon of I-95 toward this Florida resort and yet another title to defend.
This afternoon, she revved up and roared away from the Bausch &amp; Lomb Championships happier still after fending off her fiercest rival, Steffi Graf, in the final for the second consecutive year.
Sabatini's 6-2, 1-6, 6-3 victory brought her a third title here and a fourth championship for 1992, confirming her position as the Kraft Tour's hottest player.


Power Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


United Carolina Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Dance in Review
J. Fregalette Jansen Dance  The Kitchen


Corrections
An article in the Business People column on Friday about a promotion at the Convex Computer Corporation referred incorrectly to Terrence L. Rock.
He is the company's new chief operating officer, not its chief financial officer.


Autoclave Engineers Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Jansko Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Tokyo Stocks Plunge After Friday's Gain
Any lingering optimism from Friday's strong rally here evaporated today, with relentless selling pressure again sending the stock market into frightening downward spiral.
The market rose slightly in the morning in a tentative effort to sustain the upswing.
But the overwhelmingly negative sentiment that has dominated the market for the last two weeks then took hold.
A lack of positive news about the market or the economy was interpreted as bad news, analysts said.


Digital Communications Assoc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Sterling Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Red Eagle Resources reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Rangers Have a Problem but No Complaints
Before they were so rudely interrupted by a job action, the Rangers faced a diplomatic goaltending dilemma heading into the Stanley Cup playoffs.
John Vanbiesbrouck, second-favorite goalie of the Ranger management and coaching staff, was outplaying Mike Richter, first-favorite goalie and star of the future.
Richter had been hurt, he was rusty, and by his own admission was still sub-standard.
Meanwhile, Vanbiesbrouck had strung together a series of remarkable performances that began after a loss to the Islanders on Feb. 20.


A Dancer's Life: After a Tony, Back to the Chorus
In 1989 he won a Tony Award.
In 1992 he's dancing in the chorus and counting his blessings.
There's no business like show business, indeed.
Alphabetically, Scott Wise is listed last in the ads for the Broadway revival of "Guys and Dolls," which is to open tomorrow at the Martin Beck Theater.
But when he accepted the Tony for best featured actor in a musical for dancing multiple roles in "Jerome Robbins's Broadway," most people in the theater assumed he had left the chorus behind.


TCG International reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Virginia; Clinton Leads Caucus, Followed by 'Uncommitted'
Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas took an apparently unbeatable lead Saturday as Virginia Democrats began two days of Presidential caucusing, capturing 53 percent of the vote and moving closer to becoming his party's nominee.
Mr.
Clinton's lead in Virginia did not equal the unusually strong political showing he made elsewhere in the South a month ago when he swept many of the Super Tuesday primaries with more than 60 percent of the vote.


Citizens Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


RTI Inc.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Broad National Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


At Caterpillar's Helm, Calm and a Global View
Donald V. Fites winced when asked if the bitter dispute between 12,000 striking members of the United Automobile Workers union and Caterpillar Inc., was likely to have sweeping consequences for labor-management relations.
Instead, the chairman of the giant construction machinery company said, it is merely a labor dispute -- though a formidable one -- with ramifications confined to one company.
"I don't think this thing has any larger ramifications," Mr.
Fites said.
"I believe that view is being put on by the United Auto Workers in an effort to try to whip up the passions of our employees and to try to make them feel that they have broader support.


Sherwin-Williams Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Regency Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Contemporary, but Largely Invisible
When Larry Aldrich founded his museum here 28 years ago, the first, he believes, to be titled a museum of contemporary art, Pop Art was just bursting on the scene, and art historians had yet to differentiate "contemporary art" from the catchall label of "modernism."
Today, contemporary-art museums are liberally dotted about the landscape, and, at age 86, Mr.
Aldrich is passing the baton to a new director whose charge is to bring greater visibility to the museum.


One More Time: Magazine Is Reborn
After more than a year of intense analysis over its mission and the role of news magazines in general, Time will introduce today its most radical redesign since it began publication 69 years ago.
But relax, readers. It is still unmistakably Time.


It's a Transparent Attempt To Revive Pepsi's Cola Sales
Outfitting the latest soldier in the cola wars, Pepsi-Cola has stayed away from superlatives like Coca-Cola's "It's the real thing" or Pepsi's "Choice of a new generation." Instead, with an eye on America's concerns about health, diet and purity of ingredients, it will introduce today a clear cola "that's more refreshing and has a clean, smooth taste."
Crystal Pepsi, the soda that goes on sale today in Dallas, Colorado and Providence, R.I., is "less sweet, contains 100 percent natural flavors and has no preservatives," Pepsi says, adding, "It's caffeine free and low in sodium."


Laidlaw Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Federal National Mortgage Assn.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


BKLA Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Independent Perot's Quest -- A Special Report; A Man Who Says He Wants To Be Savior, if He's Asked
H. Ross Perot seems to have this compulsion about rescuing things.
In the 1970's he was called upon to rescue Wall Street.
When revolution gripped Iran, he bankrolled an effort to rescue two of his employees held hostage in a Teheran prison.
In the 1980's it was General Motors and the Texas schools.
Now, Mr.
Perot is thinking about trying to rescue the country.


The Stanley Cup Runneth Over
Before the recent National Hockey League players strike, the league, to celebrate playoff time and the coming centennial of the Stanley Cup, amassed some statistics on Lord Stanley's Cup, which was first awarded in 1893.
The league even counted and analyzed the names engraved on the base of the silver trophy: 2,011 names, consisting of 318 team officials and 1,693 players.
There is one major problem: There is no room to engrave the names of the 1992 winning team.
The league might add an extra segment to the base of the cup.


Pamet Systems Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Media General reports earnings for Qtr to March 29


Westinghouse Electric Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Dance in Review
Patricia Winter  The Living Theater


New Hampshire Thrift Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Reynolds Tobacco Shifts Accounts
The R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company has switched assignments for its two largest cigarette brands.
Reynolds said on Friday that it would move the account of Salem, America's best-selling menthol cigarette, to Trone Advertising in Greensboro, N.C., from FCB/Leber Katz Partners in New York.
Billings were not disclosed, though figures from the Leading National Advertisers tracking service showed that Reynolds spent $9.7 million last year to advertise Salem.
The shift was not a surprise; last year, Reynolds asked Trone and another agency to suggest ideas for Salem ads.


Computer Data Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


National Westminster Bancorp Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Corrections
A front-page article on Saturday about chief executives in Japan who are voluntarily taking pay cuts misstated the size of some reductions.
The cuts have ranged from 15 percent to 35 percent.


Barnett Banks Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Temco Service Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Pro Basketball; Knicks Aren't Panicking Yet, But They Are Counting to 3
This week will be memorable for the Knicks in one of two ways: Either they will clinch the Atlantic Division title, or they will let it slip away.
"By Sunday, we'll either be joyous together or miserable together," said Pat Riley, the team's coach, after practice here today on the SUNY-Purchase campus.


Corrections
An article on Friday about a residential development planned in Brooklyn for the site of the Brighton Beach Baths misstated the date of a public hearing to be held at the Brooklyn Borough President's office.
It is May 6, at 10 A.M.


Baseball; Amazin' Yankees (6-0) Win Battle of Unbeatens
Circle this date on your calendar.
Circle it again.
The Yankees are in first place, and they are the only undefeated team remaining in the major leagues.
This is no joke.
Maybe you should circle it once more.
The magical baseball journey of April continued for the Yankees tonight as they surprised the Blue Jays, 5-2, at the Skydome by scoring three runs in the ninth inning and moving into first place in the American League East with a 6-0 record.
It is the first time they have been alone in first place in two seasons.


Safeway Inc.  reports earnings for 12wks to March 21


Kinnock Says He Will Quit as Labor Party Leader
Blaming the heavily pro-Conservative British press for the opposition Labor Party's defeat in the election on Thursday, Neil Kinnock said today that he would resign as leader and let a special party convention elect his successor in June.
John Smith, the 53-year-old Scottish lawyer who would have been Mr.
Kinnock's Chancellor of the Exchequer if Labor had won, and Bryan Gould, also 53, the party's spokesman on environmental affairs, are expected to announce Tuesday that they are both in the running to succeed him in what could be a bruising fight.


Barkley Slams Sixers' General Manager
CHARLES BARKLEY of the Philadelphia 76ers said yesterday that GENE SHUE, the team's general manager, is "a clown whose only ambition is to caddie" for HAROLD KATZ, the Philadelphia owner.
According to earlier news reports, Shue had said Barkley has the talent of MICHAEL JORDAN but not the will to win, preferring to play for himself and not the team.
Barkley reacted yesterday.
"Shue has done nothing to help the situation here," said Barkley.
"He should not be making comments. He wasn't here, and we were good enough to win the division two years ago.
"I've no respect for Gene Shue. He's just a robot who does as he's told."
Workers in the 76ers' office said Shue was out of town and unavailable for comment.
Katz also was unavailable.


Business and Health; I.R.S. Studies Pay Of Hospital Chiefs
THE Internal Revenue Service is scrutinizing nonprofit hospitals, auditing their executive pay arrangements as part of a sweeping look at the institutions' tax-exempt status.
The Government Accounting Office said in 1990 that most such hospitals were not providing enough charity care and other community services to justify their tax exemptions.
Federal tax auditors are examining 21 hospitals across the country to determine if they operate primarily for the benefit of their communities or more like businesses.
The crackdown reverses a trend in recent years when hospitals were encouraged to be "competitive," often through joint ventures with doctors and outside entrepreneurs.


Laser-Pacific Media Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


By Design; A Comeback for Hats?
Will the hat really come back?
As the American collections for next fall swept down the runways on Seventh Avenue last week, the hats the models wore were impossible to ignore.
At Perry Ellis and Anna Sui, floppy overscale caps sprouted long, tickly feathers anchored with costume-jewelry brooches just above their brims.
They were enchanting, conjuring up nostalgic images of 1960's hippies.


Classical Music in Review
Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center
Alice Tully Hall
Friday night's program at the Chamber Music Society read very well: dollops of string music from Hindemith and Stravinsky, the Ligeti Horn Trio, a Haydn Trio in C and Dvorak's E-flat Piano Quartet.
Although substance and rarity were mixed, according to the society's traditional formula, it was hard to ignore the slight aura of gloom that hung over this fairly ill-attended affair.
Critics fear (or ought to fear) reading their own reactions into those of musicians and audiences, but a distracted, going-through-the-motions attitude seemed to permeate both the performances and the responses to them.


For Iran Chief, a Mandate and a Test
President Hashemi Rafsanjani is emerging from Iran's parliamentary elections with both a strong mandate to rebuild the country and the toughest challenge of his political career.
If the final outcome of the elections in fact refects what appears to be an overwhelming victory for his followers, Mr.
Rafsanjani will be hard-pressed to come up with another bogeyman to blame for Iran's problems.


CHRONICLE
Who says there's no sense of humor in the environmental movement?
Dr.
THOMAS E. LOVEJOY, a tropical biologist who is widely credited with bringing the rain forest issue to public attention, will be the subject of a roast tonight.
Those who will aim their barbs at Dr.
Lovejoy, who is assistant secretary for external affairs at the Smithsonian Institution, are CHEVY CHASE, master of ceremonies for the evening; BRUCE BABBITT, former Governor of Arizona; MICHAEL FUCHS, chairman of HBO; PAUL EHRLICH, ecologist and author, and SCHUYLER CHAPIN, former dean of the Columbia University School of the Arts.
Their remarks will be made at a "bow tie required -- black tie preferred" dinner at the Water Club given by the Rainforest Alliance.
Renowned for his political savvy and fund-raising talent, Dr.
Lovejoy has spread the message on critical environmental issues to an impressive list of movers and shakers.
And he brought some of them -- including Senators Albert Gore, Orrin Hatch, David Boren and Tim Wirth, along with Robert Redford, Tom Cruise and Tom Brokaw -- to a Smithsonian research camp site he established outside Manaus, Brazil.
The endangered site is called the Minimum Critical Size of Ecosystems Project.


Employee Benefit Plans Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


On My Mind; Poets of the Gulag
In the passageway outside the punishment isolation cells, the Soviet prison commandant stopped to argue.
Lieut.
Col.
Nikolai Osin knew from my dossier sent ahead from Moscow that I had visited a Federal maximum security penitentiary in Illinois.
He was saying that at least his prison camp in the Urals was better -- wasn't that so?


Gauging Threat of Recalcitrant TB Patients
Milton A. Ellison is considered a walking public health threat.
A 34-year-old homeless man from New York City with tuberculosis, Mr.
Ellison has repeatedly failed to take the medicine that he needs.
So last month health officials took a step that they said was the only way to protect Mr.
Ellison and the people around him: They detained him in Orange County and took him to a hospital where he was guarded by sheriff's deputies and shackled by wrist and ankle to his bed.


Stocks Gain in Japan After Monday's Big Fall
Japanese stock prices moved higher today after a seesaw trading session.
Traders said the market remained volatile, pointing to continued low volume.
The Nikkei index of 225 issues ended the day up 202.93 points, or 1.2 percent, at 17,439.58.
An estimated 250 million shares were traded.
"No one is really convinced the market hit bottom," said Paul Migliorato of Jardine Fleming Securities.
"We went down 600 points yesterday, but looked to be holding our own today, and people decided this is worth a punt." Plunge Resumed Monday
Most investors were keeping a nervous eye on the market after stocks resumed their downward spiral on Monday, wiping out any lingering optimism over Friday's strong but brief rally.


Organ Donor Babies Can Turn Death Into Life; Humanity of Unborn
To the Editor:
Thank you for taking the side of actual life in your March 31 editorial: "If we deny Theresa Ann Campo Pearson her humanity, then we have also denied our own."
No truer statement have you ever uttered in an editorial, and I have been reading The Times for 50 years.


Treasuries Rise in Slow Trading
Prices of Treasury securities moved higher in slow trading yesterday, aided by expectations that the Federal Reserve Board would need to cut short-term rates again soon.
Trading volume, normally light on Mondays, was even slower than usual because of flooding in Chicago's financial district.


A.T.&amp; T. Plans for Business
In an step-up of the battle for small-business telephone customers, the American Telephone and Telegraph Company said yesterday that it was adding four long-distance calling plans with 10 to 30 percent discounts for frequently called numbers.
Before the recession, small-business customers were often neglected by long-distance carriers in favor of large- and medium-size businesses, where profit margins were often more attractive or prospects of big market-share gains more likely.


E-Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Organ Donor Babies Can Turn Death Into Life; What Is Essential
To the Editor:
The request to use the organs of a doomed anencephalic infant to save the lives of other babies presents an agonizing dilemma.
You oppose it in your March 31 editorial, stating: "If we deny Theresa Ann Campo Pearson her humanity, then we have also denied our own."
Rhetoric of this kind is not helpful.
The great difficulty lies in deciding what is essential as the physiological ground of our humanity.
Many believe humanity is grounded in the possibility of experience and cognitive capacity, which this infant lacked.
It is difficult to believe, as you suggest, that our humanity lies in our ability to breathe and regulate our temperature.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Clinton; A Scattered Campaign Brain Trust Diverse in Ideas
Every morning at 8 o'clock Little Rock time, the conference call begins.
The discussion might include a dozen participants from Los Angeles, Washington, New Haven and Arkansas, but the general topic is always the same: how to make Bill Clinton President.
George Stephanopoulos, the deputy campaign manager, loves the luxury of joining in while propped up in bed, a telephone cradled under one ear.
James Carville, the peripatetic Louisiana-born consultant who is too nervous to sit for long, paces as he listens, and often leaves the room when the discussion turns to logistics from tactics.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Stich Has to Work to Win Opening Match  Michael Stich, the current Wimbledon champion, struggled to beat Chang Eui Jong of South Korea, 7-6 (7-4), 6-3, yesterday in the opening round of the Salem Open in Hong Kong.
Stich, ranked fifth in the world and seeded second, was eliminated in the first round last year and needed all his experience to beat Chang, ranked No. 315.
The South Korean pressured Stich in the first set and led by 6-5, but the German won the next game and the tie breaker.
Top-ranked Jim Courier and Michael Chang, ranked sixth and seeded third, play their first matches today. (AP) Russians Eliminated: In Nice, France, two Frenchmen upset seeded Russians in the opening round of the Philips Open.
Fabrice Santoro defeated third-seeded Andrei Chesnokov, 6-3, 0-6, 6-3, and Thierry Champion beat No. 4 Andrei Cherkasov, 6-4, 6-1.
Today, Bjorn Borg is scheduled to play Olivier Delaitre of France. (AP) Korda Is Upset: Top-seeded Petr Korda of Czechoslovakia was beaten by 125th-ranked Claudio Mezzadri of Switzerland, 6-3, 4-6, 6-3, in the first round of the U.S.T.A.
Men's Clay Courts of Tampa (Fla).
Mezzadri, off the tour for a year after suffering knee injuries in 1989, used a break in the second game of the final set to take control against the 10th-ranked Korda. (Reuters)


Sherwood Group Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Top G.M. Executives Took Pay Cut in '91
Officers and top executives of the General Motors Corporation suffered a 36 percent pay cut in 1991, according to the auto maker's 1991 proxy statement, which was published today.
G.M. directors, who replaced G.M.'s president last week and removed Robert C. Stempel, the chairman and chief executive, as head of the board's executive committee, also sliced executive pay.


Biologists Tally Generosity's Rewards
THE baseball adage that "nice guys finish last" may or may not apply to biological evolution, but either way, many theorists find it hard to explain how cooperation, altruism and even self-sacrifice arose in our dog-eat-dog world.
But some mathematically inclined biologists have come to believe that clues to this apparent paradox are to be found in a computer game that seems to mimic interactions between real organisms.
The game is called "the prisoner's dilemma," and two European scientists have discovered a new version of this exercise that may show how limited cooperation between living creatures, even those not related to each other, is compatible with the hard-boiled arithmetic of survival in an unremittingly competitive environment.


Bridge
An aspect of practical play that has received insufficient attention concerns opponents' errors.
A clever player can sometimes encourage the enemy to miss the best route.
This is the subject of a book by Mike Lipkin titled "Invitation to Annihilation," available for $11.95 including postage from Baron-Barclay Bridge Supplies. (Telephone (800) 274-2221.) The author offers 10 ways "to make your table a place the opponents want to avoid."


Towns Fear Fallout of I-95 Weigh Station
The collapse of the Mianus River Bridge here in 1983 created a traffic nightmare for Greenwich and nearby Port Chester, N.Y., as traffic was detoured from Interstate 95 to local streets.
Now, residents fear a reprise.
Sometime in the next two months, Connecticut officials say, a $10 million weighing and inspection station for trucks will open at the former site of a toll plaza between exits 2 and 3 on I-95.
And many fear that a parade of big rigs will pour onto local streets, as drivers circumvent the station to avoid delays or the stiff fines for overloading.


The Price of Peace, Evaded
President Bush's vaunted New World Order is undergoing two tough tests at once: on the ramparts in bleeding Yugoslavia, and by election-year penury in Washington.
Real bullets are flying in Bosnia and Herzegovina, in the second phase of a civil war that has already claimed 10,000 lives in Croatia.
Caught in the middle, forced to improvise without a widened Security Council mandate, are blue-helmeted United Nations peacekeepers.


Professional Charts
DELTAGRAPH PROFESSIONAL, for the Macintosh, is meant to produce such a wide range of charts and graphs for a business or individual that users will not have to resort to specialized programs, and to a remarkable extent it succeeds.
On the business side, one can make the familiar column, bar, line, pie and bullet charts as well as the more specialized time line, spider, bubble, multiple pie and organization charts and several kinds of three-dimensional presentations.
Meanwhile, down the hall on the technical side, someone else can be making scatter, polar, two-dimensional contour, surface, ternary and three-dimensional XYZ surface plots.
A ternary chart, for example, shows "the percentage of a whole based on three parts of information," according to the manual.


Death Penalty Sought in Brooklyn Trial
Despite the absence of a death-penalty law in New York State, a reputed Mafia member could face execution if convicted in a Federal narcotics and murder trial that is beginning in Brooklyn.
The defendant, Thomas Pitera, 37 years old, is depicted by authorities as the head of a deadly group in the Bonanno crime family.
Known as Tommy Karate because of his dedication to martial arts, Mr.
Pitera is accused of killing seven people.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: White House; Following 'Rose Garden Strategy,' Bush Puts Thorn in Side of Unions
President Bush strolled into a Technicolor Rose Garden this morning with the movie star renowned for playing Moses to sign an executive order intended to limit political spending by labor unions.
After lunch, the President gathered two dozen law-enforcement officials in the Roosevelt Room to demand that Congress pass an anti-crime bill.


A Weak Housing Plan for Yonkers
After more than a decade of litigation, Yonkers, N.Y., still struggles to desegregate its housing.
A new Mayor, Terence Zaleski, promised to move the city away from bruising court battles toward reasonable progress.
But he now offers a housing plan that would provide too little too late.
The City Council, which is scheduled to vote on the proposal today, ought to reject it.
In 1985, U.S.
District Judge Leonard Sand ruled that Yonkers had deliberately promoted segregation in housing and schools for nearly 40 years.
The Board of Education devised a school desegregation plan but the City Council balked at a housing remedy.


Salomon to Sell 42% Stake In Parent of Grand Union
Salomon Brothers Inc. said yesterday that it had agreed to sell its 42 percent stake in the parent of the Grand Union Company, a move that would enable the owners of the supermarket chain to try to establish a more durable financial structure after its leveraged buyout in 1989.
The sale would end a significant foray into merchant banking by Salomon.
The firm, which is trying to shed interests outside the securities industry, was part of the investor group that bought Grand Union in 1989 from the financier Sir James Goldsmith for $1.2 billion.


G.E. Net Rises 6%, Led by Kidder and NBC
The General Electric Company yesterday reported a 6 percent rise in first-quarter earnings, which was within the range expected by financial analysts but caused concern among investors.
The company attributed its improvement to a healthier performance by its NBC broadcasting network and strong sales in its divisions that make electric generating equipment, medical instruments and provide financial services.
The company said its Kidder, Peabody brokerage subsidiary had a double-digit earnings increase.


Bonn Journal; Too Many Capitals (and Knee-Deep in Blueprints)
A visitor to Germany these days might be forgiven for concluding that Germans are in the process of moving the seat of their Government from Berlin to Bonn, instead of the other way around.
Bonn is alive with construction projects.
Giant cranes move girders into place for new office buildings along the Rhine, two large museums are near completion, and workers are finishing a new house of Parliament.


Trenton Legislature Debates Plan to End Highway Tolls
The Republican majority in the Legislature unveiled a proposal today to eliminate tolls on both the New Jersey Turnpike and the Garden State Parkway, upstaging Gov.
Jim Florio, who has suggested removing tolls only from the Garden State.
But drivers should not expect any relief soon, if ever, because the proposals are only in the most preliminary stage.


Sports of The Times; Looie's Final Buzzer
LOU CARNESECCA from Queens said goodbye to basketball yesterday, and it took a considerable amount of air out of the ball around here.
The retirement announcement was unexpected, although he said he'd been dropping little hints to people for the last couple of weeks.
Lou Carnesecca, a.k.a.
Looie ("Hey, Looie," shouts a cabdriver to him, "I've seen your team play and they need to eat more lasagna!"), is 67 years old and has been coaching basketball at St.
John's University for 32 years, 24 of them as head coach, and everyone naturally figured that he would coach forever.
Why not?
He's been here forever, hasn't he?


U.S. PANEL SEEKING RESTRICTION ON USE OF DNA IN COURTS
A long-awaited Federal report on a powerful new genetic technique for identifying criminal suspects says it should not be allowed in court in the future unless a more scientific basis is established.
In principle, the technique, known as DNA fingerprinting or DNA typing, allows a person to be identified from the tiniest scraps of body tissue at the scene of a crime, whether a drop of dried semen, a strand of hair or a spatter of blood.
The technique relies on the fact that each person's DNA, the genetic material, is unique.


Executive Editor Is Leaving Knopf
Elizabeth Sifton, executive vice president of Alfred A. Knopf, is leaving her job for personal reasons, the publishing house said yesterday.
Ms.
Sifton joined Knopf in 1987 after working at Viking.
She is highly respected in publishing for the breadth and quality of fiction and nonfiction she has edited.
Among the authors with whom she has worked at Knopf are Isaiah Berlin, Nicholas Lemann, Robert Hughes (with whom she worked on his current best seller, "Barcelona"), Allan Gurganus and John le Carre.


Corrections
A front-page picture caption on Sunday quoting independent voters in the Bronx misidentified the woman shown with Louis Puccio.
She was Teresa Cuccio, not Mr.
Puccio's wife.


Nelson and Winnie Mandela Separate


States Sue E.P.A. Over Lack of Clean Air Rules
New York, New Jersey, Connecticut and six other states filed suit against the Federal Environmental Protection Agency yesterday, saying it failed to issue regulations that the states need to regulate emissions of toxic air pollutants.
Under the Clean Air Act passed by Congress in 1990, the agency was supposed to issue regulations by Nov. 15, 1991, covering toxic releases by manufacturers, petroleum refiners, chemical plants and others.
The regulations are to tell the states how to issue permits to polluters.


Off the Rolls -- A special report.; The Sorrows, and Surprises, After a Welfare Plan Ends
Body odor, ammonia and spaghetti sauce battled for control of the air at the Wheeler Warming Center this week as Anita Robinson straggled in, submitted to a search from a guard in rubber gloves and headed for a mandatory lice-fighting shower.
Ms.
Robinson, 37 years old, was cut loose from her moorings last fall when Michigan set what might be the most dramatic national standard in a budget-cutting season: it ended a $240 million welfare program for adults it considered employable.
New Ways to Suffer
Since the checks stopped, Ms.
Robinson has been evicted from an apartment, found a boyfriend and fallen out with him, and wound up in a shelter for the homeless.
But asked about the program's demise, she offered a surprising verdict: "It's made my life better."


Hueytown Journal; Humming Along, and Howling Mad
For the last four months a loud hum that comes and goes erratically has bedeviled parts of this central Alabama city, keeping people awake and setting teeth on edge and dogs to howling.
It's called the Hueytown Hum, a low-pitched, steady sound emanating from the rolling hills surrounding this coal mining town of 15,000 people about 15 miles southwest of Birmingham.
The hum, has turned bucolic subdivisions with names like Edenwood and Lakeview into zones of stress for up to three days at a time before fading away, only to return an hour or a week later.


Hilton Hotels Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Flood Halts Markets
Because of flooding in Chicago that affected trading at the Chicago Board of Trade, the Chicago Mercantile Exchange and the Chicago Board Options Exchange, all Chicago futures and options tables today on pages D19 and D21 reflect only trading until it was suspended at each exchange.
The Board of Trade halted trading at 9:45 A.M., central time; the Mercantile Exchange at 10:45 A.M., and the Options Exchange at 12:30 P.M.
Trading in grains on the Board of Trade did not open.


Molex Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Hi-Shear Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


American Stores Sale
The American Stores Company said today that it had completed the sale of 74 Jewel Osco stores and a general merchandise warehouse to Albertson's Inc.
American said it netted about $375 million from the sale, which will be used to reduce long-term debt.
The sale covered all of American Stores' operations in Texas, Oklahoma and Florida.


Departures Leave Big East at Crossroads
After 24 years as head coach, and after celebrating his 67th birthday in January, it was merely a matter of time before Lou Carnesecca passed the torch.
Still, his retirement announcement yesterday at St.
John's was stunning, as much as for its landmark value as for its impact on the Big East conference.
Carnesecca follows another coaching legend who stepped down this spring, Jerry Tarkanian of the University of Nevada-Las Vegas.
And Carnesecca represents the fading embers of an era of coaches who could expect to stay at one institution until retirement.


Therapies Offer Hope For Sex Offenders
WHILE few revelations are as chilling for parents as the news of parish priests who have been molesting children, research reported last week suggests that many child molesters are reformable.
And even while extreme, if antiquated, measures such as castration are being proposed to stop sex offenders from repeating their crimes, a new generation of more sophisticated therapies is challenging the conventional wisdom that sex offenders cannot be rehabilitated at all.


New York City to Hold Gay Games in 1994
New York City is to hold Gay Games IV in 1994, an amateur sporting competition that is expected to draw as many as 15,000 athletes from 40 countries, Mayor David N. Dinkins said yesterday.
Welcoming the Olympic-style sporting event, Mayor Dinkins told a City Hall news conference that the games would contribute more than $100 million to the city's economy and serve as an opportunity "to promote tolerance, understanding, respect and openness among all people."


Black Holes
New observations by space telescopes have produced strong evidence that massive black holes are an extremely common phenomenon in the universe, perhaps existing as the violent vortex of nearly every galaxy, astronomers reported last week.
A black hole is thought to be an invisible mass embedded among the stars and so dense that its gravity sucks in everything around it and nothing, not even light, can escape.
No black hole can be observed directly, but astronomers think they have seen the effects in the radiations emanating from the whirlpool of matter being drawn into the black hole.


Paroled Rapist Charged With Killing 5 Women in New Jersey
A 25-year-old paroled rapist who had been in prison since he was 14 was charged today with five murders and four rapes in East Orange and Newark that the authorities said began in December, less than a month after his release.
The suspect, Jerome Dennis, was arrested Sunday morning before dawn at his home in East Orange.
He was formally charged today, two days after law-enforcement agencies formed a task force to investigate the deaths of several women whose bodies were found in desolate parts of East Orange in the last eight months.
Three bodies, including the most recent victim, a high school girl, were found on Friday within a block of each other.
A fourth was found Saturday afternoon.


College Basketball; Carnesecca Steps Down From St. John's Empire
Lou Carnesecca, who became a worldwide basketball ambassador at St.
John's University despite never having played a varsity game, announced his retirement as the coach of the Redmen yesterday.
His decision, which followed weeks of consideration and private discussion, ends a Hall of Fame career after 24 seasons, a record of 526-200, 18 N.C.A.A. tournament appearances, and untold fractured sentences.


Organ Donor Babies Can Turn Death Into Life; A Question of Anatomy
To the Editor:
Your March 29 article on the case of the anencephalic infant Theresa Ann Campo Pearson and the legal definition of death quotes me as saying that such a baby "has more in common with a fish than a person." This statement, abridged and taken out of context, created a disturbingly false impression.
The problem was compounded in your March 31 editorial, which stated: "And as one medical ethicist saw it, Theresa Ann had 'more in common with a fish.' "
The statement was made in a lengthy discussion of why some people think that anencephalic babies should be accepted as organ donors without having met the criteria for brain death.
In brief, it is because such babies are missing the brain cortex.
The cortex is the part of the brain that mediates all behaviors and functions that are uniquely human, in that they distinguish humans from all other living things.


Olympia Asks for More Time
Embattled Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd., declaring itself cash-poor but asset-rich, called on its bankers today to defer interest and principal payments on billions of dollars of debt over the next three months.
It also chose Gerald Greenwald, a former Chrysler executive, as its new president to lead it through a huge restructuring.
The highly secretive real estate giant, the biggest commercial landlord in North America, held an unprecedented meeting with representatives from nearly 100 banks in the ballroom of a downtown hotel here.


Boy Impaled During Game
An 8-year-old boy was accidentally impaled in the forehead with a curtain rod last night during a mock sword fight with a playmate on a Queens street, the police said.
The boy, who was not immediately identified, underwent surgery at Mary Immaculate Hospital and was in critical condition, said Officer Andrew McInnis, a police spokesman.
The accident occurred as the two boys, both 8, played with the curtain rods on a Jamaica street about 7:15 P.M., Officer McInnis said.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.25-6.5
6.50
9.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
6.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.68
3.44
6.04
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.60
3.64
5.57
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.73
3.76
5.67
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.96
7.01
7.84
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.85
7.87
8.12
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.81
8.83
9.23
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.69
6.70
7.25
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Goodyear Sees A Turnaround
The Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company expects to report earnings of up to $65 million in the first quarter, compared with a punishing loss a year earlier, its chairman, Stanley C. Gault, said today.
Mr.
Gault said at the annual meeting of shareholders that the expected results were a sign that its strategies were working.
New marketing agreements with Sears, Roebuck; Wal-Mart, and Canadian Tire have increased the number of outlets where Goodyear tires are available by 2,100 stores.


Observer; Monkey Business, Anyone?
We can have H. Ross Perot for President if we ask him.
He is a businessman and a rare example of the species nowadays: hasn't even gone bankrupt, apparently.
This raises the question whether he is really a businessman or just another billionaire poseur, like the late J. Paul Getty, who parlayed his oil gold into an excuse for endlessly disgorging his philosophy of life into the columns of Playboy magazine.


Westchester to Buy Land for Preservation
Ending 13 years of lawsuits, countersuits and negotiations, Westchester County lawmakers today tentatively agreed to acquire the Rye birthplace of John Jay, the nation's first chief justice, for up to $11.5 million.
The agreement, which includes $4 million from New York State, was signed by the County Executive, Andrew P. O'Rourke, and by Diane G. Millstein, a Larchmont developer, who owns the 23-acre site.


School Copes With Shock After Crash
The students at Woodland Middle School left a morning assembly today without speaking much.
Grade by grade, they walked to their homerooms after hearing that two classmates had died and 27 teachers and students were injured when their bus tumbled down an embankment Saturday on the way back from a class trip to Montreal.
As state authorities prepared to seek criminal charges against the bus driver, the school clung to its normal schedule.
Teams of psychologists, social workers and guidance counselors descended on the school.


Herman Cherry, Artist, Is Dead; An Abstract Painter and Poet, 83
Herman Cherry, an abstract painter who was a contemporary and friend of the vanguard Abstract Expressionist artists, died on Friday, his 83d birthday, at his home in Manhattan.
He died of complications from heart and liver disease, said his wife, the former Regina Kremer.


Salem Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Tories Seen Softening Thatcherite Free-Market Orthodoxy
In their 13 years in power, first under Margaret Thatcher and now John Major, the Conservatives have believed that the best way to help business was to expose it to the rigors of the free market and minimize Government involvement in business affairs.
But after the Conservatives' election victory last Thursday, economists, business and union leaders are expecting a shift in Mr.
Major's policies.
The reason is that he has appointed an avowed interventionist, Michael Heseltine, to be Secretary of a beefed-up Department of Trade and Industry.


CHRONICLE
Buckingham Palace could surely use a laugh or two: the latest word from the royal marital front comes from PRINCESS ANNE, daughter of Queen Elizabeth II.
Yesterday she filed for an uncontested divorce from her husband of 18 years, MARK PHILLIPS.
The couple have two children, Peter, 14 years old, and Zara, 10.
They separated more than two and a half years ago.


More Orders For Boeing 777
The Boeing Company said today that Cathay Pacific Airways would order 11 of the new 777 midsize twin-engine airliners, with options on an additional 11, for a total value of $3.4 billion.
The Hong Kong-based carrier's order brings to 99 the number of 777's for which Boeing has firm commitments from a total of eight airlines; options now equal 86.
Separately, Boeing, based in Seattle, said the first 777 would take off 777 days from Wednesday, on June 1, 1994.
Thai Airways International ordered two additional 777's on April 1, and on Jan. 24 Boeing confirmed Japan Airlines' order for 10 of the planes with 10 options.


Whitaker Forfeits Lightweight Belt
PERNELL WHITAKER has forfeited his World Boxing Council lightweight title because of problems keeping within the 135-pound weight limit, the World Boxing Council announced yesterday in Mexico City.
The council said that the crown Whitaker, 28 years old, won in September 1989 would go up for grabs in a fight pitting one of two challengers against DARRYL TYSON of the United States, who now ranks as the W.B.C.'s No. 1 lightweight.
The statement from the W.B.C.'s headquarters did not specify whether Whitaker had decided to move up into another division or retire.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article and a picture caption on Saturday about California's senatorial primary referred incorrectly in some copies to the Senate seats sought by Dianne Feinstein, the former Mayor of San Francisco, and Representative Barbara Boxer.
Ms.
Feinstein is running for the two-year term and Representative Boxer the six-year term.


Hotels as Well as Amusements Use Fantasy at Euro Disneyland
The Walt Disney Company is known for Mickey Mouse and Magic Kingdoms.
But in recent years it has also become an aggressive and, despite a reputation for fierce budgetary control, affluent patron of post-modern architecture.
That policy has been pursued eagerly in the new Euro Disneyland here.
The actual theme park, as per custom, was designed by Walt Disney Imagineering, and looks like other Magic Kingdoms in Anaheim, Orlando and Tokyo.
But with six gigantic hotels, a shopping and night-time entertainment complex and plans for two more theme parks, a European corporate headquarters, a tripling of hotel space, additional golf courses and a second conference center, building should continue to the year 2017.


President Is Retiring At Computer Associates
Computer Associates International Inc. said yesterday that Anthony W. Wang was retiring as president and chief operating officer.
He will remain on the Islandia, L.I., company's board.
Mr.
Wang (pronounced Wong), 49, will be succeeded by his brother, Charles B. Wang, 47, who is chairman and chief executive officer of Computer Associates, which he founded in 1976.
THe company said it did not plan a search for a replacement as president.


Ex-Ballplayer Scores by Putting Sports on Screen
At the age of 46, Ron Shelton still plays pickup basketball three days a week at the Hollywood Y.M.C.A., only yards away from the office where he wrote "White Men Can't Jump."
"I used to be able to jump -- but not anymore," Mr.
Shelton said with a laugh.
"I'm a good shooter. And I'm still a good ball-handler."


Primerica Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Quake Theory Attacks Prevailing Wisdom On How Faults Slip and Slide
TAKING a tip from carpet layers and tire designers, a number of eminent seismologists are challenging the basic theory of how earthquake faults behave.
While many experts remain unconvinced, the new ideas are expected to provoke heated controversy because they reject much of what lies behind modern earthquake prediction.


Pentair Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Morgan (J.P.) &amp; Co. (N) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Charles Arthur Russell Jr., 40, Cellist, Dies
Charles Arthur Russell Jr., a cellist, vocalist and composer who was known for his fusion of classical and popular music, died on April 4 at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center.
He was 40 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of AIDS, said Tom Lee, his companion.


Celanese Canada reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


INSIDE
U.S. Criticizes Peru's Leader But Stops Short of Sanctions
Although Washington did not impose sanctions on Peru after President Alberto Fujimori dissolved the Government, the Secretary of State said Mr.
Fujimori made a "tragic mistake" because his actions will deprive Peru of what it needs most.
Page A8.
Suspect Held in 5 Slayings
A 25-year-old paroled rapist was charged with five murders in East Orange and Newark that had terrorized local residents.
Page B1.
Chemical Alone in Prime Cut
The Chemical Bank cut its prime lending rate by a quarter point, to 6 1/4 percent, but no other big banks followed the move.
Page D1.
Kinnock Quits as Party Chief
Taking aim at the British press for the Labor Party's defeat in the British elections, Neil Kinnock said he would resign as leader.
Page A12.
Goodbye, Looie
Lou Carnesecca, a masterly basketball coach and quipster at St.
John's for 24 seasons, retired at 67.
Page B9.


One Happy CBS Advertiser: Itself
When CBS began selling itself to viewers and advertisers as assiduously as any soap or soup is sold, critics complained that the network was demeaning itself through flashy promotions with partners like Kmart.
Yet that glitz has paid off.
As CBS marks a rise in the A. C. Nielsen ratings, from third in the 1990-91 television season to first in 1991-92, executives both inside and outside the network are lauding CBS's own advertising, marketing and promotional efforts.
They say those campaigns were crucial to CBS's clinching a first-place finish in prime time for the first time in seven years, an accomplishment sweetened by the television trivia fact that until now no network had ever leaped from worst to first in a single season.


A Wronged Staff Shows It Has the Right Stuff
Amazing. Stunning. Totally unexpected.
No, not the 6-0 Yankees, as in the last undefeated team in the major leagues.


Venture Is Developing Ways to Speed Traffic
A.T.&amp; T. and the Lockheed Corporation disclosed details yesterday of plans to jointly develop technology to help break up traffic congestion by using A.T.&amp; T.'s "smart cards" and Lockheed's radio transmission technology.
The new methods, known as intelligent vehicle highway systems, would, for example, allow a vehicle to pay a toll without stopping, alert repair trucks to the exact location of accidents, and enable drivers to receive or send messages through video displays in their cars -- possibly for alternative routes around congestion.


Pioneer Hi-Bred International reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Fibreboard Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Ameritech Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Dinkins Administration Rethinks Cuts in Municipal Construction
Under mounting pressure from construction groups, bond dealers and some fiscal monitors, the Dinkins administration has decided that it was a mistake to propose deep cuts in the city's construction spending during a recession and is trying to come up with a way to finance the spending.
Critics have expressed concern that the cuts would hurt the economy and delay vital construction projects, increasing their cost when they are finally undertaken.


Police Raid and Suit Open Window Into Gypsy Life
One afternoon in June 1986, more than 18 police officers raided two modest homes of an extended gypsy family here, looking for stolen property.
They took the Marks family's heirlooms, ripped gold-plated false fingernails from women's hands, removed earrings from a 5-year-old girl and even searched a baby's diapers.


J.P. Morgan and Wachovia Post Gains
J.
P.
Morgan &amp; Company and the Wachovia Corporation, two banking companies renowned for avoiding loan losses, both announced strong gains in first-quarter earnings yesterday.
Besides extremely low losses from bad loans, both companies benefited from reductions in their overhead expenses and a wider spread between the interest rates they pay for deposits and other borrowed funds and the interest rates they earn from loans and investments.


Harry Burks Jr., 92, Retired Oil Executive
Dr.
Harry G. Burks Jr., a retired executive of the old Standard Oil Company in New Jersey, died on Wednesday at the Meadow Lakes Retirement Community in Hightstown, N.J.
A longtime resident of Hillside, N.J., and Madison, Conn., he was 92 years old.
He died after a brief illness, his family said.


C.I.A. Chief Says Focus Will Shift to Economics
Robert M. Gates, the Director of Central Intelligence, said today that the Bush Administration had directed that nearly 40 percent of the new tasks of the country's intelligence agencies would involve international economics.
Mr.
Gates said a national security review "highlighted the dramatic increased importance of international economic affairs as an intelligence issue." The extensive review, conducted by 14 task forces, envisioned a reshaping of the nation's intelligence priorities through the year 2005.


People
*
Richard Tompkins, corporate executive vice president of Campbell-Mithun-Esty, was named to the additional new position of chief operating officer in New York.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Week; Bush and Clinton Share Win-at-All-Cost Image
With white eyes, black teeth and a porcupine shaft of hair, Bill Clinton stares ferally from the cover of this week's Time magazine.
The photo negative of Mr.
Clinton, making him look like an alien from a 1950's sci-fi horror movie, and the cover line, "Why Voters Don't Trust Clinton," are the latest jolts to a campaign that is struggling grimly -- and hoarsely -- onward.


Breaking Up Is Really Hard to Do; Scarcity of Judges Leads to Divorce Chaos in Passaic County
In Passaic County, marriages that are on the rocks are being kept together, at least in the legal sense, for two or three years after the couple files for divorce.
There aren't enough judges to hear the cases.
Just how hard breaking up can be in this situation dawned with painful slowness on Rodney Sasso, a Paterson firefighter who filed for divorce from his wife in the spring of 1989, after nearly 20 years of marriage.
Last December, nearly three years later, the contested divorce finally worked its way up the backlogged list of trial dates and was heard.


Topics of The Times; Carriage Horses: In Danger Again
Three years ago an enlightened New York City Council passed a law that spared carriage horses from exposure to screeching brakes, loud honks and potential death on midtown Manhattan streets.
It also eased midtown's legendary traffic congestion.
The need for such protective legislation is evident.
In 1985 a carriage horse had to be destroyed after a speeding limousine caused it to bolt into an intersection where it was hit by a car.
In 1989, another carriage horse collapsed of heat exhaustion.


Aetna Life Is Discussing Sale of Unit
The Aetna Life and Casualty Company is discussing the sale of its American Re-Insurance Company unit with Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts &amp; Company in a leveraged buyout that could run as high as $1.4 billion.
The sale, some experts said yesterday, would help the insurance giant focus on the more profitable core businesses of annuities, pensions and health insurance.
It would also supply Aetna with a capital infusion that could top $1 billion.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Candidate's Health; Laryngitis Silences Clinton Another Day
A common occupational hazard for politicians, chronic laryngitis from speaking too much, forced Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas to cancel a major economic address he had planned to give Tuesday in Pennsylvania, his staff said tonight.
Last week Mr.
Clinton's personal doctor, Dr.
James Suen, prescribed several days of silence for the Democratic Presidential candidate because he had overused his voice.
After examining Mr.
Clinton today, he recommended another day of rest.


Sanitizing Sex -- and Death
Recently, a Federal official decided to play it safe.
He deleted a chapter of a best seller called "Taking Care of Your Child" before it was distributed to 275,000 Federal employees.
The chapter dealt with contraception.
The decision to delete it is yet another instance of the Bush Administration's willingness to placate a part of America that refuses to confront elementary facts of life.
"I thought as a Federal bureaucrat and someone in charge of making that decision, am I going to cause some people to be offended?" explained Curt Smith, an employee of the Office of Personnel Management.
"These are issues that alarm people very quickly."


Theory on Eruption
SCIENTISTS have found evidence that a mixing of two kinds of lava set off the devastating eruption of Mount Pinatubo in the Philippines last June that killed 700 people and forced the closing of Clark Air Force Base.
The mixing of two forms of lava, forming an unstable combination, is one of several explanations for the explosions of volcanoes, like Pinatubo and others around the Pacific rim, that are situated over plates that are slowly descending into the sea floor.
Another has been the sudden invasion of sea water into molten rock beneath the volcano.
The water then turns to steam with a resulting explosion.


Talcon L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Flooding Closes Trading On Exchanges in Chicago
The leading Chicago financial exchanges were closed yesterday as millions of gallons of water flooded basements in the heart of downtown Chicago, but the flooding caused relatively little disruption in financial markets elsewhere.
That disruption could grow substantially, though, if the markets do not reopen quickly.
The Chicago Board of Trade and the Chicago Mercantile Exchange, the primary markets in futures contracts on everything from wheat to stock indexes, were forced to close in the morning, with the Board of Trade halting trading at 9:45, central time, and the Mercantile Exchange an hour later.


Nicaraguans Begin Cleanup After Last Week's Volcano Eruptions


Dance Magazine Awards
The ballerina Darci Kistler, the composer and choreographer Meredith Monk and the choreographer Helgi Tomasson, director of the San Francisco Ballet, are the recipients of the 1992 Dance Magazine Awards.
The awards were established 35 years ago to honor lifetime achievement in dance.
A silver bowl was presented to each winner yesterday afternoon in a private ceremony.


Books of The Times; An Emigre in Paris Willing to Start Afresh
The Italics Are Mine  By Nina Berberova  600 pages.
Translated by Philippe Radley.
Alfred A. Knopf. $30.
The belated publication last year of Nina Berberova's collection of stories, "The Tattered Cloak," introduced American readers to a captivating Russian writer: a nimble, observant writer, who captured the lost hopes and dreams of a Russian emigre community in pre-World War II Paris with unusual emotional precision.
With the publication of her autobiography, "The Italics Are Mine," in a newly revised edition that incorporates an amended translation from the Russian, fans of the stories now have the opportunity to read Ms.
Berberova's firsthand account of that exile experienced by so many Russian intellectuals in the wake of the 1917 Revolution.


Protesters Disrupt Brooklyn Board Meeting
The first meeting of a reconfigured Community Board 14 in Brooklyn was disrupted last night by a bomb threat and later, by angry shouting matches -- evidence that the racially charged protests that have wracked the board for two years show little sign of ending.
The raucous meeting at Edward R. Murrow High School in Midwood came 12 days after the Brooklyn Borough President, Howard Golden, announced new appointments he made to the board that increased the number of black members to 16 from 11.


Fingerhut Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 27


Cheap and Abundant Power May Shutter Some Reactors
Nuclear plants that provide 10 percent of the nation's nuclear power may be closed this decade because their operating costs are too high to compete against a rising tide of cheap surplus electricity, experts say.
More than 100 plants under construction were abandoned in the 1970's and 80's because of their cost.
But the idea that an operating nuclear plant is not competitive with other sources of electricity violates the fundamental logic of nuclear power, which is that plants may be expensive to build but are cheap to run.





PROGRESS IS SLIGHT IN CONTRACT TALKS
Executives of Caterpillar Inc. and officials of the United Automobile Workers met here today to try to resolve a five-month-old labor dispute in which thecompany has threatened to replace 12,000 striking union members, but the two sides remained far apart, according to participants in the talks.
The two sides met late into the evening in this suburban town just west of Chicago at the request of Bernard E. DeLury, director of the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service, which has its regional office here.


Chicago's Loop Is Closed Down As River's Water Floods Tunnels
All business halted in the heart of downtown Chicago this morning and tens of thousands of office workers were sent home after 250 million gallons of water from the Chicago River leaked into underground tunnels and, from there, flooded into basements.
Fearing that the water would short-circuit electrical systems in the tunnels and in the buildings, the city shut off power to much of the Loop, the city's central business district.
Officials said the electricity might not be restored Tuesday.


Inmate Given Stay to Argue That Execution Would Violate Rights
Just two days before he was to be put to death for the 1981 murder of a South Texas police officer, Leonel T. Herrera today received a stay of execution.
The delay clears the way for the Supreme Court to hear the man's claim that the execution would violate his constitutional rights simply because he is innocent.
On a five to three vote, the Texas Court of Criminal Appeals, the state's highest criminal court, blocked Mr.
Herrera's execution without discussing the merits of the case.


Patterns
No More Skin?
A few loose thoughts on the collections. (Are there any other kind?)
The skin show in fashion seems to be over, at least in New York.
Last week's fall collections were the most covered-up in years.
At Calvin Klein the models were practically buried in clothes.
The trend toward basics, symbolized by the Gap, may or may not spell a threat to designer fashion, but some designers are not sitting still.
They're co-opting it.
At Perry Ellis, one theme running through Marc Jacobs's collection was the pocket T-shirt dress, like the Gap but designerized.
These pocket-T's were long, slit up the sides and made of gray wool jersey or rayon and Lycra spandex in colors.
They will cost about $325 in the stores.
The contrast between what designers showed on the runway and what they wore themselves seemed especially sharp.
Todd Oldham, whose collection sizzled with wild decoration, came out in a plaid flannel shirt and chinos.
Ralph Lauren delivered classically tailored men's wear for women, then took a bow in turtleneck, jeans and cowboy boots.
After sending out his models layered within an inch of their lives, Calvin Klein walked down the runway wearing khaki pants and a white T-shirt, his triceps bulging.
Has he been working out, or getting schmaltz injections?
And finally, stop the presses: Anna Wintour, the editor in chief of Vogue, who likes her skirts short, short, short, was spotted wearing long -- a black one, zippered in the back -- at the Michael Kors show.
The last time she wore a long skirt, she said, was in 1986.
A Japanese Bankroll
The Japanese continue to show interest in bankrolling American design talent.
Prominent Apparel, the American subsidiary of C. Itoh, one of the world's largest trading companies, has recently formed partnerships with two New York designers, Randolph Duke and Byron Lars.
"Their concern is global and they also have the wherewithal to bring a designer into the Japanese market, as well as Europe," Mr.
Duke said.
"They're quite a large company. Should your business boom, they have the dollars to handle the growth."
Neither deal is a licensing situation, which in the past has allowed designers to grow rich before the company even shows a profit.
In both ventures, Wheaton International, a New York marketing company, acts as the managing partner, running and staffing design and manufacturing operations.
Prominent Apparel is the sole investor.
Rowley and Reese Shows
Cynthia Rowley, a Seventh Avenue designer, showed the most over-the-top variations on the theme of men's wear for women last week.
Her models wore men's black nylon stretch socks with garters, and toted six-packs of Bud.
Her styles included a great snap-front buffalo plaid dress over an animal-print slip.
At the Tracy Reese show on Thursday, Marc Jacobs served drinks to arriving editors, and Gordon Henderson, another designer, sent the models out from backstage.
They were just there to support Ms.
Reese, a former designer of the Perry Ellis Portfolio collection.
Her show was Tolstoyesque, with Russian military-style jackets and lovely cloisonne-print blouses.
Open-Sees at Saks
Saks Fifth Avenue announced yesterday that it will hold semimonthly "open-see" days for new vendors of clothing and accessories.
At open-sees, small manufacturers and designers are invited to show their wares to the store's merchandising staff.
The first open-see at Saks will take place on Friday from 9 A.M. to 1 P.M.


Blount Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


MANDELA DIVULGES BREAK WITH WIFE
In a voice reflecting tenderness and regret, Nelson Mandela, the president of the African National Congress, announced today that he and his wife of 33 years, Winnie Mandela, had agreed to separate.
Affectionately referring to Mrs.
Mandela by her African name of Nomzamo, Mr.
Mandela said, "My love for her remains undiminished." But he left little doubt that he considered their marriage, which had seemed to survive his 27 years of imprisonment, now to be finally over.


For Dinkins, Smaller Salary Proves No Barrier to Charity
Mayor David N. Dinkins earned $128,871 last year, just 60 percent of his 1990 income, but he made $15,000 in charitable contributions, nearly 32 times the amount he gave the year before, according to income-tax returns released yesterday at City Hall.
The Mayor's income fell markedly last year, chiefly because it had been inflated the year before by a one-time sale of stock to his son, but also because he took a 5 percent cut in his $130,000 mayoral salary as a symbolic gesture in light of the city's deep fiscal problems.
He also deferred $7,500 in pay for retirement, to be taxed when he draws on it.


Topics of The Times; A Hug for Arthur Ashe
Just two days after acknowledging that he has AIDS, Arthur Ashe delivered a simple, ringing message to the American people, one well known to doctors but not, alas, to vast numbers of people who shrink in mindless panic from contact with AIDS patients.
Appearing with his wife on ABC-TV's "20/20" Friday night, he said:
It really is demeaning for someone in my situation to have the 1990's version of leprosy, to have to walk around on eggshells when we know that I am absolutely no danger to anyone. . . .
You can kiss me, you can hug me, you can shake my hand, you can drink out of the same glass.
I can sneeze on you, I can cough on you -- you're not going to get it from me.


Wachovia Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Covington Development Group Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Cypress Semiconductor Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 30


Consumer Chief Urges Rise In Fines for Business Fraud
Saying the New York City Department of Consumer Affairs needs a bigger stick to enforce consumer-protection laws, Commissioner Mark Green yesterday called for increases in the fines his agency levies.
Mr.
Green's call for more enforcement power came as he released a 90-page report on business fraud, which he said was being perpetrated in the city at an unprecedented rate because fines were no deterrent.
For example, he said, during the last year and a half city inspectors found that one in six premium gasoline pumps in the city were dispensing regular.


Surging Paychecks on Wall St.
After a few years of humility, Wall Street is again seeing its paychecks rising sharply, especially at the most senior level.
But now, compensation experts say Wall Street is likely to face increasing pressures to devise more objective pay-for-performance standards for its senior executives.
Pay for the average Wall Street employee grew 17 percent, to $97,000, from last year's levels.
All told, 1991 was a stellar year on Wall Street, as a record total of $20.8 billion was paid to everyone from the custodian to the chief executive, exceeding the last peak in 1987, when the stock market crashed.


Jantzen and Bozell Revive '28 Campaign
It is back to the future for Jantzen Inc., as the swimwear and sportwear company reintroduces elements of an advertising and marketing campaign initially seen 64 years ago.
The campaign, called "Clean Water," was presented by the Portland, Ore., company in 1928 in an effort to create standards of cleanliness and safety for public pools and beaches.
An updated version of the campaign, featuring the 1920's Jantzen logo of a woman in a red bathing suit, began running last week in newspapers.
The ads are the first work by Bozell Inc. in New York since it won Jantzen's account in September.


Q&amp;A
Cavernous Caves
Q.
What is the deepest below the surface people have gone in a cave?
What is the longest passageway system known?


Pizza Hut Ends Franchise Dispute
Bringing a six-year legal battle to a close, Pizza Hut Inc. agreed to acquire 236 Pizza Hut restaurants from one of its second-largest franchisee, Pizza ManagementInc.
Details of the transaction were not disclosed, but restaurant industry analysts said Pizza Hut, a unit of Pepsico Inc., paid $125 million for the restaurants.


Microsoft Smooths Some Bumps
DEPENDING on which side of the debate you favor, Microsoft Windows is either the best thing to happen to DOS computers since the first PC was introduced or the biggest case of hysterical consumerism since the tulip bulb mania in 17th-century Holland.
The truth lies somewhere in between, of course.
Windows has been around for many years, but it did not capture the imaginations of users until version 3.0 arrived nearly two years ago.
Since then, the Microsoft Corporation has sold more than 10 million copies of Windows 3.0, and it expects to match that figure this year with the newest upgrade, Windows 3.1.


With Direct Injections, Gene Therapy Takes A Step Into a New Age
SOMETIME within the next month, a patient suffering from advanced melanoma who otherwise has almost no chance of surviving will be the first to receive the ultimate form of human gene therapy.
In all gene therapy trials tried to date, researchers have followed a laborious and protracted routine, first removing cells from a patient's body, then provisioning them with new genes designed to fight disease, and finally returning the altered cells to their owner.
But in the new experiment, researchers will simply inject DNA right into the patient's tumor.


Devils, With New Lines, Return to the Good Old Days
Coach Tom McVie had trouble recalling the last time his Devils had played as effectively as they did tonight in their 5-1 triumph over the Pittsburgh Penguins at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
"It's been awhile since we played a game like that," McVie said afterward.
"I'm trying to convince people that our club can really play outstanding when it sets its mind to it."


Mesh of Announcers Detracts From the Masters
The Masters can be a potboiler or a yawner, but no one should miss the end-of-tournament ceremony awarding the green jacket to the winner.
It's like a fashion show in a pro shop, simultaneously amusing and awkward.
So there on Sunday was Ian Woosnam, the defending champion, in his canary yellow pants and green jacket.
There was the Masters chief, Jack Stephens, wearing his green blazer, which begged for a tailor.


Review/Piano; Mozart, Debussy and Schubert by Richard Goode
In reviewing pianists, there probably should be a very strict ration on invocations of Artur Schnabel.
Few musicians could survive the comparison; and even the best might not deserve it.
But when a friend mentioned Schnabel's name in Avery Fisher Hall on Sunday night, no comparison seemed more just.
Richard Goode played Mozart, Debussy and Schubert with such intellectual focus and grace, I could not help but think of his distinguished predecessor.
This was particularly true of Schubert's A-major Sonata (Op. posth., D. 959).
Mr.
Goode treated the work's fantastical elements seem logical extensions of its classical themes.
Even arpeggios and scalar passages became articulately expressive, shaped as if they had as much importance as Schubert's melodies.
There were no extraneous or exaggerated gestures; no phrase drew attention to itself at the expense of the argument.
I have heard pianists play this work more electrically, but not more sensibly or affectingly.
Mr.
Goode's interpretation had both integrity and immediacy; he made convincing and comprehensible what other pianists turn into ornamentation.


Growing Ranks of Homebound Patients Put Strain on Medicaid
To the Editor:
"New York Medicaid Strained by Newly Poor" (The Week in Review, March 22) discusses cases of some who are not poor who have qualified for long-term care under Medicaid by impoverishing themselves.
But you do not give a complete account of the cause of New York State's Medicaid budget crisis.
Certainly, the home-care system is not the major problem.
The majority of the 100,000 home-care patients are poor -- most are very poor.
Because they have no way to pay for long-term care (Medicare and most private insurance don't pay for it), they have been made destitute by the system.


U.S. Is Shunning Sanctions Against Peru
The Bush Administration continued today to sharply criticize President Alberto K. Fujimori of Peru for suspending democracy to bring order to his Andean nation.
But Washington stopped short of calling for economic sanctions to force him to change course.
While Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d told a special session of the Organization of American States that "you cannot destroy democracy in order to save it," he joined with other O.A.S. foreign ministers in backing a relatively restrained resolution on Peru.
The United States has consistently criticized Mr.
Fujimori's actions since they were taken on April 5.


Grappling With the Care Of Problem TB Patients
Public health officials and legal experts say that dealing with problem patients is harder now than it was when tuberculosis was a leading killer of Americans earlier this century.
There are, they say, two reasons: lack of adequate institutions for the long-term supervision of patients and changes in constitutional law that have placed greater importance on the rights of an individual and made confinement less acceptable.
States differ in the power they have to handle the problem patient.
In Massachusetts, health officials are allowed to detain a person who has shown a pattern of noncompliance with medication for the months or years it may take to achieve a cure that eliminates the TB bacteria from the body.
About a year ago, the state opened a TB treatment unit at Lemuel Shattuck Hospital in Boston for recalcitrant patients that provides drug treatment and other services, rewarding cooperation with treatment through a hierarchy of privileges, including day passes.


China's Octogenarian Deng Shows New Gains
To the Editor:
The belated coverage by Beijing's news media of Deng Xiaoping's tour to the south, referred to by William Safire (column, March 30), and the political decline of Prime Minister Li Peng (news article, March 25) are but two more indications that Mr.
Deng, China's 87-year-old paramount leader, is winning against Chen Yun on China's economic future.
Not until March 30 did CCTV, China's national broadcasting station, report on Mr.
Deng's January visit in Shenzhen in a 10-minute lead segment.
When asked why it took two months to broadcast the event, an editor answered: "I'm sorry, I really can't give a satisfactory answer." The conservative Guangming Daily published the report on its front page with a large photo of Mr.
Deng.
His message, as quoted in the broadcast, was: "We must be bold in our reform, daring to experiment. We must not act as though we were women with bound feet. We must not hesitate if our course is correct."


Prime Is Cut By Chemical; Others Hold
The Chemical Banking Corporation cut its prime lending rate to 6 1/4 percent yesterday from 6 1/2 percent.
The cut, which put the rate at its lowest point since May 1976, followed last Thursday's move by the Federal Reserve to push down short-term interest rates by a quarter percentage point.


Arab League Wants 2 Bombing Suspects To Be Sent to Malta
As the deadline approaches for Libya to turn over two suspects in the bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 over Scotland or face international sanctions, the Arab League has proposed that the suspects be handed over to Malta and that the sanctions be postponed, United Nations officials said today.
The sanctions, which would cut air links and arms shipments to Libya and reduce the size of Libyan missions abroad, are to begin on Wednesday if the suspects in the 1988 bombing are not surrendered to the United States or Britain for trial.
The Security Council, which approved the sanctions in March, is to meet on Tuesday on Libya.


Hudson County Prices Bonds
A $135.3 million debt refunding by the Hudson County, N.J., correction facility was tentatively priced yesterday through a group of underwriters led by the First Boston Corporation.
The bonds have a maximum yield of 6.65 percent for a 6.6 percent bond due in 2021
The tax-exempt certificates of participation, which are in serial form, are priced to yield 5.25 percent for an issue due in 1996, 6.1 percent in 1992 and 6.3 percent in 2004 and 2005.
For a longer maturity, a bond due in 2011 is priced to yield 6.58 percent.


Smith (A.O.) Corp. (A) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


BRIEFS
*
A.T.&amp; T. Microelectronics formed a global venture to produce integrated circuit chip sets for low-power, compact digital cellular telephones with Mitsui &amp; Co., Tokyo, and Teknekron Communications Systems Inc. *
Bank of San Francisco, San Francisco, entered a definitive agreement for the sale of at least a 51 percent voting control to a private investor group for about $13 million.


Lewis Enters Long Jump in New York
CARL LEWIS, who will be seeking a third consecutive Olympic gold medal in the long jump this summer in Barcelona, Spain, has entered the long-jump competition of the New York Games on May 24.
Lewis, the world-record holder at 100 meters, is widely recognized as the greatest long jumper in history, for his 10-year, 65-meet winning record that was finally broken last summer when MIKE POWELL beat him at the world championships in Tokyo.
Even though Powell set the world record at 29 feet 4 1/2 inches, Lewis still managed to reach 29 feet or better three times.


Aluminum Co. of America reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


All Together Now: Nets Join in Victory
Derrick Coleman was back after missing three games because of discomfort from a boil, but it took the Nets all four quarters tonight before they could get in step against the Magic and come away with a 110-104 victory.
"I just told the guys we got the 12 back tonight," said the Nets' coach, Bill Fitch, happy to have his starting team back in full force, if not in full strength as the Nets continued on their drive to get to the playoffs for the first time since 1986.


Primerica Posts Earnings, Setting Records All Around
The Primerica Corporation notched record earnings of $220.8 million in the first quarter, the company said yesterday, more than doubling the $105.9 million it earned in the period a year ago.
Even better, analysts said, it easily surpassed its previous quarterly record, $132.1 million in last year's fourth quarter.
Primerica rode a wave of profits at its Wall Street subsidiary, Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Company, and exercised heavy profit taking by selling lucrative stock holdings.
Over all, Primerica's earnings represented a jump to $1.96 a share, from 95 cents in the 1991 period.


Review/Theater: Two Trains Running; August Wilson Reaches the 60's With Witnesses From a Distance
In "Two Trains Running," the latest chapter in his decade-by-decade chronicle of black American life in this century, August Wilson arrives at a destination that burns almost too brightly in memory to pass for history.
"Two Trains Running" is Mr.
Wilson's account of the 1960's, unfurling at that moment when racial conflict and the Vietnam War were bringing the nation to the brink of self-immolation.
Yet Mr.
Wilson's play, which opened last night at the Walter Kerr Theater, never speaks of Watts or Vietnam or a march on Washington.
The Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. is mentioned only once.
The garrulous characters, the regulars at a Pittsburgh ghetto lunch counter in 1969, are witnesses to history too removed from the front lines to harbor more than the faintest fantasies of justice.
They invest their hopes in playing the numbers, not in distant leaders sowing lofty dreams of change.


Off the Rolls -- A special report.; Cuts for New York and Connecticut
New York have adopted drastic cuts in its general assistance program as part of its budget this year and Connecticut seems likely to do so.
But in New Jersey, which recently imposed stricter eligibility requirements for such programs, no cuts have been proposed.
In Connecticut, Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. proposed a $113 million reduction in February for the general assistance program, which is intended primarily for poor single people and childless couples.
The bill, which is before the Legislature, would cut or eliminate aid for at least two-thirds of the 35,000 people in the program, the State Department of Income Maintenance has estimated.


Classical Music in Review
Waverly Consort
Town Hall
Exit Mozart.
Enter Columbus.
The year 1992 has found its new obsession.
The Waverly Consort did its part on Saturday night with vocal and instrumental music from Spain in the age of exploration.
Here were celebrations of battles against the Moors and other enemies, the niceties of court music, church music from both Spain and its colonies in the New World, and finally songs from a Sephardic culture that Spanish reconquest virtually banished from the Iberian peninsula.


Baseball; For Taylor, a Few Blots Amid the Blurs
Even before the Yankees made pitcher Brien Taylor the first pick over all in the major league draft last June, and before they signed him to a record $1.55 million contract in August, he was thought of as a future star.
The potential certainly is there: In Taylor's last spring-training start, he averaged 94 miles an hour on his fastball, with a radar-gun high of 98.


Classical Music in Review
Brooklyn Philharmonic
Brooklyn Academy of Music
Dennis Russell Davies promised to stir things up at the Brooklyn Philharmonic, and in his first season he has made a reasonable start.
Some of his changes are cosmetic: the orchestra has traded in its traditional concert dress for open-necked black shirts for the men and bright blouses for the women.
More to the point, he has been tinkering with the notion of what an orchestral concert should be.


Moves to Halt Phone Abuses
A.T.&amp; T. and Sprint said yesterday that they planned to move against companies that abuse the long-distance carriers' "800"-number service by surreptitiously imposing fees for a toll-free call.
Consumers Action of San Francisco says that with the recent crackdown on excessive charges for "900" and "970" lines, some of those companies have started using "800" numbers to charge callers.


Salem Carpet Mills Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


Team Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Springs Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


Burger King to Sell Distribution Unit
The Burger King Corporation has agreed to sell its in-house distribution business, Burger King Distribution Services, to the Onex Corporation, a conglomerate based in Toronto.
The distribution services company distributes food and paper products to all of the Burger King-owned restaurants in the United States.


Dekalb Genetics reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


DAZED BUT ALIVE, LONDONERS RETURN
London's financial district returned to work a bit dazed today, with streets still blocked off by the police and ankle-deep in debris and glass from the terrorist bombing in the ancient heart of the city on Friday night.
Above the heads of onlookers who crowded sidewalks for a glimpse of the damage, the shredded ends of window blinds flapped like streamers from the broken facades of office towers, and papers blown from the shattered buildings filled the air like confetti.


Assembly Votes to Extend Building Permits for Years
Over the strong objections of environmentalists, the Assembly gave overwhelming final approval today to a bill that would automatically extend local building permits through 1994.
The bill, which was backed by the state's powerful construction industry, passed the Assembly by a vote of 61 to 8, with Democrats and Republicans on both the winning and losing sides.
Gov.
Jim Florio has not indicated whether he will sign the legislation, saying he must weigh the needs of the economy and the environment.


Models of Miami Draw German Shop
As a new boom in metropolitan Miami attracts trendy businesses like nightclubs, restaurants and modeling agencies, advertising agencies were sure to follow.
A German shop specializing in work for fashion and retail clients, Adverba G.m.b.H., is opening Adverba International in Coral Gables, Fla.
Rainer Walker, president of the agency and its parent, which is based in Frankfurt, attributed the decision to Miami's growing popularity as a market for models and modeling.


Seeing Genius Between the Dashes
FOR today's column, you'd best care about words, literary history, the imperfect process of creative writing and editing, and something as minor as commas.
It would be helpful if you enjoy F. Scott Fitzgerald and "The Great Gatsby." But you needn't like italics.
Fitzgerald hated --
absolutely despised
-- italics for emphasis; he wasn't keen on semicolons either.
And Fitzgerald was definitely not the best speler.
Matthew J. Bruccoli knows this.
In fact, the Bronx-born professor of English at the University of South Carolina (now there's a mix) likely knows Fitzgerald better than the author's famous editor, Maxwell Perkins, did in the 1920's.
Although Fitzgerald died 52 years ago (listening to Beethoven), his writing is still being edited -- by Professor Bruccoli.


In Liberia's Illusory Peace, Rebel Leader Rules Empire of His Own Design
Only the legions of edgy and heavily armed guards at checkpoints leading to this sleepy village give any hint of the grand ambitions envisioned here.
For if the guerrilla leader Charles Taylor has his way, this remote outpost will become the strategic center of a vast military and administrative empire.
Already nearly 95 percent of Liberia, the West African nation founded by freed American slaves, is in effect run from Gbarnga by Mr.
Taylor's forces.
The area has its own currency and banking system, an international airfield, a thriving export trade in diamonds, gold, rubber and timber -- even its own radio and television network.


2 From Hal Riney Head a Design Firm
Hal Riney &amp; Partners Inc., of San Francisco, is helping to form a graphic design firm there.
The firm, Riney, Bradford &amp; Huber, is led by two agency executives.


Temple-Inland Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Wieden &amp; Kennedy Gets Ad Age Award
After forgoing the selection of an American agency of the year for 1990, Advertising Age has named Wieden &amp; Kennedy of Portland, Ore., as agency of the year for 1991.
In this week's issue, the advertising trade weekly saluted the iconoclastic shop "for its artistry in generating and maintaining creative momentum during an ecomonic recession," for clients like Nike and Subaru of America.
Last year, for the first time, Advertising Age did not select an agency of the year because its editors said they could not find one whose work was innovative enough.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-12  AN ULTIMATUM IN RUSSIA
The Russian Cabinet threatened to resign over the issue of economic reforms as a power struggle escalated between President Yeltsin and the Congress of People's Deputies.
A1  MANDELAS TO SEPARATE
Nelson Mandela, president of the African National Congress, announced that he and Winnie Mandela had agreed to separate after a 33-year marriage that endured through his 27-year imprisonment.
A7  NO SANCTIONS FOR PERU
Washington continued to berate President Alberto Fujimori of Peru for suspending democracy, but stopped short of calling for economic sanctions.
A8  WAR CRIMES CASE DISMISSED
France has thrown out a case against Paul Touvier, a French militia chief accused of killing Jews and a human rights leader during the Nazi occupation.
A5  EMPIRE OF A REBEL LEADER
The Liberian empire of Charles Taylor is thriving while the country's capital, Monrovia, withers.
And the threat of violence seems to have moved in to stay.
A3  VOTES WON, SCAPEGOATS LOST
As President Hashemi Rafsanjani and his supporters emerge victorious from parliamentary elections, he has no outside force to blame for Iran's hardships.
A6  MALTA PROPOSED FOR SUSPECTS
The Arab League has proposed that the suspects in the bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland, be handed over to Malta and that economic sanctions against Libya be postponed.
A6  LONDON PICKS UP THE PIECES
London's financial district returned to work, ankle-deep in debris and glass from the terrorist bombing in the heart of the city.
A12  KINNOCK TO RESIGN PARTY POST
Neil Kinnock, leader of Britain's Labor Party, said that he would resign and let a special party convention elect his successor.
A12
A major shift is expected in Britain's economic policies.  A12  GERMAN IDENTITY CRISIS
Bonn Journal: Building is booming in Bonn, although the seat of Government is to move to Berlin.
Bonn's leaders are fighting the move, but with little hope of reprieve.
A4  National A16-21  NUCLEAR PLANT SHUTDOWNS
Nuclear plants that provide 10 percent of the nation's nuclear power may be closed this decade because their operating costs are too high to compete against a rising tide of cheap electricity, experts say.
A1  SHUTTING DOWN THE CHICAGO LOOP
A breach in a tunnel beneath the Chicago River sent water flooding through an underground network, overrunning downtown basements and utility lines and forcing the evacuation of tens of thousands of workers around the Chicago Loop.
A1  LIVING (AND HURTING) OFF WELFARE
Since Michigan cut off welfare payments to 83,000 adults last fall, some have found jobs, many have not, and at least one died after skimping on her medicine to save money.
A1  CLINTON'S DIVERSE CAVALRY
The advisers who would make Governor Clinton President have little in common aside from a love of politics and a commitment to their candidate.
The staff's diversity has helped more than hurt.
A20  BUSH PLAYS TO HIS POSITION
President Bush's appearances with Charlton Heston and law-enforcement officials could be seen as part of a "Rose Garden strategy": boosting Mr.
Bush's political fortunes by wrapping him in the trappings of his office.
A20  REAGAN JOSTLED IN SCUFFLE
Reagan was jostled but unhurt after the Secret Service grabbed a man who interrupted a speech and smashed a statue at the former President's feet.
A16  GYPSIES SPEAK OUT WITH SUIT
A group of gypsies sued the city of Spokane, Wash., claiming their civil rights were violated in a police raid.
The suit breaks a tradition of passivity and could deplete the city's treasury.
A16  THE ISSUE OF INNOCENCE
A Texas inmate won a stay of execution so his lawyers could argue that his constitutional rights were violated simply because he is innocent, an issue never fully addressed by the Supreme Court.
A21  HILLS ARE ALIVE, BUT WITH WHAT?
Hueytown Journal: The hills by this Alabama mining town have been throbbing with a loud, erratic hum that has mystified sound experts and exasperated residents.
A16  The Yale College dean resigned with harsh words for the faculty.
A21  Under a Federal mediator, talks began in the Caterpillar strike.
A21  Metropolitan Digest, B1 COPING WITH THREAT OF TB
As tuberculosis makes a comeback, especially among the homeless and those infected with the virus that causes AIDS, states are grappling with ways to deal with problem patients who will not complete their treatment and who pose a danger to others.
A1  RECONSIDERING FISCAL CUTS
The Dinkins administration has decided it was a mistake to propose deep cuts in the city's construction spending and is trying to devise a way to finance the expenditures.
Critics had expressed concern that the cuts would delay vital construction projects.
A1  Business Digest, D1  Science Times C1-10  DNA EVIDENCE IN DOUBT
A long-awaited report by a panel of genetic fingerprinting experts expressed strong doubts about the value of such evidence and said courts should not accept it unless laboratories take new steps to be sure the most stringent scientific standards are observed.
A1  A new theory throws earthquake predictions into doubt.
C1  Salvaging sex offenders with innovative therapies.
C1  A game sheds light on altruism.
C1  Fashion Page B7  Obituaries B8  Arts/Entertainment C12-18  Euro Disneyland's hotels.
C13  An ex-ballplayer puts sports on screen.
C13  Theater: "Two Trains Running," by August Wilson.
C13  Word and Image: "The Italics Are Mine." C17  Sports B9-15  Baseball: Yankees stay undefeated.
B9  Ice-cold Mets lose at ice-cold Shea.
B9  Basketball: Carnesecca steps down at St.
John's.
B9  Nets beat Orlando.
B12  Columns: Berkow on Carnesecca B9  Golf: Couples among elite.
B15  Hockey: Devils rout Penguins.
B11  Editorials/Op-Ed A24-25  Editorials A24  The price of peace, evaded.
Sanitizing sex -- and death.
Weak Yonkers housing plan.
Topics: Carriage horses.
Letters A24  Russell Baker: Monkey business, anyone?
A25  A. M. Rosenthal: Poets of the gulag.
A25  Emma Gilbey: Winnie Mandela's rise and fall.
A25  Donald Koblitz: "What did you do in the cold war, daddy?" A25


More Turmoil at Yale: College Dean Plans to Quit
The dean of Yale College, Donald Kagan, a central player in the university's painful efforts to get its budget in order, announced his resignation last night and warned that "Yale's tradition and greatness" were threatened by the "frenzied denial and defensiveness" of the university's faculty.
In a speech at a meeting in New Haven sponsored by Yale's undergraduate student government, Mr.
Kagan criticized a faculty committee that rejected a university plan to reduce Yale's growing budget deficit by cutting faculty positions and eliminating several academic departments.


Fall Collections End On a Brighter Note
The fall fashion shows opened in Milan, Italy, last month on a lugubrious note with mournful colors, longer skirts and a feeling that the slow economy through most of the world had deflected interest in new clothes.
By the time the last designers had introduced their collections in New York on Friday, the mood and the perception had changed.
Having experimented with longer clothes for a year, designers had figured out how to do them successfully.
Long, fitted clothes covering the body to the ankles looked as sexy as short ones that bared all.


Study Faults F.C.C. Deals
Unwary investors stand to be bilked out of tens of millions of dollars this year by unscrupulous telemarketers selling risky investment opportunities in the wireless cable television industry, according to a report.
The report, prepared by the North American Securities Administrators Association, which represents state regulatory agencies overseeing the securities industry, and the Council of Better Business Bureaus, blames the lotteries by which the Federal Communications Commission awards licenses to transmit wireless cable television programming for a recent sharp increase in fraudulent investment schemes.
It called for an overhaul in the Government lottery system used to distribute licenses.


General Electric reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


S.A.S. Merger Wins Approval
Scandinavian Airlines System won approval today to merge with the domestic carrier Linjeflyg, creating a near monopoly within Sweden just before deregulation.
"It is not the most ideal situation, giving one carrier such a big market dominance ahead of the deregulation," said Jonas Berggren of the Freedom of Commerce Board.


Quotation of the Day
"In view of the tensions that have arisen owing to differences between ourselves on a number of issues in recent months, we have mutually agreed that a separation would be best for each of us." -- NELSON MANDELA, announcing his separation from his wife, Winnie.  [ A7:1. ]


Chess
When a player introduces a daring gambit, the question arises whether its surprise value was uppermost or whether it was a profound concept that might withstand the test of time.
Take the stunning sacrifice that Gary Kasparov of Russia offered in the 11th game of his world title defense against his countryman Anatoly Karpov in New York in 1990.
At the moment it was played, the commentators in the analysis halls felt that it could not be correct.
And since then the skeptics, including Yasser Seirawan, one of America's top players, have become convinced that it was indeed unsound.
Nevertheless, in the Linares International Tournament, which ended March 14 in Spain, Kasparov confounded his critics by playing the same way again, in the fifth round, and his opponent was the redoubtable Boris Gelfand of Russia.
Despite the time Gelfand had for thorough investigation, Kasparov defeated him.


Review/Television; Sheriff Ned Blessing, a Onetime Texas Boy Bandit
Think things are tough enough already?
Try selling a new series to television these days, especially if it's not a half-hour sitcom.
The hourlong dramas, we are told, aren't nearly as profitable later, in syndication.
Producers have to try harder, sometimes reverting to tactics that not too long ago would have been unthinkable.
Consider the case of "Ned Blessing," an 1880's Texas-Mexican border tale being presented on CBS this evening at 9 as a two-hour movie.
Actually, as becomes obvious at the end of the film, this is the first chapter in a potential series, its continuation apparently depending on the ratings fate of the pilot.
Scripts are at the ready, but that's where they'll stay unless the network decides to go ahead with the series.
But where, reviewers might well ask, would the program be heading?
Hearst Entertainment, eager to supply an answer, has decided to release several of the scripts in an effort to convey "a sense of the show's creative style and direction." The producer concedes that the step is "highly unusual."


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
Olympia &amp; York called on its bankers to defer interest and principal payments on billions of dollars of debt over three months.
It also chose Gerald Greenwald, a former Chrysler executive, as its new president to lead it through a restructuring.  [ Page D1. ]


Ford Plans $3 Billion Outlay To Raise Production Levels
The Ford Motor Company announced a $3 billion investment in new machinery and plant space today, some of which will be used to build a new mini-van in late 1993.
When auto sales were brisk in the 1980's, Ford was tightly constrained by too little production capacity, and today's announcement is a step to correct that problem.
The No. 2 auto maker's actions will affect a number of plants in the United States and Canada and should result in 1,300 new jobs at Ford's truck plant in Louisville, Ky., a spokesman said.
Before the recession, Ford's hourly employees typically worked a great deal of overtime to meet demand for vehicles.


Office Depot Inc.  reports earnings for 13wks to March 28


Air Carriers Fine-Tune New Fares
As airlines struggled yesterday to finish entering new, lower fares into their computer systems, several carriers spent the day altering or fine-turning the plans most of them adopted last week in response to American Airlines' broad changes.
Continental Airlines, for example, announced excursion fares between Florida and the Northeast and parts of the Midwest that are on average 20 percent below those adopted in recent days by most carriers.
In doing so, it is following the lead of USAir, which recently announced similar fare reductions on those routes for travel between April 23 and June 14.


Experts Dismiss Flood Threat at Proposed Nuclear Dump
A SCIENTIFIC clash over a proposed nuclear dump in Nevada intensified yesterday with the public release of two conflicting reports.
After more than two years of study, a 17-member panel of the National Research Council released a report that dismissed the idea that an earthquake might drive ground water upward to flood a proposed nuclear dump inside Yucca Mountain, Nev.
The dump, for the nation's most highly radioactive wastes, is under study by the United States Department of Energy.


Rematch Is Being Worked Out For Slaney and Budd-Pieterse
A confluence of events could bring Zola Budd-Pieterse of South Africa and Mary Decker Slaney to the track together this spring for the first time since their collision eight years ago in the 3,000-meter race of the Los Angeles Olympics.
Both runners have expressed an interest in running in the Prefontaine Classic, June 6 in Eugene, Ore.
Budd-Pieterse plans to compete there and in the Mazda Indy Games in Indianapolis, provided the International Amateur Athletic Federation grants South Africa provisional membership, which is expected next month.


YELTSIN'S CABINET THREATENS TO QUIT IN CONGRESS FEUD
President Boris N. Yeltsin's entire Cabinet formally offered to resign today unless an unexpectedly aggressive Parliament halted efforts to scale back the Government's program of economic reform.
Any such dilution of the Russian President's program could lead the West to reconsider its offer of billions of dollars in assistance and jeopardize Mr.
Yeltsin's plans for economic recovery.
Yegor T. Gaidar, the Deputy Prime Minister and chief architect of the economic reforms, said the Cabinet had submitted its resignation en masse, reflecting a growing power struggle between Mr.
Yeltsin and the Congress of People's Deputies, the highest legislative authority in Russia.
Keep Working, Yeltsin Says
Mr.
Gaidar said Mr.
Yeltsin had asked his ministers to continue working until the end of the Congress session in the next few days, when he will decide whether to accept their resignations.
Their action was in protest against a resolution adopted by the Congress on Saturday ordering Mr.
Yeltsin to relinquish the post of Prime Minister and to name a new Government within three months, as well as to make broad changes in the economic program, which came under sharp criticism.


New Duties Familiar To Treasury Nominee
When he becomes Under Secretary of the Treasury, Jerome H. Powell will carry on much of the work he did in his previous position as Assistant Treasury Secretary for domestic finance.
Mr.
Powell, who was nominated on Thursday by President Bush, has been deeply involved in developing and pushing the Administration's banking bill, which has yet to receive Congressional approval.
As Assistant Secretary, he also oversaw a report that called for big changes in auctions of Government securities after the scandal over improper practices by Salomon Brothers.
As Under Secretary, he will oversee domestic finance, economic policy and the public debt bureaucracy.
"He is intellectually honest," said William Heyman, director of the division of market regulation for the Securities and Exchange Commission.
"When you work with him, you can tell you are dealing with someone who has private sector experience." Mr.
Heyman, who worked with Mr.
Powell on the Treasury auction report, said Mr.
Powell achieved far more consensus than he thought possible in heading the committee of Treasury, the S.E.C. and Federal Reserve officials.


IMC Fertilizer Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


D'Amato Paid 41% of Income Toward Taxes WASHINGTON, April 13
Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato and his wife paid 41 percent of their income in taxes last year, according to joint returns released today.
They gave 1.6 percent of their earnings to charity.
The New York Republican and his wife, Penelope, who separated a decade ago, had an adjusted gross income of $167,186 and paid $43,605 in state and Federal taxes, according to the returns.
They showed the couple's charitable donations were $2,695.


Classical Music in Review
'Petrouchka'
Little Orchestra Society Avery Fisher Hall
The most astonishing moment in the Bennington Marionettes' staging of Stravinsky's "Petrouchka" on Saturday morning was when it came time for the ballet's Puppet Master to amuse the carnival crowds.
Before that, the fair's puppets had all been life-size figures, with large faces and flexible bodies, manipulated by black-suited puppeteers.


Woman Injured in 50-Foot Fall at Quarry
A woman was seriously injured after she fell at least 50 feet from the ledge of a quarry and landed in a rocky ravine, the police said.
The woman, Maureen Manchester, 46 years old, was in stable condition at Hartford Hospital on Monday with injuries to her chest and abdomen.


Bo Is Talking Anything but Baseball
BO JACKSON's priority list has baseball "at the bottom of the barrel" for now.
Jackson, who had hip replacement surgery April 4, was on crutches yesterday in Chicago at the White Sox home opener, against the Seattle Mariners.
He said he had virtually no pain in the left hip that was injured while playing football in January 1991.
"I'm feeling great," he said.
"I take pride in that I'm a fast healer." Jackson said he would continue therapy to strengthen the muscles "and learn to operate with a foreign object in my body."
"I didn't have surgery to get back to baseball," he said.
"I had it for three reasons. First, to get rid of the pain and discomfort. Second, to have a normal family life. And third, to go deer hunting in four or five months. Baseball is at the bottom of the barrel. That's the way I'm looking at my future."


Chairman of Pinkerton's Adds to His Responsibilities
Thomas J. Wathen, chairman and chief executive of Pinkerton's Inc., will take on the added responsibilities of chief operating officer on June 30 in a move Mr.
Wathen described as "planned long ago." Alfred J. Berger, the current chief operating officer, will return to his former role as consultant and outside board member.
Mr.
Wathen's privately held California Plant Protection Company acquired the venerable Pinkerton's security agency in 1988.
Mr.
Wathen, who is 62, turned to Mr.
Berger, a longtime friend and California Plant Protection board member, for help in merging the two companies.
Mr.
Berger became a full-time chief operating officer in 1990 as the company prepared for its initial stock offering.


Jennifer Convertibles reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Organ Donor Babies Can Turn Death Into Life
To the Editor:
I was infuriated by "Theresa Ann Campo Pearson: Baby Girl" (editorial, March 31), about a child born with anencephaly in Florida, whose parents were denied the opportunity to donate her organs to a child in need when Judge Estella Moriarty declared her not technically "brain dead" (the legal definition of death in the state of Florida) because her brain stem was still functioning.
You state that permitting such an organ donation would have "turned this baby into a farm to be harvested for organs while she was still alive."
Let's digest some medical facts before jumping to conclusions.
Anencephaly is defined as a marked developmental defect not only of the brain but also of the bones that house this structure.
Infants with this condition have no brain and no skull.
Their small heads are completely flat from the eyebrows back.
They do not hear, see, smell, feel, taste, think or grow.
Is this "alive"?
Not in my opinion!


East European Bank Is Split on Its Future
The London-based bank established to foster private investment in Eastern Europe agreed today to study an expansion of its role there, but put off any decision on broadening its financing abilities, after sharp United States objections.
The European Bank for Reconstruction and Development was set up a year ago to provide market-rate loans and equity investments aimed at spurring the growth of private enterprise in Eastern Europe.


Earth Day Message Pounded Out


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt *
Bankers Trust New York Corp. filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for a shelf offering of up to $1 billion in debt securities. *
Burlington Resources Inc., Seattle, filed for a shelf offering of up to $400 million in debt securities.


Butterfly Farms May Be Last Hope of Rare Hunted Species
WITH a wingspan nearly half a foot across, banded in black and yellow with iridescent blue patches, the homerus swallowtail is one of the most spectacular butterflies on earth.
But its beauty and rarity have brought the gorgeous insect to the brink of extinction as poachers and collectors prowl its last refuges in the remote mountain rain forests of Jamaica.
A team of conservationists working with the Nature Conservancy and the Xerces Society, a group that protects endangered insects and their habitats, is trying to rescue the last homerus colonies.
Their plan is to discourage the illegal poaching of the wild butterfly by local people and instead to train them how to cultivate the insect themselves in butterfly farms.


Baseball; Cold Mets Resemble Old Mets As Futility Continues at Shea
The comedy, if it isn't yet tragic, is at least fast approaching epic.
The Mets, with bloopers and the kind of collective baseball blasphemy that Manager Jeff Torborg was supposed to have eliminated through discipline, last night lost their fourth straight game, a 3-2 decision to the Philadelphia Phillies at Shea Stadium.


Systems That Make Votes Count for More
To the Editor:
William Safire, in his column on the British elections ("The Major Indicator," March 16), unfairly criticizes proportional representation, stating that such a system would bring with it "all the splintering instability that now afflicts the Israeli Knesset."
The Israeli situation is an exception to the rule that proportional representation systems provide a more desirable mix of stability and flexibility than our winner-take-all system does.
The Israeli system represents an extreme form of proportional representation, in that it has a single national district, rather than numerous local districts, and requires no threshold of voter support for representation in the Knesset.
Proportional representation systems with local districts and requiring a threshold are examples of stable, strong governments, such as Germany.


Peter H. Knapp, 75, Psychiatrist Noted in Psychosomatic Medicine
Dr.
Peter Hobart Knapp, a Massachusetts psychiatrist noted for his research in psychosomatic medicine, died last Tuesday at his home in Cambridge, Mass.
He was 75 years old.
The death was caused by a brain tumor, his family said.


METRO DIGEST
GAUGING THE THREAT OF TB PATIENTS
As tuberculosis has made a comeback, especially among homeless people and those infected with the virus that causes AIDS, states are grappling with ways to deal with problem patients like Milton A. Ellison.
Mr.
Ellison, a 34-year-old homeless man from New York City, has repeatedly failed to take the medicine that he needs.
So last month, health officials took him to a hospital where he was guarded by sheriff's deputies and shackled by wrist and ankle to his bed.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  SECOND THOUGHTS ON BUDGET CUTS
Under mounting pressure from construction groups, bond dealers and some fiscal monitors, the Dinkins administration has decided that it was a mistake to propose deep cuts in the city's capital budget during a recession and is trying to come up with a way to finance the spending.
A1.
A TEST FOR DRUG-MURDER LAW


Martin Williams, A Jazz Critic, 67; Wrote on Culture
Martin Williams, one of jazz's most influential critics and advocates, died over the weekend at his home in Washington.
He was 67 years old.
He was found dead about 2 A.M. yesterday.
He died of complications from the flu after being ill with cancer for some time, said his former wife, Martha C. Williams of Alexandria, Va.


Just Enough of a Wind Helps Conner Advance
Dennis Conner, always the pragmatist until he finds himself losing, said before his sudden-death race in the America's Cup defenders' semifinals today that he was leaving his fate up to the "wind gods." Apparently, they listened.
The gentle, 7-to-9-knot breeze that Conner's yacht, Stars &amp; Stripes, needed to beat Kanza, Bill Koch's heavier-air boat, blew softly during the early stages of the race here.
Combined with a skillful start, it was the kind of break Stars &amp; Stripes needed.
By the time the breeze picked up, Stars &amp; Stripes had stacked up enough time to finish 2 minutes 12 seconds ahead of Kanza.


Couples Takes a Place Among Game's Elite
For even the most skeptical observers, Fred Couples's victory at the Masters fills a void that has existed for more than a decade in American golf.
Once again, the country that produced Jones, Hogan, Palmer, Nicklaus and Watson can claim the indisputably best player in the game.
Until Sunday afternoon, many people, especially Couples himself, were not convinced that his recent run of 5 North American victories and 19 top-six finishes in 24 starts over the last 10 months were enough to validate him as No. 1.


Most of Apple's Copyright Suit Is Dismissed
Apple Computer's long-running copyright infringement suit against Microsoft and Hewlett-Packard was gutted today when Federal District Court Judge Vaughn Walker threw out its central elements in a surprise ruling.
A few remaining items will be discussed at a hearing scheduled for May 12.


A Correction: Voter Turnout in 20 Primaries So Far


Nobody Migrates for Better Welfare Benefits
To the Editor:
According to an article on the Albany legislative impasse on the state budget (March 23), officials were "arguing about measures aimed at deterring people from moving to New York to qualify for welfare benefits."
This myth stems from a supposition that poor people calculate the marginal increase in their standard of living that life in New York's poor neighborhoods might bring about and voluntarily pull their children out of school, cut off their relationships with friends and family, and move to the promised land represented by this recession-ridden state.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Federal National Mortgage Association, known as Fannie Mae, plans to price $1.1 billion of debentures in two issues today: a $600 million 5-year issue and a $500 million 10-year issue. *
Connecticut Health and Educational Facilities Authority is offering $52.6 million in tax-exempt revenue bonds for Lawrence and Memorial Hospital through underwriters led by Paine Webber Inc.
Yields on the serial bonds range from 5.55 percent in 1998 to 6.35 percent in 2005, with longer bonds due in 2012 and 2022 priced to yield about 6.519 percent and 6.55 percent, respectively.
All the bonds are insured by Municipal Bond Investor's Assurance Corp. and are rated triple-A by both Moody's Investors Service Inc. and Standard &amp; Poor's Corp.


There's Still Time to Save U.S. Shipbuilding; Submarine Tankers
To the Editor:
I have an idea for using the skills, personnel and facilities of the Electric Boat division of General Dynamics in Groton, Conn., without wasting them on the Seawolf submarine.
Several years ago, General Dynamics considered building a series of submarine tankers to carry liquid natural gas or oil from the Arctic to other regions.
Traveling smoothly underwater they would not be subject to ocean storms and turbulence, and using advanced sonar technology, they could safely avoid any undersea mountain ranges or obstructions.
They could be an alternative to pipelines, which are subject to sabotage and environmental concerns.
My company, MRC Films, produced a film for General Dynamics describing this concept, but military submarines were then apparently more important, and the idea was dropped.


Personal Health
WHEN consulted by a patient with crippling back pain that radiates down the leg, a doctor's first thought is that a protruding disk in the lower spine may be pressing on the sciatic nerve.
And very often, that is indeed the cause of the pain popularly known as sciatica.
But not always.
As some experts have discovered, at least one in five cases of sciatica is caused, not by a herniated disk or muscle spasm in the back, but by a little-known muscle -- the piriformis -- deep in the buttock.
Normally, the muscle helps turn the hip out and raise the leg to the side.


Satellite Technology Management reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Campuses Find New Ways to Recruit as Fight for Good Students Gets Fierce
Dan Riches, a high school senior in Waukesha, Wis., is in a difficult spot.
A straight-A student, he has been accepted by both the University of Pennsylvania and Georgetown University and cannot make up his mind.
"The guy from Georgetown called me last week and asked me if I had decided," said Mr.
Riches, who drove to Philadelphia from Wisconsin with his father, Michael, to tour Penn this past weekend.
"When I told him I was going to visit Penn, he told me: 'You don't want to go there. It's filthy and it's in a rundown neighborhood.' "


Food Notes
Easter Sweet
Easter sweets are sweet indeed, and not only to the taste.
Bakers and confectioners are busy with pastel icings and chocolate, and fashioning decorated eggs, charming bonnets, delicate baskets and a vast menagerie of adorable animal and bird babies.


Rogers Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 29


Union Agrees To End Strike At Caterpillar
The United Automobile Workers union unexpectedly agreed tonight to end a five-month-old strike against Caterpillar Inc. that had left more than 12,000 workers walking the picket lines.
The accord was widely seen as a setback for the union, which until Monday had characterized the company's offer as a "mean-spirited proposal."


Owens-Illinois reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Provident American reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Miss Adelaide and Nathan Detroit Return


Centennial Cellular reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Helmsley's Last Legal Bid to Elude Prison Fails
Leona M. Helmsley's final legal move to avoid prison failed yesterday when a Federal appeals court in Manhattan upheld an order for her to surrender today to the Federal Medical Center in Lexington, Ky.
Underscoring her desperate attempt to remain free, her lawyer, Alan M. Dershowitz, said outside the courtroom that Mrs.
Helmsley would give her hotel holdings to New York City for housing the homeless in exchange for escaping prison.
She and her husband, Harry, own the New York Helmsley and the Park Lane and have interests in the other Helmsley hotels, including 51 percent of the Helmsley Palace.


CBS in First Place Of Ratings Race for Year
As the rating returns for the 1991-92 television season came in yesterday, CBS poured Champagne, ABC declared it a transition year, Fox Broadcasting said it had grown like a teen-ager (with a lot of help from teen-agers) and NBC tried to change the rules of the game.
For CBS, the victory was sweet enough to bring out the entire top management of the company, including its chairman, Laurence A. Tisch, for a Champagne celebration at CBS headquarters in New York.
Mr.
Tisch said CBS's re-emergence as the most popular network was something he had never stopped expecting, even as the network finished in third place for the last four seasons.
"Maybe I was crazy, but I knew we wouldn't be staying in third place," Mr.
Tisch said.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Apr. 10
Apr. 3
Apr. 12
1992
1992
1991
Gasoline production, daily
6.8
6.8
6.5
Distillate production, daily
2.9
2.9
2.8
Gasoline stocks
215.5
219.2
204.2
Distillate stocks
90.5
93.4
96.8
Crude imports, daily
6.9
5.3
6.5
Product imports, daily
1.6
1.7
1.4
Crude stocks
346.8
337.4
341.6
Crude production, daily
7.3
7.3
7.4
Refinery utilization (%)
86.8
86.8
84.1
Source: American Petroleum Institute


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Clinton; Mission: Keeping Track Of Those Keeping Track
In the view of the campaign of Gov.
Bill Clinton, this deceptively placid riverside capital has reporters the way some dark kitchens have mice, and it has called on Betsey Wright to keep track of them.
"This reporter said to me, 'It isn't possible to operate covertly in this state, is it?' " she said in an interview last week.
"I said: 'That's the point. It's not possible. If you want a list of sightings of you in this state, I can give it to you.' "


New Autodesk Chief Was Executive at Sun
Autodesk Inc. yesterday named Carol Bartz, a former Sun Microsystems Inc. executive, to be its chairman, president and chief executive.
Based in Sausalito, Calif., Autodesk is the producer of Autocad, the leading computer-aided design software program.
Ms.
Bartz, who is 43 years old, succeeds Alvar Green, who announced his resignation as chief executive in October but remains a director.


Willamette Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Congressman Ends Re-Election Bid


Carbide to Sell India Assets To Build Hospital for Bhopal
The Union Carbide Corporation said late yesterday that it would sell its last holdings in India to raise as much as $17 million to build and operate a hospital in Bhopal, where a 1984 chemical explosion at its pesticide factory created the worst industrial disaster in history.
More than 4,000 Bhopal residents have died since the explosion and at least 200,000 survive with injuries, according to the Indian Government.
Union Carbide blamed employee sabotage for the explosion while the Government has charged the company with negligent design, construction and operation of the plant.
The Bhopal plant was part of an agricultural chemicals business that Union Carbide sold to Rhone Poulenc of France in 1986.


Israeli Labor Party Chief Confronted by Militants


Pathe Communications Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Sports of The Times; The Batboy Learned by Watching
THE major leagues are not exactly some craftsmen's guild from the Middle Ages.
The father does not bring the child around when he is 10 or 12, and make him an apprentice, guaranteeing him a career for life.
But Ruben Amaro, a crafty shortstop from the 60's, did the next best thing.
He passed on some hitting genes from his own father, the legendary Santos Amaro, and then he made his son the closest thing to an apprentice, a batboy for the Phillies.


Schools Cope With Influx of Immigrants
The huddled masses keep pouring into New York City's schools, infusing them with immigrant ambition and novel folkways but also overloading classrooms and straining the budget and the teaching staff.
An annual report issued yesterday by the Board of Education showed that about 120,000 immigrants from 167 countries had enrolled in the city's schools over the past three years, pushing the system's student population close to the million mark.
This year's influx of 43,268 immigrants is greater than the 40,845 that enrolled in the 1990-91 school year, and even more than the 35,600 in the 1989-90 school year, indicating that the trend is nowhere near abating.


American Home Products reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


International Paper reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Arbour Shrugs at Mark and Coaches On
Al Arbour has always been solid and stolid, more historical than hysterical.
When he coaches the Islanders in their final game of the season Wednesday night against the Devils at Nassau Coliseum, this taciturn man will set a record that will be difficult to break.
But he doesn't seem too impressed with himself.
It will be Arbour's 1,438th regular-season game as an National Hockey League coach, one more than Dick Irvin, who coached from 1930 through 1956 with Chicago, Toronto and Montreal.


2 Wisconsin Agencies Price $124.69 Million in Bonds
Two Wisconsin state agency bond issues totaling $124.69 million were priced for public sale yesterday.
A $72.94 million issue of housing revenue bonds from the Housing and Economic Development Authority through underwriters led by the First Boston Corporation was tentatively priced to yield a maximum 7.15 percent for a debt security due in 2013.
The bond is part of financing that may be subject to the Federal alternative minimum tax for some investors.
Shorter maturities also subject to the tax are priced to yield from 5.25 percent in 1995 to 6.6 percent in 2002, with another long-term maturity due in 2007, priced to yield 7.05 percent.


Prices of Treasury Securities Fall
Prices of Treasury securities dipped in slow trading yesterday, as dealers were once again forced to cope without the benefit of the Treasury futures market.
The Chicago Board of Trade remained closed, as the city's financial district continued to deal with problems created by Monday's flood.


Corrections
An article last Wednesday about psychiatric care of mentally ill homeless people identified a health-care worker imprecisely.
The worker, Carl Siciliano, is case manager of the Neighborhood Coalition for Shelter Permanent Residence, not the acting director of its parent body, the Neighborhood Coalition.
The executive director of the parent Neighborhood Coalition is Jonathan D. Meyer.


GTE Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Transit Union Head to Seek Strike Approval
The head of New York City's transit workers' union said yesterday that he would seek authorization for a strike from the union's executive board by the end of the week, unless the Transit Authority agreed to make a $5 million emergency contribution to the union's deficit-plagued health fund to keep it afloat.
The threat by Sonny Hall, the president of Local 100 of the Transport Workers Union, came during a debate between Mr.
Hall and Tim Schermerhorn, a leader of a dissident faction within the union.
The debate was held at The New York Times at the request of Mr.
Hall, who has struggled to get members' support in the labor negotiations and was seeking an independent forum to present his views.
Mr.
Hall gave no timetable for when he might ask the local's 32,000 workers to go out on strike, and he also indicated strong reservations about any job action, because of sanctions under state law for public employees who walk out.
A Loan at Issue
Still, his remarks represented the first time since 1980 that a leader of the transit union publicly broached the idea of a walkout.
After an 11-day subway and bus strike in 1980, the union had to pay nearly $1 million in fines and workers were docked two days' pay for each day they were on strike.
The strike proposal came after sustained criticism of Mr.
Hall by Mr.
Schermerhorn and other dissident members who have been calling for a more aggressive posture by union leaders.
Mr.
Schermerhorn, who advocates a job action during the Democratic National Convention in July, said that he did not think the union was prepared now to go on strike.
Mr.
Hall's threat represented a new turn in protracted negotiations over the union's health fund, which is financed by the Transit Authority and administered by the union.
In a tentative contract settlement reached last January, the Transit Authority agreed to pay $40 million over the next two years to help wipe out huge deficits in the health plan, caused by rising medical costs.
That money would have been in addition to the $11 million a month that the authority now pays into the plan, transit officials said.
Workers would have continued to receive the same level of health-care benefits under the tentative agreement, but they would have had to begin paying $10 for each doctor's visit.
Despite support from the union's board, the membership rejected the proposed contract last month by nearly 2 to 1.
The union then asked the Transit Authority for additional money to maintain medical benefits while negotiations resumed.
An arbitrator ruled last week that the transit agency had no contractual obligation to increase its contributions, but he recommended that the agency in essence lend $5 million to the health fund to improve morale and to advance the contract talks.
The M.T.A.
Rejects
On Monday, the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, the Transit Authority's parent agency, rejected the arbitrator's recommendation.
M.T.A. officials said they would lend the money only if the union agreed to join the M.T.A. in seeking binding arbitration to settle a new contract.
Mr.
Hall, the union's president, and Mr.
Schermerhorn, a founding member of New Directions, the dissident union caucus that claims a core of several hundred members, both rejected arbitration yesterday.
Each said that, under arbitration, transit officials could unilaterally decide matters, like staffing levels, that would ordinarily be the subject of negotiation.
Mr.
Hall said that current union members and retired members would lose important medical benefits on Friday -- including dental care, eyeglasses and prescription drugs -- and that they would have to pay new fees for doctor's visits and hospital care, if transit officials did not advance the $5 million.
"Can we leave active members with no health coverage?" Mr.
Hall asked.
"Can we leave retirees with no health coverage? Of course we can't. So we're going to the board real soon, this week, and get a vote: which way do we go?" No Date for Strike Set
After the debate Mr.
Hall said he would ask the executive board and the membership to authorize a strike if medical benefits were cut back.
But it was unclear when Mr.
Hall would seek to begin a walkout, if such action is approved.
At several junctures in the 45-minute debate, Mr.
Hall was sharply critical of Mr.
Schermerhorn's proposal for a job action by subway and bus workers during the Democratic convention.
Dissident transit workers, along with members of other unions, including utility workers and hospital workers, have called for strikes during the convention, at a time when they believe city and state officials would be vulnerable.
"We are among that number of people that say this is a good time to act, we should use this as a leverage in our bargaining," said Mr.
Schermerhorn, a train operator who ran unsuccessfully against Mr.
Hall in union elections last year and in 1988.
Mr.
Hall said he favored demonstrations and informational picketing during the convention.
"To say that you're going to disrupt the convention will make more enemies than we can ever count," he said.
"That's a terrible idea." Two Views on Tactics
Mr.
Hall also noted that the union had paid a huge price for the 1980 strike.
"The Taylor Law is a disaster for workers to go on strike," he said, referring to the state law that prohibits public employees from walking out.
"You lose no matter what happens."
Mr.
Schermerhorn contended that rallies and other kinds of pressure might induce transit officials to find more money for the workers.
Mr.
Hall argued that only additional subsidies from the state would enable the M.T.A. to improve its offer.
Mr.
Hall also accused Mr.
Schermerhorn's group of harboring a "special agenda of political hard-core, deep socialism," and of opposing any contract, "no matter its contents."
Mr.
Schermerhorn responded, "Nothing could be further from the truth." He said that New Directions had its roots among rank-and-file transit workers, and he accused Mr.
Hall of being out-of-touch with union members.


ARCO Cuts Spending And Sees Lower Profit
The Atlantic Richfield Company said yesterday that it had slashed its capital spending plans for the next five years by 20 percent and that it expected to post sharply lower earnings for the first quarter because of lower oil and gas prices and difficulties in its chemical business.
Speaking to securities analysts in New York, Lodwrick M. Cook, ARCO's chairman and chief executive, said earnings for the first quarter would be "disappointing and below the fourth quarter of 1991."


People
*
Kim Corrigan and Charlie Hasser were named to the new positions of senior vice presidents and management supervisors at Avrett, Free &amp; Ginsberg Inc., New York.
She had been vice president, management supervisor at Rosenfeld, Sirowitz, Humphrey &amp; Strauss, New York.
He had been vice president of marketing at American Racquet Co., Mobile, Ala. *
John Uusitalo was named general manager at Floathe Johnson Associates Inc., Kirkland, Wash.
He was previously an account director at FCB/Leber Katz Partners, New York.


Goody Products reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Mayor of Capital Finds Welcome Wearing Thin
Sharon Pratt Kelly swept into office as Mayor of Washington 15 months ago with 86 percent of the vote after promising to "clean house with a shovel, not a broom." The house, in this case, was the debt-ridden, patronage-swollen government left behind by her predecessor, Marion S. Barry Jr., who was convicted and imprisoned for cocaine possession.
Many Washingtonians still say their new Mayor is a breath of fresh air and a person with integrity, intelligence and a gift for making speeches.
She is the nation's first black woman to be elected mayor of a major city and only the third mayor of the District of Columbia.


CHRONICLE
Five years ago, Rabbi HARLAN J. WECHSLER of Manhattan was having lunch at a neighbor's in Southwest Harbor, Me., where he has a second home, when he heard that a woman was writing a book on the Jews of Maine.
"I thought I knew the only Jewish woman in Maine, my wife, and I knew she wasn't writing a book, so I figured I had had too much to drink," said Rabbi Wechsler, rabbi of Congregation Or Zarua, a new Conservative congregation on the Upper East Side.


Wine Talk
TAYLOR, FLADGATE &amp; YEATMAN there is something Dickensian about the name, like Jarndyce &amp; Jarndyce.
In fact it is a Victorian name -- early Victorian -- but it represents something much older.
The company, founded in 1692, is one of the oldest and most respected of the port wine producers in Portugal.
Messrs.
Taylor, Fladgate and Yeatman themselves did not join the company until more than a century later; in 1816, 1837 and 1844, respectively.
In March, to celebrate the company's tercentenary, the current owners, decendants of the Yeatmans and the Fladgates, held a tasting here of vintage ports dating back to 1863.


On the Road to Tripoli: Expect a Detour
John Portelli, one of the directors of Virtu Ferries, is preparing for the windfall he expects from the United Nations sanctions against Libya.
He and his partners, who rent large boats, plan to begin a shuttle service five days a week between Tripoli and Valletta.
The boats can carry 330 people, allowing visitors and Libyans alike to evade the air embargo and travel to and from the the Libyan capital.


Review/Music; For the 250th Year, Handel's 'Messiah' Speaks
Easter 1992 has by rights two topics: events 2,000 years ago and our reactions to them in the present.
Yet, musically at least, we seem stuck somewhere in between, having left it to the late Baroque to tell these stories for us.
Bach's Passions and Handel's oratorios have become the music of choice for Christian ears, so we cheerfully pass the work to them.
Music from our own time, addressing modern sensibilities, might have made more sense than Monday night's "Messiah" at Carnegie Hall, but modern choices are few and often depressing.
Britten has written pointed liturgical music for the Anglicans.
Stravinsky's "Symphony of Psalms" is one of the 20th century's great artifacts.
Messiaen's rapt but idiosyncratic mode of worship has created a church with a congregation of one.
Many Roman Catholics take an opposite direction and turn to folk guitars.
A few minor composers are busy with church music.
Major ones seem to have other things on their mind.


U.S. Links Trail of Heroin To a 'Soviet Connection'
As heroin floods into New York, Federal law enforcement officials have discovered a new group of smugglers, emigres from the former Soviet Union, who have begun using Poland as a way station for bringing drugs from Southeast Asia into this country.
The new smugglers, the authorities say, are part of a loosely affiliated organization whose members range from extortionists to contract murders.
Only yesterday, a newly formed Federal task force directed against the emigres held its first meeting in Los Angeles.


Taking a Load Off


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Independent; Perot Says He Had Aides Visit an Accuser of Bush
H.
Ross Perot, the Texas billionaire who is considering a bid for the Presidency, has found himself under scrutiny for investigating the story of a Missouri inmate who claimed that President Bush was part of a 1980 plot to delay the release of American hostages in Iran.
In a telephone interview from his office in Dallas, Mr.
Perot acknowledged today that he had recently sent aides to interview the Missouri prisoner.
The prisoner said he flew Mr.
Bush back from secret meetings in Madrid in 1980 on an SR-71 Blackbird, a United States aircraft generally used for spying.
Mr.
Perot denied, however, that his motivation was to uncover potentially embarrassing information about the President.
Instead, he said, he was responding to an appeal from a person who said he had been unjustly imprisoned.


Times Co. Profits Rose in the First Quarter
The New York Times Company reported yesterday that its first-quarter net income more than doubled.
It said one reason for the increase was advertising revenues in the newspaper and magazine groups that were higher than in the 1991 quarter, when they were held down by the Persian Gulf war.
Earnings rose 173 percent, to $13.9 million, or 18 cents a share, from $5.1 million, or 7 cents a share, in the 1991 period.
Revenue for the quarter rose 5.6 percent, to $440.4 million from $416.9 million.


Schwab (Charles) Corp. (N) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Rethinking U.S. Policy on Peru
While the Bush Administration's firm stand in support of the restoration of democracy in Peru may be a laudable one, it may not be practical.
News analysis, page A12.


The New York Times Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Accrediting Agency Wins Renewed Federal Approval
On the advice of a Federal advisory panel, Education Secretary Lamar Alexander today renewed Government approval of a college and university accrediting agency whose use of a cultural and racial diversity standard had been attacked as discriminatory.
Mr.
Alexander notified the accrediting agency, the Middle States Association of Colleges and Schools, that his recommendation for Federal recognition for four more years came largely as a result of changes the agency made in its diversity standard.


C-Cor Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Tenney Engineering Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Peru and U.S.: What Course to Take?
While America's firm stand in support of the restoration of democracy in Peru may be laudable, is it practical?
Does it make sense to tell an impoverished country whose courts are widely believed to have been corrupted by drug traffickers and whose capital is under attack from vicious Maoist guerrillas that the only way out of its problems is to restore the democracy that existed before the Government crackdown -- even though its democratic institutions were not working and their removal had the support of 70 percent of the people?


BRIEFS
*
Franklin Electronic Publishers Inc., Mount Holly, N.J., will publish the Handbook of Adverse Drug Interactions as a hand-held CD-ROM electronic book. *
Hughes Aircraft Co., Los Angeles, a unit of General Motors Corp., received a $20 million contract to provide cable assemblies for the Boeing Co.'s 747-400 and 767 jets.


Book Notes
Sifton and Knopf
Elisabeth Sifton's announcement on Monday that she would leave her position as executive vice president of Alfred A. Knopf prompted a flurry of rumors about her personal and professional relationships.
Some people who work with her said the official news release was creatively worded to suggest without detail that a host of circumstances in her personal life compelled her departure.
Others said it was deliberately phrased to obfuscate what had become an intolerably fractious relationship between Ms.
Sifton and Sonny Mehta, Knopf's editor in chief.
Both explanations are far too facile, Ms.
Sifton and Mr.
Mehta said yesterday, although both were reluctant to discuss the more complex reasons behind the decision.


Topics of The Times; Highway Uglification
In early spring the foliage lining the New York metropolitan area's highways is at its most delicate.
Trees and bushes look feathery and fragile as they prepare to sprout leaves.
Grass loses its brown pallor, giving way to cool green.
Forsythia are fresh and inviting.
But the beauty of spring is marred all too often by the filth of nature's worst enemy: us.
Indeed, a drive through the region now, before leaves, shrubs and weeds provide their green cover, is like a drive through a garbage dump.
From the Sprain Brook to the Meadowbrook, from Grand Central Parkway to the Garden State, there's litter everywhere.
Plastic bags hang from tree branches.
Soda cans nestle against the daffodils.
Bottles and cardboard boxes lie amid the grass.


Profits Off 82% at Genentech
Genentech Inc., the biotechnology concern, today reported a sharp drop in first-quarter earnings primarily because of increased research and development spending.
But the decline also reflected a drop in sales of the company's blood-clot-dissolving drug, Activase, which was shown in recent trials to be no more effective than a competing drug, Streptokinase, which sells for about one-tenth as much.


St. John's Open-Minded on New Coach
The process of finding a successor to Lou Carnesecca as basketball coach at St.
John's began yesterday with the announcement of a nine-member search committee that will recommend a replacement to the Rev.
Donald Harrington, president of the university.
And while the president said that the long-time assistant Brian Mahoney would be a strong candidate for the job, he also answered a question that St.
John's followers, and Big East conference officials, have asked for several years:


AT DINNER WITH: Jane Pratt; Jane's Excellent Adventure: 'Oprah' for Teen-Age Girls
JANE PRATT may well be the only talk show host who has had a major fight with her producers over a pair of overalls.
"They thought they were a little too ripped," she said of the overalls, which she had wanted to wear on her new television show, which appears weekdays at 5 P.M. on Channel 5, the Fox station in New York.
"It was like talking to Mom and Dad. I was like, 'Come on, you guys, everybody's wearing them.' "


Israelis and Islamic Fighters Clash in Southern Lebanon
Israeli troops and militant Muslim guerrillas fought a three-hour battle in southern Lebanon today.
Two gunmen were killed and an Israeli soldier wounded, Lebanese security officials said.
The battle was said to have taken place in the central sector of Israel's border buffer zone.
It was the second clash of its kind in eight days, representing a step-up in activity by Iranian-backed guerrillas in the area.


Topics of The Times; New York's Dog Days Return
The wonder of New York City's pooper-scooper law is that it ever worked. People --
New York people
-- cleaning up the mess their dogs left behind?
Come on.
But they really did.
For years, the streets were relatively clean.
No more.
The dog litter is returning, disheartening evidence that New Yorkers no longer have enough pride in their city to help keep their streets clean.
Officials blame reduced enforcement of the 14-year-old law that requires owners to pick up or pay fines of up to $100.
Budget cuts have forced the Parks and Sanitation departments to assign their dog-waste patrollers to other jobs, and the Police Department says it's too busy with weightier matters.


Metropolitan Financial Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


TSR Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Griping, Without All That Typing
Does the nation really need a computer program making it easier for people to gripe about, condemn, or otherwise harass large corporations, politicians, Government agencies, trade groups and each other?
Parsons Technology, a privately held software publisher in Hiawatha, Iowa, apparently figures that more crankiness is a small price to pay for a program that helps citizens pursue their rights.
The new Parsons Personal Advocate program is attempting to do for the old-fashioned form letter what Lotus 1-2-3 did for spreadsheets.


Utah Medical Products Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Tracy-Locke's Chairman to Retire
Howard W. Davis, the chairman, president and chief executive of Tracy-Locke Inc. in Dallas, one of the country's largest agencies, unexpectedly announced his retirement yesterday.
For 10 years, Mr.
Davis, 46 years old, had led Tracy-Locke, an agency owned by the Omnicom Group in New York.
During that time, billings grew from an estimated $75 million to an estimated $400 million.


Automatic Data Processing reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Retail Sales Dropped 0.4% in March
After rising smartly during the first two months of the year, retail sales fell four-tenths of 1 percent in March, the Commerce Department said today.
The decline, which was widely anticipated, served to underscore the halting nature of the economic recovery but caused no particular concern because it was seen as a natural lull between the buying prompted by unusually warm weather in the earlier two months and a late Easter buying season.


Watkins-Johnson reports earnings for Qtr to March 27


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Candidate's Health; VOICE RECOVERED, CLINTON CAMPAIGNS
Gov.
Bill Clinton's voice has been hoarse and strained for months, but it was not until he won the New York primary that he had the political luxury of taking the advice any good doctor would have been giving him for months: Shut up.
And a week off from the road -- which ended tonight as Governor Clinton flew to Los Angeles for two days of West Coast appearances -- seems to have given the Arkansas Governor as much benefit in his quest for the Democratic Presidential nomination as delivering any number of policy speeches could have.


International Business Machines Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Laborites to Wait Until July to Pick Leader
Britain's opposition Labor Party decided today to hold a special convention to pick a new leader on July 18, about a month later than suggested by its outgoing chief, Neil Kinnock, who is resigning after Labor's fourth straight election defeat.
The decision to delay the convention beyond the late June date suggested by Mr.
Kinnock came after protests by many members that party leaders were trying to hurry them into a decision to pick John Smith, a 53-year-old Scottish lawyer regarded as a centrist.
He announced his candidacy today.


Pro Basketball; Knicks and Nets Stay a Step Ahead of Pursuers
Clinching nothing and impressing no one, the Knicks nonetheless clung to first place in the Atlantic Division last night by defeating the Washington Bullets' junior varsity, 93-90, at Madison Square Garden.
For most of what turned out to be their 50th victory of the season, the Knicks teetered on the edge of divisional-title disaster, trailing the woeful, injury-depleted Bullets until 58.3 seconds remained in the fourth quarter.
All the while, the scoreboard showed the Boston Celtics leading the 76ers in Philadelphia, waiting for the slumping Knicks to stumble again and relinquish the last game of what was a five-game lead 10 days ago.


Training Computers to Note Images
Now that computer researchers have refined the art of searching through megabytes of data for a single phrase, their new challenge is developing tools to sort through huge electronic libraries of pictures.
Teaching computers to recognize images is essential for putting consumer catalogues on video, and can lead to vastly improved video editing, satellite data-gathering and video teleconferencing.
Instead of looking through files of photographs or scanning stacks of videocassettes, librarians, editors, producers and researchers could quickly call up pictures and video clips by computer.


PCI Services reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


An Unusual Organizer For a Minority Business
Someone less confident than Thomas DeRogatis might have thought twice about starting Prestar Partners, a minority-owned investment boutique.
After all, neither he nor his partner, John Coleman Jr., is a member of a minority group.
What allows them to call Prestar minority-owned is their backer, Joseph A. Unanue, a Brooklyn native whose parents were born in Spain and came to the United States from Puerto Rico.
Mr.
Unanue (pronounced oo-NAN-way) is chief executive and part owner of Goya Foods Inc., the nation's largest Hispanic-owned business after Bacardi Imports Inc.


EXECUTIVES
*
American Re-Insurance Co., Princeton, N.J., a unit of Aetna Casualty and Surety Co., named E. Michael Joye senior vice president and special counsel in corporate operations. *
General Public Utilities Service, Parsippany, N.J., a unit of the General Public Utilities Corp., named Philip C. Mezey senior vice president-system services.


Insignia Systems reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Schnittke's Opera In World Premiere
What may have been the most important event in Russian operatic history since the first staged performance of Prokofiev's "Story of a Real Man" in Moscow in 1960 took place Monday night.
In Amsterdam.
The occasion was the world premiere of "Life With an Idiot," the first opera by Alfred Schnittke, who now lives in Hamburg, Germany, but who counts as Russia's most respected, best-known living composer.
The performance at the Netherlands Music Theater of this surrealist, often grotesque and sexually explicit score took place in the presence of Queen Beatrix and Prince Claus and was greeted with a fervent standing ovation.


Review/Television; 'Frontline' Takes On Washington
"The Betrayal of Democracy," William Greider's two-hour assault on Washington as "a grand bazaar, a steamy marketplace of buying and selling," makes the case that legislation and regulation have been taken out of the hands of the people by monied interests in cahoots with government elites of both parties.
The program, at 9 on Channel 13, is a major PBS offering in its "Election '92" project.
In Mr.
Greider's portrayal, political life has been all downhill since the 1960's, when he went to the capital as a correspondent for The Louisville Times and The Courier-Journal and stayed on as a reporter and editor for The Washington Post.
He looks back warmly on those years, when "the political action was driven by the upheaval of aroused citizens demanding changes on many fronts -- from civil rights and worker safety to consumer protection and openness in government." But once the laws were passed, he reports, and former Senate committee staff members confirm, lobbyists moved in and captured the regulatory process for their clients.


CUNY Tuition Plan: A Big Jump in Cost But a Free Semester
The City University of New York is planning a major tuition increase next fall, but the rise is accompanied by a promise that if freshmen make it to their senior year they may attend their last semester before graduation free.
Educators say they believe the plan is the first of its kind in the nation and praised it as an innovative approach to the problems of retaining students and managing the rising cost of obtaining a college degree.


Crown Cork &amp; Seal reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


CPC International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Parker Drilling reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Met Slide Comes To a Halt


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-12  SANCTIONS AGAINST LIBYA
As Libya persisted in refusing to hand over airline bombing suspects for trial in the West, as ordered by the United Nations Security Council, international sanctions were implemented, including the severing of all air links.
A1
Malta expects a windfall from travel diverted from Libya.  A6  PERU'S SILENT POOR
The poor who populate a coastal shantytown south of Lima are unwilling to risk enthusiasm.
In the struggle between President Fujimori's army and those seeking to overthrow the state, these people are passive observers.
A1  RUSSIA'S BYZANTINE POLITICS
The confrontation between President Yeltsin and his opponents in the Russian Congress of People's Deputies was tentatively defused when the legislators adopted in principle a compromise declaration of support for economic reform.
A1
The Speaker of Nagorno-Karabakh's legislature was shot to death.
A9  U.N.
HALTS FOOD AID TO SUDAN
The United Nations suspended efforts to feed a million and a half starving people in the southern Sudan because of a new military offensive by the Khartoum Government against rebels in the region.
A3  ZAIRIANS TRY AGAIN
New talks on Zaire's political future opened in Kinshasa, the capital, with the focus on the creation of a transitional administration until elections could be held.
Government and opposition leaders made progress on important procedural disputes.
A3  NO PEACE FOR BOSNIA
Serbian and Yugoslav Army troops shattered a European Community-brokered truce in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The attack was the latest in a campaign to cut away swaths of the republic's territory and create an ethnic Serbian state.
A6  VERDICT OUTRAGES MANY IN FRANCE
French politicians, newspapers and human rights advocates expressed outrage over a Paris court's decision to drop charges against a Frenchman accused of killing Jews in Nazi-occupied France.
A5  Yeroham Journal: Sephardic antagonism toward Israeli elite.
A4  The British Labor Party will wait until July to pick a new leader.
A7  National A16-25, D27-28  DNA ACCOUNT CONTRADICTED
The chairman of a National Academy of Sciences panel on DNA fingerprinting said laboratories analyzing DNA should be held to higher standards.
But, contradicting an interpretation that had appeared in The New York Times, he said the committee's report was not calling for a moratorium on the technique while those standards were being put in place.
A1  STRIKE AT CATERPILLAR ENDS
The United Automobile Workers agreed to end the five-month-old strike against the nation's largest manufacturer of construction equipment.
In return, Caterpillar will end efforts to hire permanent replacements.
The two sides will continue to negotiate.
A1  A CHOCOLATE LOVER'S DREAM
A newsletter contending that chocolate might help prevent cavities was circulated to dentists by the Princeton Dental Resource Center, which urged the dentists to pass the publication on to patients.
But medical researchers doubt the claim, and many dentists are not aware that the Princeton organization is financed by a leading candy company, M&amp;M/ Mars.
A1  STORMY AFTERMATH IN CHICAGO
Mayor Daley, finding that the flood besieging basements throughout the Loop could have been avoided, dismissed his transportation commissioner, who was in charge of public works.
City officials said some buildings could be without electricity for a week.
D27
A 60-mile web of tunnels got little notice -- until Monday.
D27  A FAMILIAR-SOUNDING BUSH
As it casts about for ways to show that the President is coming to grips with domestic issues, the Bush re-election team has come up with a new wrinkle on an old political practice.
Mr.
Bush has been offering not only the same speech but also the same policy announcements, over and over again.
A25
Perot sent aides to check an "October surprise" report.  A25
A Clinton aide keeps track of reporters visiting Little Rock.  A24
In the final round of Virginia caucuses, Clinton won again.  A24
His week of recuperation clearly did Clinton no harm.  A24  CLEAN-AIR BREAKTHROUGH
California smog officials and the Ford Motor Company introduced Ford Escort and Mercury Tracer versions that are being acclaimed as the cleanest-running cars ever approved for mass production.
A16  A CITY'S RESPONSE TO BLOODSHED
Increasingly deadly violence that threatens to engulf some neighborhoods and stifle renewal has forced Oakland, Calif., to search its soul for solutions.
A16  SCIENTIFIC MISCONDUCT INQUIRY
In a rare public hearing at the University of Pittsburgh, witnesses defended a scientist whose research concluded that even low doses of lead in children could reduce intelligence scores.
D28  A new report on the stark plight of American children.
D27  Education Page B11  Charlotte, N.C., pioneer of school integration, will end busing.
Metropolitan Digest, B1 CUSHIONING A TUITION INCREASE
The City University plans its largest tuition increase in 15 years for incoming freshmen, but it also promises the students that if they make it to their senior year they can attend their last semester before graduation free of charge.
A1  Business Digest, D1  The Living Section C1-12  A vessel where the fuel is food.
C1  Topless bars for a crowd in pin stripes.
C1  At Dinner With Jane Pratt.
C1  Health Page C14  Arts/Entertainment C15-24  Theater: "Guys and Dolls." C15  Sports B12-17  Baseball: Yanks routed by Blue Jays.
B13  Obituaries D26  Editorials/Op-Ed A26-27  Editorials A26  Stop the Balkan butcher.
Tax crime, prison time.
Bush pays campaign dues.
Topics: New York dog days.
Letters A26  Anna Quindlen: Rabbit punch.
A27  Jesse Lemisch: Do they want my wife to die?
A27  R. Dan Brumbaugh Jr.: Banks?
What banks?
A27


GTE Profits Up in Period
The GTE Corporation said today that its profit more than doubled in the first quarter, largely because its profit in the quarter last year was reduced by costs from its merger with the Contel Corporation.
The telecommunications and electronics company reported earnings of $427 million, or 47 cents a share, compared with $197 million, or 21 cents a share, in the period last year.
Revenue totaled $4.8 billion, up from $4.7 billion a year earlier.


Why Economists Shun Deficit Spending
To the Editor:
Your March 31 Business Day report that some economists now favor an increase in the Federal deficit to stimulate the economy misstates why many economists continue to resist this traditional Keynesian prescription.
They do not believe that deficit spending, "by putting more money into circulation, increases inflation."
That is an Eisenhower-era view, which few economists still hold, if only because Government borrowing does not put money into circulation and because inflation is seen as fundamentally a result of excessive money creation by the Federal Reserve.


Pro Basketball; Knicks and Nets Stay a Step Ahead of Pursuers
Among those harboring the pre-game misconception that the New Jersey Nets had a chance to clinch their first playoff berth since 1986 with a victory over Miami tonight was Coach Bill Fitch.
But even though his team went out and proved their mettle against the Heat with a hard-fought 105-100 victory, a check with the league office in New York informed Fitch that nobody clinched anything.
Thus, Miami (37-43) was not eliminated from contention and the Nets (39-41) did not wrap anything up.
But they certainly enriched their playoff prospects.
What's Needed


But Suppose Yanks Pitch Well 161 Times
Ah, the vagaries of major league pitching.
The New York Yankees, seven games into the 1992 season, spent a better part of a week in territory that seemed reserved for any team but theirs -- the top of the American League East standing -- in large part because their pitching had been beyond compare.


A Model Inmate, and Now a Suspect Again; New Jersey Officials Say Parolee Accused in 5 Slayings Showed No Signs of Trouble
Jerome Dennis, the East Orange man accused of killing five women since his release from prison last fall, was a seventh-grade dropout who grew up in one of the poorest neighborhoods in Newark and had run-ins with the law even before his arrest on rape charges in 1981.
But during the 10 years he spent in prison for rape, and in the five months he was on parole, Mr.
Dennis was described as a model inmate and parolee.
He attended vocational cooking classes and a Bible study group behind bars and held two jobs after his release under a parole program that provides intensive monitoring.
Parole Officer 'Shocked'


Lukens Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


Crimea Has Been Ukrainian Since 1954
To the Editor:
Sergo Mikoyan raises interesting questions in "Stop Treating Russia Like a Loser" (Op-Ed March 25), but his argument is weakened by factual errors.
Ukraine's President L. M. Kravchuk is not trying "to annex the Crimea." Crimea has been part of Ukraine since 1954 and voted for Ukrainian independence in the referendum last Dec. 1.
President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia acknowledged this last December, when he recognized the inviolability of the borders of all former Soviet republics.
Nor can Mr.
Kravchuk forget unlawful Politburo decisions on the Crimea.
When the Crimea was made part of Ukraine in February 1954, there was no Politburo.
It was abolished in 1952 and not restored until 1956.
The decision was made by the Presidium of the Central Committee, of which Professor Mikoyan's father, Anastas I. Mikoyan, was an influential member. (Other top leaders at the time: Nikita S. Khrushchev, G. M. Malenkov, L. M. Kaganovich, V. M. Molotov. A. N. Bulganin.)


U.N. Suspends Its Relief Effort in Sudan
The United Nations has suspended efforts to feed a million and a half starving people in the southern Sudan because of a new Government military offensive against rebels in the region.
The offensive began despite a pledge by the Sudan, Ethiopia and Kenya at a meeting in Addis Ababa not to hinder humanitarian relief operations.


Mr. Bush Pays His Campaign Dues
Bowing right and punching left, President Bush has attacked organized labor with orders aimed at separating the unions from some of their money.
His principal order tells Federal contractors to notify non-union employees that they cannot be forced to contribute fees to a union's political causes.
Now, unless a worker objects, some portion of fees paid in lieu of dues goes to support political campaigns or lobbying.
By diminishing labor's fee collection, Mr.
Bush is paying some political dues of his own.
His right wing and the National Right to Work Committee have long urged him to take this step.
But only now does the President oblige, waxing poetic about workers' liberty.
If that hassles unions opposed to Mr.
Bush's re-election, why, that seems fine to the White House.


Goodrich Posts $100,000 Profit
The B. F. Goodrich Company said today that it posted a small profit for the first quarter in contrast to a deficit a year earlier.
Goodrich, which makes specialty chemical products, vinyl-based polymers and aerospace products and services, reported it earned $100,000 in the three months ended March 31 in contrast to a loss of $2.9 million a year ago.


Report Says Marinovich Failed Drug Test
Los Angeles Raiders quarterback TODD MARINOVICH, who is nearing the end of a drug-diversion program, tested positive for a banned substance in an N.F.L. drug test, ESPN reported yesterday.
The cable network said Marinovich refused to be interviewed but had denied the report through his agent, Tom Condon.


Quaintance Eaton, 90, Writer on Opera, Dies
Quaintance Eaton, a writer of books and articles on opera, died on Sunday at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center in Manhattan.
She was 90 years old.
She died of complications of a stroke, said Bill Cunningham, a longtime friend.


Corrections
A brief article on the Company News page of Business Day yesterday about new orders for the Boeing Company misstated the company's Monday closing stock price in some editions.
Boeing shares closed at $45.75, up 87.5 cents on the New York Stock Exchange.


Baseball
Two innings. Two miserable innings. Two forgettable innings.
The first two innings tonight at the Skydome helped disrupt the Yankees' joyous march through April as the Blue Jays scored eight runs and sent New York spiraling to defeat for the first time in seven games this season.
It was not pretty.


Washington at Work; Lawmaker's Life: Not So Wonderful
Here in Big Sur, Representative Leon E. Panetta has long been admired as a champion of fishermen and environmentalists against the oil companies wishing to drill offshore.
He is also chairman of an important Congressional committee, by all accounts a serious legislator and, at least by Washington power standards, an abstemious fellow.
Never mind. His constituents want to talk about something else.


It's Time for Rangers to Lace the Skates
If the Rangers needed reminding that this already had been a long, meandering season, then here it was: They were off for Toronto today, in mid-April, to resume their regular-season schedule and to play hockey in that provincial capital for the first time in more than 13 months.
Several team members had been to Toronto this season, for arbitration hearings, and for collective-bargaining negotiations during the strike.
But now, after 17 days without a game, the Rangers were packing their skates and pads at their Rye practice rink today for some semiserious on-ice business.
It was time to play a game Wednesday against the Maple Leafs that meant something, even though it really meant nothing.


Chicago Loop Faces Weeklong Close
Some of Chicago's most historic buildings, ravaged by underground flooding that began Monday, could be without electricity for another week, city and utility officials said today.
And they said that the millions of dollars in lost business and structural damage could have been avoided if city engineers had made a $10,000 fix.
Trying to seize control of a politically volatile situation, Mayor Richard M. Daley today dismissed his transportation commissioner, who is in charge of public works, saying that the official had not responded to earlier warnings that water from the Chicago River was leaking into a system of freight tunnels.


Donald Davis Is Dead; Playwright Was 88
Donald Davis, a playwright, producer and director for the theater, radio and television, died on March 28 at his home in Palm Beach, Fla.
He was 88 years old.
He died of a heart attack, said his wife, Thebe Bell Davis.


Showbiz Pizza Time Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 27


Hospital Stops Admissions To Infant Unit
A hospital in Livingston, N.J., has stopped admitting premature babies to its special-care nursery, after four babies who died in the first week of April were all found to have had intestinal-tract bacteria in their blood.
The hospital, St.
Barnabas Medical Center, announced its action yesterday amid an investigation by the New Jersey Health Department into how the infants might have come into contact with the bacteria and what role it might have played in their deaths.
While saying that it was more likely that the babies died from other complications stemming from their premature births, hospital officials said that it was necessary to quarantine the nursery to safeguard other infants.


Schofield an Everyday Man
Dick Schofield, acquired for protection, is going to be the everyday shortstop for the Mets.
Kevin Elster, with a trip to the doctor in the offing and further shoulder surgery a possibility, could be finished for the season.
Elster is scheduled to fly to Birmingham, Ala., tomorrow for another evaluation of the right shoulder that was operated on in September 1990.
The Mets concede surgery could be the ultimate diagnosis.
"He's concerned," Manager Jeff Torborg said.
"We talked with him last night. He doesn't know why it hasn't got better."


Officer Filing For Pension In Teaneck
Police Officer Gary Spath of Teaneck plans to file for a disability pension on the ground that he is unable to continue work because of the fatal shooting of 16-year-old Phillip Pannell two years ago.
Officer Spath's lawyer, Robert L. Galantucci, is reviewing the application and plans to submit it soon, perhaps by the end of this week, to the state-run Police and Firemen's Retirement System, Mr.
Galantucci's partner, James P. Patuto, said today.


Pier 1 Imports reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Banc One Set to Acquire Valley National for Stock
The Banc One Corporation said yesterday that it had agreed to acquire the Valley National Corporation, Arizona's largest banking company, in a $1.2 billion exchange of stock.
For the acquisition-minded Banc One, where buying other banks is a line of business and crucial to growth, the purchase of Valley extends its reach into a state where prospects for economic growth are brighter than the company's home base in Ohio.


Enron Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Boise Cascade reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Kroger Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 21


Prosecutor Cites Problems In Crown Heights Inquiry
Amid continuing pressure for more arrests, the Brooklyn District Attorney, Charles J. Hynes, said it was unlikely that investigators would be able to identify and successfully prosecute the 10 to 20 young men who took part in the attack and fatal stabbing of a 29-year-old Hasidic scholar in Crown Heights last summer.
One teen-ager was quickly arrested in the killing.
But in an interview this week, eight months after Crown Heights was rocked by racial violence, Mr.
Hynes said he was "not optimistic at all that we're ever going to find the people involved."


Brand Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


CHRONICLE
The convenience of the portable phone may be too much of a good thing, or at least it was for MONICA SELES, the tennis champion.
When the phone she was carrying in her bicycle basket during a recent ride on Hilton Head Island, S.C., rang, she reached for it.
"The bicycle fell and I sprained my right wrist and middle finger," she said the other day.
"I learned a lesson -- always worry about yourself more than about things. You can always get another phone, but you can't get another wrist."


PictureTel Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


Chicago's Well-Kept Secret: Tunnels
For nearly a century, a 60-mile web of tunnels has wound 40 feet below this city's downtown streets and river bed, causing little trouble or public notice until Monday.
Now almost everyone here in this water-weary city has heard of the tunnels and the damage they helped cause on Monday when 250 million gallons of murky water from the Chicago River rushed through their narrow passages and into basements in the city's business district.


Gundle Environmental Systems reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Butler Manufacturing Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


John Joseph Weber, 72, Is Dead; Did Research on Psychoanalysis
Dr.
John Joseph Weber, emeritus professor of clinical psychiatry at the College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University, died on Sunday near his home in Connecticut.
He was 72 years old and lived in Manhattan and Deep River, Conn.
A statement by the college said he died of a heart attack while fishing.


Accounts
*
The Plaza Hotel, New York, to Opt-X Advertising Inc., Clifton, N.J., for its advertising account previously at Great Scott Advertising Co., New York.
Billings were not disclosed. *
Sanofi-Winthrop Pharmaceuticals, New York, to Robert A. Becker Inc. , New York, for three accounts from the company's professional products division, with billings totaling $7.8 million.
The Talwin NX and Talacen accounts were handled by Hudson Healthcare Communications Inc., New York, and the Danocrine account had been handled by Kallir Philips Ross Inc., New York.


C.D.'s and Bank Funds Are Down Sharply
Yields on bank money market accounts and certificates of deposit were down sharply for the week ended yesterday, according to The Bank Rate Monitor.
"Last week's cut in the Federal funds rate by the Federal Reserve Bank and Chemical Bank's quarter-point cut in its prime lending rate on Monday, to 6 1/4 percent, may mean that we may likely see another round of interest rate cuts before we see another uptick in interest rates," said Robert K. Heady, publisher of The Monitor.


Board of Trade Remains Closed
Futures and options trading at the Chicago Board of Trade remained suspended yesterday because of flooding on Monday that forced much of downtown Chicago to turn off electrical power.
In addition, there was no trading in cotton futures or options on futures on the New York Cotton Exchange because those contracts are settled through the Board of Trade.
The Chicago Mercantile Exchange and the Chicago Board Options Exchange reopened, but the Mercantile Exchange halted trading at noon in its currency, livestock and interest-rate contracts.


Irsay Delivers His One-Two Hunch
General Manager JIM IRSAY says the Indianapolis Colts plan to use the first two picks in the National Football League draft on the Outland Trophy winner, STEVE EMTMAN, and the Heisman Trophy winner, DESMOND HOWARD.
At least that's the plan for now, although the new coach, TED MARCHIBRODA, is keeping an open mind.


Motorola Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 4


CP Forest reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Tax Crime, Prison Time
Why is it that around every April 15, some celebrity is in the toils of the law for tax evasion?
Leona Helmsley, the erstwhile queen of the hotel world, was indicted in mid-April 1988.
Convicted and unable to reduce her four-year sentence, she goes to prison on this tax deadline day.
The reason is that the revenue authorities, prosecutors and even Federal courts often join to make an example of noteworthy violators as an incentive to voluntary taxpayer compliance.
Is this unjust, either for tax violators in general or Mrs.
Helmsley in particular?


Merrill Lynch &amp; Co.  reports earnings for 13wks to March 27


Setback for Apple Copyright
Apple Computer's case against Microsoft and Hewlett-Packard was dealt a severe blow when a judge threw out core elements.
Page D5.


Smith Corona Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Richard Pommer, 61, a Historian Of Architecture in Social Context
Richard Pommer, an architectural historian whose writings linked modernist design to its social and political context, died on Friday at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in Manhattan.
He was 61 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of brain cancer, said his wife, the art historian Linda Nochlin.


No Headline
The durable and highly visible president of the University of Chicago, Hanna H. Gray, announced yesterday that she would retire at the end of the 1992-93 academic year and return to teaching history.
Mrs.
Gray, who is 61 years old, has been president of the highly selective private university since 1978, and was one of the first women to lead a major American research university.
Her 14 years in office make her one of the longest serving presidents of any major American university, an unusual figure in a period when the average tenure of a university president is six years.


Public &amp; Private; Rabbit Punch
It is a difficult thing to rise up and decry those traditions and symbols that have become national customs.
Although it is widely accepted that Mother's Day is a tool of crass commercial interests, a man attacks it (or forgets it) at his peril.
Those lone voices that complain about the joylessness of Christmas are silenced by the rum-pum-pum-pum of Muzak carols in elevators.
Little attention was paid to the courage of one man, Calvin Trillin, when he suggested a dozen years ago that we stop talking turkey on Thanksgiving.
Mr.
Trillin was an eloquent representative of those of us who believe that, in taste tests, Americans served erasable bond with gravy and stuffing will swear it is good.
The so-called Trillin movement to substitute spaghetti carbonara for turkey as the national harvest feast dish has gone nowhere, except that there are now photographs of the man in the barns of many poultry farms, above the feed bin, with orders to peck to kill.


Busing Is Abandoned Even in Charlotte
If integrated education has been a priority anywhere in America, it has been in this shiny new banking center in western North Carolina, where busing over the last two decades became a source of civic pride at the same time it was met with fierce opposition around the nation.
But even here, the era of mandatory busing is coming to an end.
In the face of increasing reluctance of parents to bus their children to schools they consider inferior, the local school board last week voted unanimously to drop the busing plan the district has used for 21 years.


It Wasn't Easy, but Mets Settle Down at Home
There was, in the end, enough offense for the Mets to permit them to smile through their embarrassment.
There were, after nine alternately exhilarating and excruciating innings, enough runs to outlast the Phillies.
And so while the night's indelible images might have been of further failures, the scoreboard's lights were what the Mets chose to focus on: Mets 8, Phillies 5.


Ford Unveils Cleanest-Running Cars for California
California state smog officials and the Ford Motor Company unveiled two new automobile models today that they said were the cleanest-running cars ever approved for mass production in the world.
They were updated versions of the Ford Escort and the Mercury Tracer, engineered to meet pollutant emission standards California has set for 1997 models, four years ahead of schedule.
The new cars are to go on sale at Ford dealers in California starting May 21, when the 1993 models are introduced.


Sonic Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Noland Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Genentech reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Panel Backs Relaxed Rules for Horse-Drawn Carriages
Capping the first round of a bitter dispute between drivers of horse-drawn carriages and animal-rights advocates, a City Council committee voted yesterday to expand the hours and areas in which the carriages may operate in New York City, amending a 1989 law that restricts them to Central Park for most of the day.
But animal-rights organizations lambasted the amendment and vowed to continue their fight, saying the legislation would subject horses and passengers to dangerous traffic conditions and would increase congestion on already crowded streets.


Studying the Fine and Less Expensive Art of Dining at Home
Surrounded by steam kettles and double-stack boilers, a class of food aficionados gathered around a master chef at his cutting board recently as he filleted a salmon, bone by bone, and lectured on the art of selecting vegetables.
"Please don't buy those jumbo carrots," Bradley Ogden, one of the country's leading chefs, chided over the whir of exhaust fans.
"The big ones have no flavor to them. When you buy one, smell it, see if it's heavy, if the stem is still attached, if it has an aroma. If it doesn't, put it back."


BUSINESS DIGEST
Markets
Blue-chip stocks vaulted to new highs, as traders reacted to upbeat earnings reports.
The Dow climbed 36.23, to 3,306.13, its first close above 3,300.  [ Page D1. ]
Prices of Treasury securities dipped in slow trading, as dealers were once again without a Treasury futures market.  [ D18. ]


Review/Film; Patrick Swayze Down and Out in Calcutta
After a night of boozing and wenching in the fleshpots of old Calcutta, Max Lowe (Patrick Swayze), a once-promising young Houston heart surgeon, is viciously beaten and robbed by a gang of street thugs.
Max couldn't care less.
Life has lost all meaning for him.
The next morning he regains consciousness in an especially poor Calcutta quarter known as the City of Joy.
He's in a primitive clinic run by Joan Bethel (Pauline Collins), a feisty, youngish, Irish-born variation on the Albanian-born Mother Teresa.
When Joan tells Max the name of the place, he asks, "Is that geographical or spiritual?" Says Joan, "It depends on your point of view."


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  CUNY PLANS TUITION RISE
The City University is planning a major tuition increase next fall, but the rise will be coupled with a promise that if these students make it to their senior year they can attend their last semester before graduation free.
A1.
ASSESSING THE CROWN HEIGHTS CASE
Amid continuing pressure for more arrests, District Attorney Charles J. Hynes of Brooklyn says it is unlikely that investigators will be able to identify and successfully prosecute the 10 to 20 young men who took part in an attack and fatal stabbing of a 29-year-old Hasidic scholar in Crown Heights last summer.
B3.
HELMSLEY ORDERED TO PRISON TODAY


Nuclear Plant Shuts Down
The Indian Point 2 nuclear power plant here shut down automatically on Monday night when instruments detected a high level of water in one of the plant's steam generators, the owner of the plant, the Consolidated Edison Company, said today.
A company spokesman, Mike Spall, said there was no release of radioactivity, no damage to the plant and no danger to the public or plant personnel, he said.
Mr.
Spall said the utility expected the plant to resume service later this week.


Report Shows Cost of Dinkins's South Africa Trip
Mayor David N. Dinkins's weeklong trip to South Africa last year cost more than $200,000 in private money, plus another $100,000 in security expenses paid by New York City for the Mayor's police bodyguards, according to financial records and city officials.
Records of the New York City Business Assistance Corporation, the nonprofit, city-run organization that raised money for the trip, show that it took in $203,625 and spent $201,511, not including the security costs.
Those figures include money from city commissioners, private citizens and news organization representatives who paid their own way, as well as money donated by others who did not make the trip.


Polaroid Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Dixon Coale Philips; Former Mayor, 97
Dixon Coale Philips, a former Mayor of Plainfield, N.J., died on Sunday at the Meadow Lakes Health Care Center, a retirement community in Hights town, N.J.
He was 97 years old.
Mr.
Philips, a former resident of Plainfield and Weston, Vt., graduated from Cornell University in 1916.
He retired in 1957 after 37 years as vice president and treasurer of Elwell; Philips &amp; Company, a traffic-management concern in Elizabeth, N.J.
He was Plainfield's Mayor from 1943 to 1946.
Mr. Philips is survived by his sister, Esther P. Zerega, of Hightstown.


Philadelphia Electric In Bond Offering
The Philadelphia Electric Company yesterday priced through competitive bidding a total of $350 million of first- and refunding-mortgage bonds, with $200 million in 10-year bonds and $150 million in a 30-year issue.
A group led by Lehman Brothers was awarded both offerings.
Underwriters said the 10-year bonds have an 8 percent coupon and are priced at 99.789 to yield 8.03 percent, or about 70 basis points, or hundredths of a percentage point, more than Treasury securities with a similar maturity, while the 30-year bonds with an 8 3/4 percent coupon are priced at 99.465 to yield 8.8 percent, or 93 basis points more than a comparable Treasury security.


IP Timberlands reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Top Changes At Ketchum
Ketchum Advertising U.S.A. has appointed new top leadership at its New York office, following the departures of the chairman and president there.
In a memorandum distributed yesterday to the staff at Ketchum Advertising New York, Bob Kroyer, the president of Ketchum Advertising U.S.A., said Steve Penchina, 46 years old, had been named chairman.
He succeeds Hank Seiden, who left at the end of last year.


Police Seek Robbers Of Business Owners
A man who pretends to be a building superintendent to get into the apartments of small business owners to rob them is being sought by the police in northern Manhattan.
Since January, about 10 such robberies have occurred in Washington Heights and Inwood, said Lieut.
Joseph Reznick, commander of the 34th Precinct Detective Squad.
None of the victims was injured.


Corrections
An article in Weekend on Friday about "Damned in the U.S.A.," a British documentary about censorship in the arts, misstated the broadcast history of the documentary "Tongues Untied." The Public Broadcasting Service indeed provided "Tongues Untied" to its member stations, but many decided against broadcasting it.


Alan Bond Is Declared Bankrupt in Australia
Alan Bond, the executive best known for financing Australia's triumph in the 1983 America's Cup yacht race, was declared officially bankrupt today.
A banking group headed by the Hongkong Bank of Australia applied for a trustee to be appointed after Mr.
Bond failed to repay $194 million arising from a personal guarantee he gave on a loan to a former nickel mining project.


Yeroham Journal; Israel, a Coat of Many Colors With Ethnic Seams
Her name, she said, was unimportant. What counted was her misery.
Three decades ago she came from Morocco to this cheerless outpost near Beersheba on the fringe of the Negev, and she watched through the years as opportunities occasionally knocked but somehow never walked in.


PHM Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Corrections
A chart in Business Day yesterday titled "Profiting Handsomely," about compensation and profits at Wall Street brokerage houses, misstated the profits of Bear Stearns Companies.
In the fiscal year ended June 30, 1991, Bear Stearns earned $142.9 million, compared with $119.4 million the previous fiscal year.
The results shown were for the quarters ended Dec. 31.


Lazare Kaplan International reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


French Angered at Ruling on Nazi Collaborator
French politicians, newspapers, human rights groups and a chorus of other voicesexpressed outrage today over a Paris court's decision to drop charges of crimes against humanity against a Frenchman accused of killing Jews in Nazi-occupied France in World War II.
The decision on Monday, which is to be challenged before the Supreme Court of Appeal, was denounced by a broad spectrum of political leaders, many of whom saw it as new evidence of the French judiciary's reluctance to condemn French citizens for war crimes against Jews even though it has been willing to condemn Germans for similar crimes.


Pfizer Inc. (X) reports earnings for Qtr to March 29


Dow Closes At 3,306.13, A Record
Blue-chip stocks vaulted to new highs yesterday, as traders reacted to upbeat earnings reports from a handful of leading companies and sidestepped a futures market crisis caused by flooding in downtown Chicago.
The Dow Jones industrial average climbed 36.23 points, or 1.1 percent, to 3,306.13, marking its first close above 3,300 and the 14th time since Jan. 1 that the benchmark indicator set a record.
The Dow's previous high was 3,290.25, reached on March 3.


Olympia In Default On Eurobond
Olympia &amp; York Developments defaulted yesterday on an $800 million Eurobond issue secured by one of its best New York properties, a tower in Manhattan's World Financial Center, when it failed to make a $62 million interest payment.
The payment was due on March 25, but the troubled real estate conglomerate said at the time that given its lack of operating cash it would use the 20-day grace period allowed by the bond indentures.


Agnico-Eagle Mines reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Investigator Nominated To Head Suffolk Police
Acknowledging that he would have to do more with less, Robert J. Creighton, the chief investigator for the Suffolk County District Attorney's office, was nominated today as the county's next Police Commissioner.
Mr.
Creighton, who served on the Suffolk force for 20 years, said he planned to restructure the 2,400-member department to improve services at a time of stable or reduced spending.


Two Big Drug Companies Had Profits in First Quarter
Two large health-care companies reported double-digit earnings gains for the first quarter yesterday.
The American Home Products Corporation said its net income was up by 15.3 percent, to a record $406 million, on sales of just under $2 billion -- also a record.
Pfizer Inc. said its profits rose by 10.4 percent, to $295 million, but its sales increased by only 3.9 percent, to $1.76 billion, reflecting, the company said, divestments and the closing of businesses over the last two years.


Review/Theater: Guys and Dolls; Damon Runyon's New York Lives Anew
If you have ever searched Times Square to find that vanished Broadway of lovable gangsters, wisecracking dolls and neon-splashed dawns, you must not miss the "Guys and Dolls" that roared into the old neighborhood last night.
As directed with a great eye and a big heart by Jerry Zaks and performed by a thrilling young company that even boasts, in Faith Prince, the rare sighting of a brand-new musical-comedy star, this is an enchanting rebirth of the show that defines Broadway dazzle.
It's hard to know which genius, and I do mean genius, to celebrate first while cheering the entertainment at the Martin Beck.
Do we speak of Damon Runyon, who created the characters of "Guys and Dolls" in his stories and with them a whole new American language?
Or of Frank Loesser, who in 1950 translated Runyon into songs with melodies by turns brash and melting and lyrics that are legend?
This being the theater department, please forgive my tilt toward Loesser, whose musical setting of phrases like "I got the horse right here" and "a person could develop a cold" and "the oldest established permanent floating crap game in New York" are as much a part of our landscape as the Chrysler Building and Radio City Music Hall.


Real Estate; Office Space In Houston: Plenty of It
THE Apache Corporation, which signed a lease for 220,000 square feet of office space here last November -- in the largest office lease transaction completed in Houston in 1991 -- is now relocating its corporate headquarters here from Denver.
The move by Apache, the country's fourth-largest independent oil and gas producer, gave rise to optimism here.
It came as part of the steady rebound of the Houston office market since 1987, when a drop in oil prices sent the city's office vacancy rate soaring to 30 percent.
Today the vacancy rate is 22.5 percent.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Virginia; Clinton Wins Final Caucuses; Vote Is Put at 52%
Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas won the second and final round of Virginia's caucuses Monday night, capturing the state's rural vote with the same ease that he took the urban vote on Saturday.
The victory moved him closer to winning the Democratic Presidential nomination, but his overall finish in Virginia was not as impressive as his finish elsewhere in the South in the "Super Tuesday" primaries last month.


Getting Children to Eat That Good-for-You, Yucky Stuff
WHEN it comes to food, adults don't trust children.
Adults are always putting some vegetable on a fork and trying to insert it into a tiny mouth, assuming that no child would eat something green without prodding.
At the same time, they hide the chips and ice cream and candy, convinced that such snacks must be doled out or they will be consumed endlessly.
Adults pass on their views of food to their children, unwittingly condemning the children to live with the same struggle they face: constantly trying to control the desire for sweet, salty and fatty foods.


Dubious Theory: Chocolate a Cavity Fighter
For two years now, thousands of dentists have received newsletters from the Princeton Dental Resource Center with current reports on dental health and fighting cavities.
And the center has asked the dentists to pass them on to their patients.
The newsletters have some unexpected advice -- including bulletins of good news for chocolate lovers.
One issue reports that eating chocolate may be as beneficial as an apple a day.


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR Diary:
Primary day in New York turned into an unexpected adventure in Democracy for me.
I got into the booth, pulled the lever to the right, as I had been instructed, but then I pushed it directly to the left again, thinking that the machine would be ready to go.
So when I tried to vote, nothing happened.
When I poked my head out of the curtain and explained to the election workers what I had done, there were gasps and cries that I had just wasted my vote by sending it into the void.
"Can't I do it over again?" I asked.
To which they all solemnly said, "No."


Paine Webber Group Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


CABINET IN RUSSIA WON'T STEP DOWN
The Government of President Boris N. Yeltsin and the Russian Parliament drew back today from a conflict that had threatened Mr.
Yeltsin's program of economic reform.
The confrontation, watched anxiously by the West, was tentatively defused when the Congress of People's Deputies adopted "in principle" a declaration of support for economic reform.
The compromise measure, prepared by Government officials and congressional leaders, effectively neutralized the most contentious provisions of a resolution the Congress of deputies adopted on Saturday.
Brady Sees 'Steps Backward'
That resolution had prompted Deputy Prime Minister Yegor T. Gaidar, the chief architect of the Government's radical reform program, to lead the Cabinet in offering its collective resignation.
In a statement made public on Monday, the ministers declared that the Congress's decision would inevitably lead to "a catastrophic decline in living standards, famine, social upheavals and chaos."


60-Minute Gourmet
I PROBABLY receive more requests for chicken recipes than for anything else.
Single people and families on a tight schedule often opt for chicken breasts because they are so versatile, quick and inexpensive.
My repertory of chicken recipes could easily fill several cookbooks, but in recent years the type of dishes I have been devising has changed considerably.
For example, they are cooked in olive oil instead of butter, have light sauces and often have an Oriental influence.


Quotation of the Day
"The next time you snack on your favorite chocolate bar or bowl of peanuts, remember -- if enjoyed in moderation they can be good-tasting and might even inhibit cavities." -- PRINCETON DENTAL RESOURCE CENTER, a group financed by Mars, the candy company.  [ A1:4. ]
"I know that this is what candy companies would love to think. But it just isn't the case." -- DR.
LAWRENCE WOLINSKIY of U.C.L.A., who wrote the report on which the claim for candy was based.  [ D23:6. ]


Crompton &amp; Knowles reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


Louisiana Pacific Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Theater in Review
SoHo Rep Presents  SoHo Repertory Theater 46 Walker Street TriBeCa Through Sunday A political satire by Mac Wellman; directed by Jim Simpson; set and lighting by Kyle Chepulis; costumes by Caryn Neman; sound by Mike Nolan; production stage manager, Catherine A. Heusel.
Artistic directors, Marlene Swartz and Julian Webber.
WITH: Valerie Charles, Kristen Harris, Melissa Smith, Reed Birney, Steve Mellor, John Seitz, John Augustine and Jon Tytler.
Senator Bob (no other name) believes in piety in the sky and censorship as a sentinel of democracy, but he also has a prurient mind.
So what does he do when seven sexually explicit photographs are delivered to his chamber?
First of all, he looks at them; he and his staff are goggle-eyed at the contortions in these unspeakable acts.
Then he tries to sleuth the case, to determine if the photographs are intended as "smear or surveillance," or if he can use the pictures to make political hay at someone else's expense.


Donnelly Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


Economic Scene; Fly Now, Pay Later
WANT to jet round trip to Hawaii for just $149?
No problem.
Just book 45 days in advance, stay over one Tuesday that is not a legal holiday anywhere in the Southern Hemisphere and complete travel in a month with fewer than 29 days. . . .
American Airlines' bold move to simplify fares and slash the margins between discounted and unrestricted seats is winning applause from both business travelers and computer-bleary travel agents.
But their enthusiasm may be tempered by the prospect of less competition and higher prices in the future.


Punch Line by Saki
To the Editor:
Your March 30 article on the demise of Punch, the British satirical review, quotes Lord Deedes as describing a Punch cartoon in which one woman says to her companion: "She was not a bad cook as cooks go; but as cooks go, she went."
You give no date for this cartoon, but in the story "Reginald on Besetting Sins (The Woman Who Told The Truth)" Saki (H. H. Munro) tells us: "The cook was a good cook, as cooks go; and as cooks go she went."


Anti-Abortion Campaign Causes Debate in the Industry
A COSTLY anti-abortion campaign is causing advertising and media executives to re-examine fundamental issues involving ads that advocate specific points of view.
The television campaign, which began running early last month on national cable networks, is being financed by the Arthur S. De Moss Foundation in St.
Davids, Pa., founded by an evangelical Christian insurance executive.
Though foundation officials refuse to give interviews, Adweek has estimated the cost of the campaign at $20 million.


Honors
*
"Looking for Rudy," a television commercial created by North Woods Advertising, Minneapolis, was named the best television political spot ever by the readers of Campaign magazine.
The humorous commercial was credited with helping Senator Paul Wellstone, a Minnesota Democrat, upset Rudy Boschwitz, the Republican incumbent, in 1990.


A Rebound For I.B.M. In Quarter
Rebounding from a financially disastrous 1991, I.B.M. reported yesterday that it moved into the black in the first quarter with earnings of $595 million, or $1.04 a share.
The profit contrasted with a loss of $1.7 billion a year earlier, when the company took a one-time charge of $2.26 billion, and it sent I.B.M. stock up 75 cents, to $88.25.
I.B.M. helped propel the Dow Jones industrial average, of which it is a component, to a high of 3,306.13, up 36.23 points.


Books of The Times; Healing a Mind and Spirit Badly Wounded in the Trenches
Regeneration  By Pat Barker 252 pages. A William Abrahams Book/Dutton. $20.
It's a truism with a history going back to Homer: The strongest war stories are
antiwar
stories.
During this killing century, the men who served in the trenches of France in World War I produced some of the most powerful literature.
In particular, British writers whose lives were shattered by the war (to mention three: Robert Graves, Wilfred Owen, Siegfried Sassoon) left an antiwar legacy.


Bridge
For the first time ever, a top-ranked European women's team competed in the American Contract Bridge League's Spring Nationals.
In Pasadena three weeks ago, four Englishwomen who are due to play for Britain in August in the world championships in Salsomaggiore, Italy, performed very well in spite of some handicaps and some slight embarrassment.
Nicola Smith, Pat Davies, Sandra Landy and Michele Handley were jet-lagged on arrival, and were playing in the Vanderbilt Knockout Teams without alternates to permit some rest.
On the second day they played badly at the start and were 39 imps behind at the midpoint of a 64-deal match.
They overheard an opponent refer to their play as "cretinous," and were fired up.
"We're the cretins," they announced cheerfully when the second half began, and they won the match by 10.


New Oregon Issue's Top Yield Is 6.477%
A $52.7 million refunding bond issue by Oregon was tentatively priced yesterday with a maximum yield of about 6.477 percent for an issue due in 2018 through underwriters led by Dean Witter Reynolds Inc.
The tax-exempt financing consists of general obligation bonds for governmental purposes and private activity and offers yields ranging from 3.25 percent in 1992 to 5.30 percent in 1997, 6 percent in 2002 and 6.3 percent in 2007.
For a longer maturity a bond due in 2012 is priced to yield 6.45 percent.


Theater in Review
The Radio City Easter Show  Radio City Music Hall 50th Street and Avenue of the Americas Through April 23 Production conceived by Patricia M. Morinelli and William Michael Maher; directed and choreographed by Scott Salmon; sets and costumes by Erte; lighting, Ken Billington and Jason Kantrowitz; costumes, Eduardo Sicangco and Jose Lengson; musical director, Don Pippin; production stage manager, Howard Kolins; soloist on "Glory of Easter" recording, Marilyn Horne.
Presented by Radio City Music Hall Productions, J. Deet Jonker, executive producer; David J. Nash, producer.
WITH: The Rockettes, the Radio City Music Hall Orchestra, Joel Blum and Antigravity.
Now celebrating its third year at Radio City Music Hall after an 11-year hiatus, the "Radio City Easter Show" is an object lesson in how to stage a seasonal pageant that never flags and has something for almost everyone.


CHIEF SAYS PANEL BACKS COURTS' USE OF A GENETIC TEST
The chairman of a National Academy of Sciences panel studying the forensic technique of DNA fingerprinting asserted yesterday that laboratories analyzing DNA should be held to higher standards.
Contrary to a report in The New York Times, he said the panel was not calling for a moratorium on the technique while those standards were being put into effect.
The Times's account yesterday emphasized a section of the panel's report that legal experts, and two panel members, say is tantamount to calling for DNA evidence not to be used in court until the recommended higher standards are attained. 'DNA Can Be Used'
But at a news conference in Washington yesterday, the panel chairman, Dr.
Victor A. McKusick, a geneticist at Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore, said "We think that DNA can be used in court without interruption."


Police Blame Driver Error in Bus Crash
Driver inattention and excessive speed caused the bus accident in upstate New York on Saturday that killed two East Meadow students and injured 27 students and teachers, the state police said today.
The driver of the bus, Dennis D. Ellis, 44 years old, of Brooklyn, was released today from Glen Falls Hospital, where he was being treated for a broken sternum and chest injuries.
He could not be reached for comment.


Hearing Is Held on Lead-Poison Data
In a rare public hearing on charges of scientific misconduct, witnesses today strongly defended a scientist whose groundbreaking research concluded that even low doses of lead in children could reduce intelligence scores.
At a hearing on research by the scientist, Dr.
Herbert Needleman of the University of Pittsburgh, witnesses provided data showing that the conclusion of a long-disputed paper he wrote in 1979 was correct and has been repeated by numerous other researchers.


Geodynamics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: White House Memo; Bush Makes Habit of Announcements
After months of hearing Republican strategists say that President Bush had to demonstrate a mastery of Government programs, the White House has apparently taken the advice to heart -- after a fashion.
In appearances around the country and speeches in Washington, Mr.
Bush has taken to unveiling a handful of domestic policy initiatives again and again.


Lecture on a Jooss Ballet
Bengt Hager, the Swedish dance historian and museum director, will speak on the choreographer Kurt Jooss and his ballet "The Green Table" tomorrow at 2:30 P.M. in a free public lecture at the Bruno Walter Auditorium of the New York Public Library for the Performing Arts, Lincoln Center.
Information: (212) 870-1657.


Incomes of Young Families Dip 32% in 17 Years, Study Finds
Young families with children have significantly less money than their counterparts did a generation ago and suffer from child poverty rates that are twice as high, the Children's Defense Fund said in a study issued today.
Incomes in those families have dropped by 32 percent, the study found, and the child poverty rate is now a sobering 40 percent.


Picking College by the Aid
As a result of tuition increases and the recession, students are increasingly making decisions about where to attend school based on how much financial aid they receive.
What is more, students who receive financial help, and their parents, are challenging the amounts more than ever before and pressing institutions for more money.


Myers Industries (X) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Do They Want My Wife To Die?
Naomi Weisstein lies on her back in a darkened Upper West Side apartment.
Opaque curtains cover the windows; a mask and black lenses shield her eyes, for even a glimmer of light is painful.
She has not been out of bed for eight years because she is too weak and suffers excruciating vertigo; she cries out as the bed seems to tip "toward New Jersey." Extreme sensitivity to sound prevents her from listening to the recorded books that once provided sustenance.
Plagued by sweating fevers, then shuddering chills, she sleeps only fitfully.
Too weak to talk, she communicates by hand signals and nearly inaudible whispers.
Naomi Weisstein is a prominent brain researcher.
With a doctorate from Harvard, she was a professor of psychology at the State University of New York at Buffalo when she was stricken in 1980 by an acute case of chronic fatigue syndrome.
She still generates experiments in her head, and on the rare good day whispers a few minutes of ideas for colleagues to try in their labs.


Marriott Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 27


Early-April Vehicle Sales Up 3.8% From Weak Period
Sales of North American-built vehicles rose just 3.8 percent in early April from a sluggish sales period a year earlier.
The gain provided another sign that the auto market is recovering only gradually from a slump that began in the early stages of the Persian Gulf crisis in late 1990.
While light-truck sales increased 10.1 percent, to 99,834, in the April 1-10 period, car sales were virtually flat at 153,474.
The increase in total vehicle sales, to 253,308 from 243,976, resulted from light trucks, which include pickups, mini-vans and utility vehicles.


L.A. Gear reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Breaking Cease-Fire, Serbs Launch Attacks Into Bosnia
Serbian and Yugoslav Army forces shattered a European Community-brokered cease-fire in this newly independent republic today, overrunning regions populated by Muslim Slavs.
The major penetration by Serb forces from Serbia into Bosnia and Herzegovina is the first large-scale incursion by Yugoslav Army units based outside Bosnia.
The move is the latest phase in a military campaign to cut away huge swaths of Bosnia and Herzegovina for an emerging Serb state as Yugoslavia disintegrates.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Placed Glenn Davis, first baseman, on the 15-day disabled list, retroactive to April 7.
Recalled Luis Mercedes, outfielder, from Rochester of the International League.
KANSAS CITY ROYALS -- Placed Luis Aquino, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list.
Recalled Rusty Meacham, pitcher, from Omaha of the American Association.


Celebrating the 90th Birthday of the Lubavitcher Rebbe


There's Still Time to Save U.S. Shipbuilding
To the Editor:
Those who want to know how committed Congress and the Bush Administration are to saving United States manufacturing and American jobs will get their answer when a bill designed to end the foreign subsidies that are annihilating an important American industry goes to the floor of the House of Representatives.
This is H.R. 2056, the shipbuilding trade reform bill.
Introduced a year ago by Congresman Sam Gibbons of Florida, it was first intended to give an incentive to industrialized countries engaged in multilateral trade talks to quit stalling and terminate their subsidies for shipbuilding and repair that have shut United States shipyards out of the commercial ship construction market in the last 10 years.
When that objective failed, the bill became a piece of legislation to be taken seriously in its own right.


SANCTIONS ON LIBYA BEGIN TO TAKE HOLD AS DEADLINE PASSES
Air transport links with Libya were cut, and United Nations sanctions took effect today against Libya for its refusal to hand over two of its citizens accused of blowing up a Pan Am airliner in 1988.
The banning of all flights is the most dramatic part of a United Nations sanctions package that also prohibits the sale of arms, aircraft and spare parts while requiring overseas offices of Libya's national airline to close.
The Security Council's action requires all countries to reduce the size of Libyan embassies and restrict the movements of Libyan diplomats.


Peru's Path Still Terror-Filled As Rebels Defy a Crackdown
In this dusty, sprawling shantytown built on coastal sand dunes 10 miles south of Lima, hope soared last week when President Alberto K. Fujimori shut down Peru's Congress and courts.
Many here assumed that by freeing himself of legislative and judicial obstacles, the President would be able to rid the nation of terrorism quickly.


Yonkers Approves Housing Plan
The City Council tonight approved a landmark agreement to desegregate housing here, paving the way for an end to the legal and emotional turmoil that has divided the city.
The agreement, approved by a 4-to-3 vote, was reached earlier in the day in 11th-hour negotiations by city officials and the two co-plaintiffs in the 12-year desegregation case, the N.A.A.C.P. and the Justice Department.
It was the first time the city had taken the initiative to comply with a six-year-old Federal desegration order.


CSS Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Family of Cabdriver Wounded by Officer Is Suing New York City
The family of a cabdriver who was shot and critically wounded by a police officer in Greenwich Village on Thursday disputed the police account of the shooting yesterday and announced a lawsuit against the city.
The victim, Jacques Camille, a 36-year-old Haitian immigrant who had been driving a cab for just four days, was shot by a 23-year-old officer, Sean Gelfand, on West 14th Street after a robbery suspect ran from Mr.
Camille's cab and was arrested.


Roadway Services Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 23


I.R.S. Tries Honey but Still Has Vinegar on Hand
The Internal Revenue Service, hoping that more taxes will be paid when fewer people have to beware its jaws and claws, is out to slay its reputation as a Jabberwock.
Tough enforcement, using the traditional tools of audit and prosecution, is hardly being abandoned, the agency insists.
But it is focusing more attention these days on making it easier for people to comply with the tax laws voluntarily.


She Battles Leukemia With Laughter and Love
THIS is the season of hope.
Flowers paint a symphony of color, birds perform the hourly miracle of keeping all those squawking little mouths fed, the religious holidays give us a sense of coherence.
One of this spring's greatest blossomings is occurring in Room 421B of Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center at 1275 York Avenue.
When we arrived the other morning, one sign on the door ordered all who entered to remember a smile and a sense of humor.
"Yes, Mom, this does include you!" it specified.
"Thank you, The Management," it concluded.


Review/Film; Sex, Sci-Fi, Videotape and a Dead Woman
No sooner has Eve Black (Candice Daly) arrived from Kansas to visit her sister Tina in an eerie unnamed city than she receives a brutal shock.
Seconds after entering her sister's apartment in a sinister factory-like building that suggests a futuristic brothel, she discovers Tina's dead body in a bathtub.
While a sympathetic vice detective (Richard Steinmetz) looks into the case, Eve decides to remain in the creepy building, whose rooms are equipped with an elaborate video system that shows continuous soft-core pornography.
As she soon learns, the videos are filmed on the premises and feature the female residents, including her dead sister.
Masterminding the system, known as Neurovid, is a grim-faced former brain surgeon known only as the Major (Barry Dennen).


Review/Film; Police Thriller With Layers of Issues
"I want my cake and eat it too," says one of the characters in "Deep Cover," the story of a policeman assigned to masquerade as a cocaine dealer.
The film itself seemingly embraces that same thought.
On the one hand an upright police thriller, "Deep Cover" is also a rapt exploration of all the vice and viciousness that make the drug kingpin's life so popular with contemporary film makers.
The film's cautionary message, which is stated outright, is undercut by its fascination with seamy glamour.
At the resume level, there are several things that raise "Deep Cover" above the ordinary.
The screenplay is by Michael Tolkin and Henry Bean, who respectively wrote "The Player" and "Internal Affairs" and whose views on the subject of corruption are subversively entertaining.
The director is Bill Duke, whose "Rage in Harlem" was a spirited period piece.
Its stars are the quietly commanding Larry Fishburne and the wry Jeff Goldblum, who make an interestingly offbeat team.
And its racial stereotypes have been reversed, since it is Mr.
Goldblum, who is white, who plays the drug dealer and Mr.
Fishburne who plays the cop.


Corrections
Charts on March 11, March 13 and March 26 giving voter turnout and votes cast in Presidential primaries omitted a cautionary label for the figures.
All three charts also misstated the turnout for New Hampshire; the second and third charts also misstated that of Massachusetts.
All the figures in the charts were preliminary and in some cases were based on estimates of voter registration.
In New Hampshire, 62 percent of registered voters cast ballots on Feb. 18; in Massachusetts, 34.7 percent of registered voters cast ballots on March 10.
A reader's letter, dated March 14 and delayed in reaching the editors, pointed out some of the errors and prompted a recheck of the figures.
A corrected chart appears today on page A24.


Stop the Butcher of the Balkans
Slobodan Milosevic, strongman of Serbia and wrecker of Yugoslavia, may not be as ruthless and reckless as Saddam Hussein.
But his aggression against the newly independent republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina has become just as blatant -- and just as urgently requires a stern response.
Unless the international community acts against him now, thousands may die.
The U.S. and European powers can do much to stop the slaughter: Refuse to recognize Serbia's claims as heir to Yugoslavia, tighten their economic embargo on Serbia and make clear that Serbs face years of international isolation if they allow Mr.
Milosevic to remain on the rampage.


A Hall in One for Rodriguez and Irwin
They have a total of 27 PGA titles between them, so it comes as no shock that HALE IRWIN (19 titles) and CHI CHI RODRIGUEZ (8) were inducted into the PGA World Hall of Fame yesterday.
For all his fame on the course, Rodriguez, who also has 21 senior tour titles, was actually admitted to the shrine in Palm Beach Gardens, Fla., in the distinguished-service category for his work in support of junior golf.
The late Richard Tufts, a former president of the United States Golf Association, was also inducted in the service category.


Topless Bars For a Crowd In Pin Stripes
AFTER a long day at work, Richard Siegel, a lawyer in his late 30's, likes to unwind with a cool beer, a little music and a circle of topless young women with cash stuffed in their garters.
"Hey, this is elegant -- it's not sleazy," he said, referring to Stringfellows, a nightclub in the staid Gramercy Park neighborhood of Manhattan that was popular in the 1980's and recently reopened with semi-nude dancers.
"You can bring a date here and not give a bad impression."


INSIDE
Yonkers Council Approves Plan to Integrate Housing
Clearing the way for an end to 12 years of legal and emotional turmoil, Yonkers City Council members approved a landmark agreement to desegregate housing.
Page B1.
A Familiar-Sounding Bush
Casting about for ways to show a mastery of issues, the President has been repeating policy announcements over and over again.
Page A25.
Clean-Air Breakthrough
California and the Ford Motor Company unveiled two models acclaimed as the cleanest-running mass-production cars in history.
Page A16.
Fallout From Chicago's Flood
With a flood still besieging the Loop, Mayor Richard M. Daley dismissed his public works chief.
Page D27.
Dow Passes 3,300 Mark
Cheered by stronger earnings and lower interest rates, blue-chip stocks rose 36.23, to 3,306.13.
Page D1.
U. of Chicago Chief Retiring
Hanna H. Gray said she would relinquish the presidency of the University of Chicago next year.
Page B11.


RB&amp;W Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


New York Post Figures Faulted
The New York Post overstated its circulation by 60,901, or more than 12 percent, in a report last year to the Audit Bureau of Circulations, according to the organization, which audits newspaper and magazine sales.
The paper had claimed an average daily circulation of 552,227 for the six months ended Sept. 30, 1991, but the bureau has issued a revised average circulation of 491,326 for The Post during that period.


Universal Foods Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Octel Communications reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Cincinnati Bell reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


A Correction: Voter Turnout in 20 Primaries So Far


Albany Blunders in Cut To Child-Care Funds
To the Editor:
Cutting Title XX funds from the New York State budget is a clear example of the penny-wise, pound-foolish thinking that went on in Albany during state budget negotiations.
Title XX is one of the most successful programs the state has financed.
In New York a significant portion is used for subsidized child care.
It keeps the working poor working and off welfare.
Single working mothers, who benefit most from these funds, will lose the most from this cut.
Without Title XX, day care for these families will become unaffordable.
Counties have been mandated by the Governor to shoulder the burden of the state's share of these funds.
How they will do this, given their own fiscal woes, remains to be seen.


Maynard Oil Co.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


New Jersey Officials Consider Health Insurance Changes
A cycle that has become as familiar in New Jersey as the seasons, rising health insurance rates followed by a corresponding increase in the number of people dropping their insurance followed by another increase in rates, is beginning to spin out of control, state officials say, and they plan to try to break the cycle this summer.
Even as the State Insurance Department, the State Department of the Public Advocate and Blue Cross and Blue Shield of New Jersey were engaged in a three-cornered argument last week prompted by the insurer's latest premium increases, Gov.
Jim Florio proposed a major revision in state law that would require all commercial carriers to insure all individuals and small groups who request coverage.
Action proceeds on both fronts this week.


Results Plus
TENNIS  Tough Day for Borg
Bjorn Borg has a long way to go if he is serious about playing competitive tennis again.
Borg offered little resistance yesterday in losing to Olivier Delaitre, 7-5, 6-2, in the first round of the Nice Open.
Delaitre, ranked 48th in the world, needed 78 minutes to beat Borg, who got many of his points on errors by the Frenchman.
Despite the loss, Borg said he just needed more time to play his way back into shape.
"The important thing is to play points and matches in front of people again," said the 35-year-old Borg, a five-time Wimbledon champion. (AP) Courier Has Hands Full, but Wins:
Jim Courier battled his way to a 7-6 (7-5), 6-4 victory over Patrik Kuhnen of Germany yesterday in the opening round of the Salem Open in Hong Kong.
It was Courier's first match since regaining the No. 1 computer ranking.
The top-seeded Courier, who captured last week's Japan Open, had his hands full with Kuhnen, ranked 117th.
The German matched Courier's steady service game but made several costly mistakes.
The tournament's other top-seeded players also had tough matches yesterday.
Michael Chang, seeded third, outlasted a Canadian, Grant Connell, 7-5, 6-4, while fourth-seeded Brad Gilbert staved off match point in the second set before defeating a qualifier, Neil Borwick of Australia, 3-6, 7-5, 6-3.
Fifth-seeded Paul Haarhuis of the Netherlands and eighth-seeded Anders Jarryd of Sweden weren't as lucky.
Haarhuis was beaten by an Australian, Wally Masur, 6-3, 6-2, while Jarryd lost to a New Zealand qualifier, Brett Steven by 7-6 (7-5), 6-1. (AP) HOCKEY  Jets Push Oilers Back
The Winnipeg Jets blew open a scoreless game with four second-period goals and beat the Oilers, 6-2, in Edmonton.
The loss relegated Edmonton to third place in the Smythe Division.
On Sunday, the Jets, who will finish fourth, eliminated the Calgary Flames from post-season contention.
A goaltenders' duel between Winnipeg's Bob Essensa and Edmonton's Bill Ranford turned into a game of Oiler defensive lapses in Edmonton's season finale.
A victory might have given the Oilers second place in the Smythe and home-ice advantage against Los Angeles in the playoffs, pending the outcome of the Kings' final game later last night against Vancouver. (AP)


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.25-6.5
6.25-6.5
9.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
6.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.50
3.74
8.13
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.63
3.60
5.60
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.74
3.73
5.67
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.97
6.96
7.82
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.86
7.85
8.11
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.82
8.81
9.23
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.68
6.69
7.25
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Eating Well
IT'S the late 20th century and Lucy Ricardo's Vitameatavegamin of the 50's has been replaced by Jay Kordich's cabbage-spinach-carrot juice.
Lucy would be so jealous.
Mr.
Kordich was selling juicers door-to-door and sleeping in his pickup truck when "I Love Lucy" was still a gleam in Desilu's eye.
Now he sells Juiceman II machines on television and drives a Mercedes.
His book, "The Juiceman's Power of Juicing" (Morrow, 1992), had a first printing of 300,000 copies and will be on the New York Times best seller list on Sunday.
Whether it's the Juiceman IIor one of the many other machines that separate juice from pulp, these machines are flying out of stores the way oat bran once did.
"We can't keep them in the store," said Sheiliah Kissoondath, the office manager at Integral Yoga Natural Foods on West 13th Street in Manhattan.
"Business is so good, it's bad. Manufacturers are not filling complete orders."


More Advice for Doctors: U.S. Guides on Treatments
Doctors have no shortage of advice when it comes to treating patients, either before or after the fact.
And now a new voice is murmuring over the physician's shoulder, speaking cautiously and softly but nonetheless representing the opinions of experts backed by the Federal Government.
The Agency for Health Care Policy and Research, established by Congress in 1989, has been charged with finding out what the nation gets for the billions of dollars it spends annually on health care and what can be done to improve the return on this investment.


Tennis; Capriati Camp Serves A Pink Slip to Slozil
She's just 16 years old, but she's the boss.
And the repercussions from Jennifer Capriati's personalized agenda, the one that doesn't put tennis on top of her priority list, are taking their toll on a weekly basis.
On Sunday, her newest coach, Pavel Slozil, was informed that he too had been cut from the Capriati team, joining a growing list of experts consulted and discarded.


Corrections
The Practical Traveler column in the Travel section on Sunday, about fares for travelers who must make last-minute arrangements because of death or serious illness of family members, carried outdated rules for some airlines as a result of the sweeping overhaul of fare structures on Thursday.
Updated information on such "bereavement fares" is planned for May in the Travel section.
The fare changes also superseded some charges listed in the section's Travel Watch chart on Sunday.


Market Place; Apples, Oranges And Bank Deals
IS the Valley National Corporation, the Arizona bank holding company that has been troubled by huge quantities of bad real estate loans, really worth twice book value?
Yesterday it certainly seemed to be.
In the wake of the Banc One Corporation's agreement to merge with Valley in a share swap, Valley shares leaped $11.75, to $49.75, almost double Valley's book value of $26.02 a share.
If the planned merger goes through, Banc One will end up exchanging $54.75 worth of its own stock for each Valley share, based on yesterday's closing price of $45.625, down $1.50, for Banc One shares.
That would be a 2.1 multiple to book value.


U.S. Pledges to Help Trade With Ex-Soviet Republics
The Government plans to do more to help American businesses trade with and invest in the former Soviet republics, but it has not yet coordinated how to pay for the effort, Commerce Secretary Barbara H. Franklin said today.
United States exports to the region have risen sharply in the last year, as Eastern European enterprises have lost their preferential access to the market and as American businesses have unexpectedly grabbed market share, even from their rivals in other industrialized nations.


Zaire Resumes Constitutional Talks
A new round of talks on Zaire's political future opened here today, centering on the creation of a transitional government until new elections are held.
Government and opposition leaders have been wrangling over procedural rules for about a week now, with a coalition of about 160 opposition groups accusing the Government of vote-rigging and trying to pack the meeting with its supporters.


Tunisian Given Life Sentence In Series of Paris Bombings
The Tunisian leader of an Iranian-backed group that killed 13 people and wounded 303 others in a series of bomb attacks in central Paris in 1985 and 1986 was sentenced to life imprisonment by a special anti-terrorist court here today.
The Tunisian, Fouad Ali Saleh, 34 years old, was convicted of murder, attempted murder and conspiracy.
Two accomplices, Hassan Aroua from Tunisia and Omar Agnaou from Morocco, were also given life sentences, while another Moroccan, Abdelhamid Badaoui, received a 20-year jail term after cooperating with the prosecution.


Bulls Top the N.B.A. in Court
The Chicago Bulls can do no wrong.
They have 65 on-court victories, and now an in-court triumph against an unlikely foe: the National Basketball Association.
The Bulls teamed up with WGN, the superstation that beams Michael Jordan &amp; Co. nationally to cable systems, to throttle an N.B.A. plan to pare its season's telecasts from 25 to 20.


Shawmut National Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


As Casualty List Grows, G.O.P. Shows Doubts About House Bank Scandal
Only a month ago, Republicans proclaimed the House bank scandal as a great opportunity to retake control of Congress.
But now the war cry is beginning to sound more like a whimper.
The number of Republicans bruised by the affair is growing.
And with each new casualty, tensions grow, too.


Upjohn Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Editorial Notebook; Forbidden Delights
People do not eat chocolate.
They sneak it.
When somebody floats a box of bonbons under their noses they mutter, "Well, maybe just one." When they munch a candy bar they do so with the furtiveness of a wino pulling at a bagged bottle of Thunderbird.
So imagine the joy if their dentists told them that chocolate not only tastes good but "might even inhibit cavities." Which their dentists might have if they subscribed to a newsletter published by the Princeton Dental Resource Center.
Never mind that the center is financed by a candy company; and that the scientist on whose report the statement was based says his work has been misinterpreted.
Just imagine the joy.


In Ad, Florida Group Says State Child Agency Undermines Families
A Florida group has stirred up a storm with a publicity campaign attacking the state's main children's welfare agency and accusing it of "kidnapping" thousands of children as part of a plot to "undermine parental authority."
The group, the Family Rights Committee Inc., based in Orlando, bought space in about a dozen newspapers last week for a full-page advertisement designed as a cartoon strip.
The advertisement depicts Florida politicians and officials of the Department of Health and Rehabilitative Services scheming with unnamed "child advocates" to wrest children from their families.


TRW Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


A Coke and a Plaque
DONALD KEOUGH, president of the Coca-Cola Company was selected yesterday to receive the Gold Medal Award of the National Football Foundation and College Football Hall of Fame.
Keough, the unanimous choice of the foundation's board of directors, will be honored at the foundation dinner and Hall of Fame induction ceremony Dec. 8 in New York.


Martin W. Donner, 71, A Leader in Radiology
Dr.
Martin W. Donner, a leader in radiology and in swallowing disorders, died on Monday at Johns Hopkins Hospital in Baltimore.
He was 71 years old and lived in Ruxton, Md.
He died of complications after a heart transplant, his family said.


Dr. Gregory Jameson, 77, Known For Work With Heart Catheters
Dr.
A.
Gregory Jameson, emeritus professor of clinical medicine at the College of Physicians and Surgeons at Columbia University, and former director of cardiology at Roosevelt Hospital, died on March 26 at his home in Manhattan.
He was 77 years old.
He died after a long illness related to asbestosis, his family said.


Once Again, Blue Jays Leave Yankees in Dark at the Dome
Sometimes a teams gets only one or two chances to score in a game, a crucial opening or two for a big inning against a pitcher who is toying with them out after frustrating out.
If those rare chances are missed, the night can be dark.
Even inside a domed stadium.
The Yankees knew the feeling tonight at the Skydome as Jimmy Key checked them on three hits into the ninth inning in carrying the Blue Jays to a 2-0 victory.
Toronto improved to 8-1 and maintained the best record in the major leagues as Key and Tom Henke faced only 31 batters.
The Yankees lost for the second straight night and slipped to 6-2.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
PORCH railings are frequent casualties of winter weather.
Because railings are important to safety, any damage should be repaired promptly.
But even if railings appear sound, they should be inspected each spring, a good time to perform routine maintenance.
Decay, loosened fasteners and breakage are the most common problems with wooden railings.
Minor decay can be halted by applying wood preservative, and small areas of rotten wood can be scraped away and replaced with wood-hardening compound.


Ex-Aide to Dinkins Facing Tax Charges
Arnold I. Biegen, the former finance chairman of Mayor David N. Dinkins's re-election committee, was indicted yesterday on Federal charges that he failed to pay taxes on $886,000 that he has admitted stealing from an elderly widow whose estate he was managing.


Mead Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 29


Sprint Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Tyson Is Assigned To His Prison Abode
He's a grown man doing a grown man's time for a grown man's crime, but for the time being at least MIKE TYSON will be serving his six-year rape sentence at the Indiana Youth Center in suburban Indianapolis.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Steve Forbert  The Bottom Line
When folk-rock arrived in the early 1960's, it was greeted by many folkies as a cheesy sellout to pop.
Now, nearly three decades later, folk-rock sounds like a kind of purism.
Few performers honor its boundaries as faithfully as Steve Forbert, who led a four-piece band, the Bolt Uprights, on Friday night.


Bear Stearns Says Profits Are Up 58.2%
The Bear Stearns Companies, riding the wave of record earnings that Wall Street firms are reporting, said yesterday that profits in its fiscal third quarter rose 58.2 percent, to $91.3 million, its best quarterly result ever.
Profits for the period that ended on March 27, which came to 84 cents a share, compared with profits of $57.7 million, or 52 cents a share, in the corresponding period last year.
Revenues grew 46.9 percent, to $531.3 million from $361.6 million.


Census Data Show Boom Before Bust
New information from the 1990 Census provides a haunting still life of New York in the glittering and affluent 80's, an ever more cosmopolitan center of sophisticated jobs, rising educational attainment and soaring incomes that had begun to make a dent on the intractable problems of the poor.
By almost every measure, from falling dropout and poverty rates to increases in income, life in New York City and its environs improved during the last, heady decade, characterized by conspicuous consumption and economic growth.
While nationally, the income of a typical household increased only slightly, it went up 21.5 percent in New York City.


Albany May Toughen the Regulations for Bus Drivers as a Result of a Fatal Crash
The State Department of Motor Vehicles is considering tightening the regulations that govern bus drivers, already among the strictest in the nation, after a driver with a history of moving violations and accidents was blamed for a crash in upstate New York on Saturday that killed two middle-school students from Long Island.
"Any kind of incident like this always causes an agency like ours and the Legislature to go back and look and say, 'Can we do more? Is the system tough enough? Should we consider making it even tougher?' " said George Filieau, a department spokesman.


Investigation Begun Into New York City Sludge Removal Program
The Manhattan District Attorney's Office has subpoenaed records of New York City's Department of Environmental Protection for an investigation into its sludge-removal program, department officials said yesterday.
Gerald McKelvey, a spokesman for District Attorney Robert M. Morgenthau, would not comment on the investigation yesterday.
But law-enforcement officials who demanded anonymity described the investigation as preliminary and said they had not yet uncovered evidence of wrongdoing.


ALC Communications reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Former Football Star Gets Job at Drug Maker
Nicholas A. Buoniconti, whose career has run from professional football to charities to business, yesterday was named vice chairman and chief operating officer of Columbia Laboratories Inc., a pharmaceuticals company.
Mr.
Buoniconti, 51 years old, the former Miami Dolphins linebacker and former president of UST, a big maker of snuff and chewing tobacco, is returning to the business world after a two-year sabbatical to raise money for The Miami Project to Cure Paralysis, which he co-founded.


Pace Medical reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Yields Off Across the Board For Money Market Funds
Yields on money market funds monitored by IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report fell in the latest reporting week, with analysts attributing the decline to seasonal factors and to last week's trimming of the Federal funds rate by the Federal Reserve.
In the week ended Tuesday, yields of tax-exempt money funds backed off for the second consecutive reporting period.
The seven-day compounded average yield for tax-exempt funds fell 9 basis points, to 2.82 percent, with the simple yield down similarly, to 2.79 percent.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-10  THE $44 BILLION ANSWER
The International Monetary Fund said the former Soviet Union would need $44 billion in foreign aid this year to insure a transition to a market economy.
The fund's managing director confirmed that Russia would need $24 billion.
A1
The Russian Government and Parliament muted their conflict.  A9  CRACKING DOWN ON LIBYA
Air traffic between Libya and the rest of the world appeared to be at a standstill as both Arab and non-Arab nations began enforcing the Security Council embargo.
Countries also began to expel dozens of Libyan diplomats as part of the effort to force Colonel Qaddafi to hand over two suspects in the bombing of Pan Am Flight 103.
A1  THE MAN BEIJING FEARS
The horrors Han Dongfang experienced in prison are not remarkable.
What is remarkable is that the democracy campaigner talks about his experience and risks it again.
He is the Chinese Government's worst nightmare: a man who is less afraid of it than it is of him.
A1  VANCE TRIES FOR PEACE, AGAIN
The United Nations special envoy urged Serbian leaders to suspend their military actions in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
As he spoke, units of the Serb-led Yugoslav Army continued their assaults on Muslim Slav and Croatian areas.
A1
The United States warned Belgrade to stop its attacks.  A8  WINNIE MANDELA STEPS DOWN
The embattled official of the African National Congress resigned under pressure from her influential post as head of social welfare in the congress.
The move came two days after the announcement of her formal separation from her husband, the congress president.
A6  NEW CONCERN OVER IRAN
Teheran has stirred concern among its Persian Gulf neighbors by expelling Arab inhabitants of an island in the gulf that it jointly administers with the United Arab Emirates, officials in gulf nations said.
A7  CLOSING IN ON KABUL
Two rebel groups said they had captured a major Government air base north of the capital of Afghanistan.
A provincial capital fell Tuesday, and reports said President Najibullah might have gone into hiding.
A5  Peru's President Fujimori lives up to his nickname, the Emperor.
A3  North Korea partly lifts the secrecy from its nuclear projects.
A3  National A12-21, B6-7  A STRIKE ENDED, A UNION HUMBLED
News analysis: The abrupt end of the strike against Caterpillar showed that management could bring even so powerful a union as the United Automobile Workers to its knees by threatening to hire permanent replacement workers.
A1
Even with the strike over, many are not assured a job.
B6  NEW LOS ANGELES POLICE CHIEF
A year after officers' widely publicized beating of a black motorist had intensified racial discord in Los Angeles, the city chose the Police Commissioner of Philadelphia to replace Chief Daryl F. Gates.
The appointee, Willie L. Williams, will be Los Angeles's first black Police Chief, although exactly when he will take office is unclear.
A1
Man in the News: Willie Lawrence Williams.  B7  CHICAGO FLOODING CONTINUES
Heavy rain frustrated Chicago's efforts to stem the flooding of many downtown buildings, although the Mercantile Exchange held regular trading for the first time this week and the Chicago Board of Trade reopened for a short session.
A12  ANOTHER BREATH OF SCANDAL
A Senate postal employee sold crack on Capitol Hill to an undercover narcotics officer last year.
In the annals of Washington's booming cocaine trade, that case might scarcely rate a footnote.
But it illustrates for the first time that the Senate, until now untouched by the recent wave of scandal that has damaged the House, is not immune from similar problems.
A18
More Republicans are bruised by the House bank affair.
A17  CLINTON GOES BACK ON THE ROAD
After remaining in Little Rock for a week to nurse strained vocal cords, Governor Clinton campaigned in California, where he all but ignored former Governor Brown and turned his fire on President Bush.
A16
So, is Pat Caddell backing Brown, or maybe Perot?  A16
Quayle's press secretary called a radio talk show, incognito.  A16
In the Bush household, Millie is the big wage earner.  A17  FALLOUT FROM REAGAN PROTEST
The protester who rushed the stage where Ronald Reagan was speaking on Monday had press credentials, a circumstance now leading the Secret Service to consider tightening its restrictions on reporters who cover Presidents, Vice Presidents and Presidential candidates.
A20  CHILD AGENCY UNDER ATTACK
A Florida organization has stirred up a storm with a publicity campaign accusing the state's main children's welfare agency of "kidnapping" children in a plot to "undermine parental authority." A14  Columbia Journal: For Doolittle's Raiders, a big anniversary.
A12  Experts recommended a delay in cloning Lincoln's genes.
B6  New evidence was found linking halogen lights to skin cancer.
B6  Metropolitan Digest, B1  POWERFUL UNION HEAD RESIGNS
The head of the most powerful union in the New York region's construction industry resigned before he was to face charges that he had been a pawn of the Gambino crime family and had helped John Gotti extract payoffs from contractors.
A1  L.I.
CAR DEALER HELD IN FRAUD
A Long Island car dealer borrowed $1.75 billion from General Motors last year to finance thousands of cars that did not exist, Federal prosecutors said, and they charged him with fraud.
A1  Business Digest, D1  The Home Section C1-9  Italian furniture goes all cuddly.
C1  Studio!
Life style!
Empire?
C1  At home with John Epperson.
C1  Growing C2  Parent &amp; Child C9  Arts/Entertainment C11-20  Whose money is being used to fuel Broadway?
C11  In line for "Guys and Dolls." C11  Music: Rattle and the Birmingham.
C11  Dance: Mark Morris troupe.
C11  Obituaries B8
Vakhtang Mikhailovich Chabukiani, a Soviet ballet master.
Sammy Price, a jazz pianist.
Sports B9-16  Baseball: Mets beat the Phillies.
B9  Yankees fall to the Blue Jays.
B9  Basketball: Atlanta hands Knicks a loss.
B9  Editorials/Op-Ed A22-23  Editorials A22  Overdrafts and overkill.
Iran's vote: little change.
Tiny babies, many risks.
Mary Cantwell: Bad foods.
Letters A22  William Safire: The rising gorge.
A23  Anthony Lewis: Straight and narrow.
A23  Camille Paglia: Endangered rock.
A23


The Agony of Anticipation


Defiant Chinese Dissident Tells of His Ordeal
What is remarkable about Han Dongfang is not that the prison authorities jammed a needle through his hand or that they infected him with tuberculosis, but that he talks about his experience and risks it all over again.
A tall, mild-mannered man, somewhat less imposing than the plainclothes police officers who tail him every time he steps from his home, Mr.
Han is the Chinese Government's worst nightmare: a man who is less afraid of it than it is of him.


Some Serious Fun For Mercedes-Benz
The initial advertising created for Mercedes-Benz of North America Inc. by its new agencies introduces an ingredient previously missing from the car company's campaigns: fun.
Television commercials, print advertisements and posters produced by Scali, McCabe, Sloves in New York and its affiliate, the Martin Agency in Richmond, present a new 36-month leasing program in a whimsical, humorous way.


Lincoln Fails After Review Of Hospitals
In the most glaring sign of continuing troubles at two New York City hospitals, the national hospital accreditation organization has voted to strip Lincoln Medical and Mental Health Center in the Bronx of its accreditation and grant Kings County Hospital Center in Brooklyn only conditional accreditation.
Woodhull Hospital in Queens was informed earlier this year that it had failed its accreditation survey and has begun appealing to overturn that decision.
Taken together, the decisions on the three hospitals show how drastic the need for repair is in the eyes of national accreditors.
Problems at all of hospitals largely revolve around the hazardous conditions of their physical plants, although at Woodhull, questions were also raised about their internal monitoring of patient care.


Meridian Bancorp Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Amid April 15 Frenzy, Filers Show Sympathy for a Tax Cheat
In a minority view of April 15, Thomas M. Bloch said yesterday: "It's a great day." But Mr.
Bloch is president of H &amp; R Block, the giant tax-preparation franchise operator, which he said handles about one in seven American tax returns, or about 14 million last year.
Chances are that Leona M. Helmsley would not agree with Mr.
Block, who explained that when his father and uncle started the company, based in Kansas City, Mo., they changed the last letter of the name "so people wouldn't call it 'Blotch.' " Though the symbolism of Mrs.
Helmsley's trip to prison yesterday has not been lost on most of America, Mr.
Block said of her case: "If anything it sends a message to taxpayers. Considering we have a self-assessment system in this country, maybe it's good."


Maytag Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Brown Takes His Campaign to Pennsylvania


Treasuries Drop in Slow Trading
Prices of Treasury notes and bonds dipped in slow trading yesterday, as liquidity continued to be drained from the credit market in the aftermath of the underground flooding in Chicago that interrupted futures trading there.
The Chicago Board of Trade did open for a couple of hours yesterday, but traders said that most futures traders have essentially gone on vacation for the rest of the week.
The Board plans shortened hours again today and will be closed tomorrow, Good Friday.


Corrections
A picture caption in The Home Section on April 9 with an article about black architects misidentified Robert L. Easter.
He is to become president of the National Organization of Minority Architects in the fall.
William J. Stanley 3d is the current president.


Bridgeport U. Clears Path For Bailout
Deeply in debt and fast running out of students, the University of Bridgeport tonight agreed to pursue a bail-out plan that would give control of the private university to the Professors World Peace Academy, an affiliate of the Unification Church.
If threats made by students are carried out, hundreds, perhaps thousands, will leave rather than attend a university controlled by a church they see as opposed to academic freedom and democratic values.


Williams Sent to Columbus
The Yankees sent outfielder Bernie Williams to their Class AAA Columbus farm team today while recalling pitcher Russ Springer in a move that appears to indicate they have curbed their efforts to trade outfielder Jesse Barfield.
The club wants the 23-year-old Williams to play every day and he cannot do that in the majors with the veteran Barfield blocking him.
When Williams began the season as one of six outfielders, Manager Buck Showalter hinted that a deal for Barfield would make more playing time available for Williams.
The Yankees spoke to the Chicago White Sox about Barfield, but no trade was made.


Coleman's Latest Salvo: Out of My Face, Coach
Derrick Coleman may be in better health, but his relationship with Coach Bill Fitch shows no sign of improvement.
Coleman and Fitch, who have been at odds through much of the season, had another face-off Tuesday night near the end of the Nets' victory over the Heat in Miami.
After Fitch called a timeout with 6 minutes 48 seconds to play, and with the Nets down by 5 points, Coleman refused to go back in the game.
Even without Coleman, the Nets went on to win, 105-100.


Two Military Contractors Post Big Gains in Quarter
The General Dynamics Corporation and the Northrop Corporation, two of the nation's largest military contractors, reported sharp increases in first-quarter earnings yesterday.
Like other weapons producers and aerospace companies, General Dynamics and Northrop have been posting solid results for more than a year as they work off a backlog of orders from the last decade.
But over the next several years, analysts said, earnings growth will become much harder to sustain because the Pentagon's budget cutting will start biting more deeply into the industry's sales and profits.


MBNA Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


North Korea Shows Video of Atom Site
Partly lifting the veil of strict secrecy from its mysterious nuclear projects, North Korea suddenly broadcast a videotape today showing what it described as a series of conventional nuclear power plants, on the same site that the United States maintains is the core of a huge weapons complex.
The release came just hours before the beginning of an elaborate 80th birthday celebration for North Korea's hard-line Communist leader, Kim Il Sung.
It included what appeared to be the first detailed images ever seen of the inside as well as the outside of some of the plants that have prompted a growing confrontation between North Korea and the United States.


New Study Bolsters Skin Cancer's Link To Halogen Lamps
Scientists said today that they have more evidence that halogen lights may increase the risk of skin cancer, a risk that apparently can be eliminated by using simple glass or plastic covers over the bulbs.
Researchers at the University of Genoa in Italy, in a letter published in the current issue of the journal Nature, said halogen lamps emit large amounts of far-ultraviolet radiation, a type known to cause skin cancer.
In tests with hairless mice with a propensity toward cancer, the researchers said, they were able to produce skin lesions and large tumors of increasing malignancy by exposing the animals to uncovered halogen lamps for 12 hours a day for a year.


Market Place; Hanson Viewed As Undervalued
AFTER years of trying, Hanson P.L.C. has finally nudged the level of American ownership of its stock over 20 percent.
However, that is far short of the goal the industrial and natural resources conglomerate outlined to American analysts and portfolio managers during the company's recent investment roadshows.
The company wants to be "a core investment holding here as we are in Britain," according to Lord White, head of its American operations.
Hanson's track record certainly warrants attention.
The company has reported increased profits every year since it was founded in 1964 when Lord White and Lord Hanson merged their fertilizer, commercial vehicle distribution and printing businesses and built the conglomerate with a string of successful takeovers.


An Art Collection Gathered Cheaply
ART by van Gogh sells for tens of millions of dollars.
Paint-by-number art can sell for 50 cents a picture, and that's what Michael O'Donoghue, a New York screenwriter, collects.
More than 200 pieces from his collection can be seen in "1952-1992: 40 Years of Paint-by-Number Paintings" at the Bridgewater/Lustberg Gallery, 529 Broadway (Spring Street), from April 20 to 25.
The first crude paint-by-number sets appeared in the late 40's.
By 1952, the Palmer Paint Company began to produce more sophisticated sets; in 18 months, the company had sold $12 million worth.
Today, the Craft House Corporation dominates the market, with 125 different subjects, although other companies make similar sets.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.25-6.5
6.25-6.5
9.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
6.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.00
3.63
5.95
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.60
3.63
5.56
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.71
3.74
5.63
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.01
6.97
7.82
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.87
7.86
8.10
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.85
8.82
9.17
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.67
6.68
7.24
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Review/Orchestra; Simon Rattle and the Birmingham Explore Early 20th-Century Music
With three concerts at Carnegie Hall this week, the City of Birmingham Symphony Orchestra under Simon Rattle describes the free-for-all that was early 20th-century music.
Under the rubric "The Revolution of Expression: 1911, 1912, 1913" these are events intended to go beyond the walls of the concert hall and use the surrounding city to explore the arts and the social climate of an era.
And it was a riotous time.
With the harmonic and spiritual language of the Romantics exhausted, one new path seemed as good as another.
Nielsen's Third Symphony and Ravel's "Daphnis et Chloe" on Tuesday chose to look backward, each in its own way.
The Nielsen, with its bluff good humor and unself-conscious warmth, simply extends the world of Brahms and Dvorak as if nothing had changed at all.
The outer movements roar and dance exuberantly; the Andante sings its pastoral song.


American's Bookings Rise 46%
American Airlines said yesterday that the new, lower fares it introduced last Thursday had generated a 46 percent increase in bookings from normal levels for this time of year.
The airline released the data on the day its parent company, the AMR Corporation, reported first-quarter earnings of $20 million, or 28 cents a share, compared with a loss of $195 million in the corresponding period last year, when travel and earnings were depressed by the Persian Gulf war and a doubling of fuel prices.


Dow Rises 47.63 to Second Straight Record
Stocks rallied again yesterday, with the Dow Jones industrial average reaching a closing high for the second consecutive day, on a second day of upbeat earnings reports.
The Dow jumped 47.63 points, or 1.4 percent, to 3,353.76.
After a sharp rise at the opening, the Dow climbed gradually through morning trading, steadied itself in the early afternoon, and then shot upward in the final 30 minutes of trading.
It closed near the day's high.
On Tuesday, the Dow closed above 3,300 for the first time.


Knicks Collapse and Find Company at the Top
The Knicks latest collapse may have cost them the Atlantic Division title.
Scoring the game's final 10 points, the Atlanta Hawks shocked the Knicks, 95-94, tonight at the Omni.
Meanwhile, the Boston Celtics defeated the Detroit Pistons, moving into a first-place tie with the Knicks with one game left in the season.


Tennstedt Cancels Concerts
The conductor Klaus Tennstedt has canceled his three remaining concerts with the New York Philharmonic because of illness, the orchestra has announced.
Kurt Masur, the ensemble's music director, will conduct the scheduled program: the Sibelius Violin Concerto (Nigel Kennedy, soloist) and the Brahms First Symphony.
Performances are tonight at 8, tomorrow at 11 A.M. and Tuesday at 7:30.
Information: (212) 721-6500.


Gannett Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 29


Parents Also Have to Learn About Guns
To the Editor:
I am a volunteer in a New York City day care center, working with children 3 and 4 years old.
I am amazed at what these children want to play during their "free time." They have wonderful imaginations and would turn every toy in the room into a gun if allowed.
We try hard to divert them, but as soon as our backs are turned, they are back to guns and violence.
What is also amazing is what they are allowed to watch on television and the movies they are taken to see.


Raids Delve for Evidence Of Illegal Waste Dumping
Federal and city investigators raided the Fresh Kills Landfill and a private shipyard on Staten Island yesterday, seizing office records and searching for buried waste containers, in what city officials said were separate inquiries into illegal dumping of garbage or other waste.
In one raid, investigators with search warrants sealed off two sections of First Marine Shipyard and began digging in search of waste drums they said were buried at the yard, people working at the shipyard who saw the raid said.
First Marine is owned by the Frank family, whose oil and sludge-barge businesses have been described by New York State as the worst polluters of New York Harbor.


Quotation of the Day
"Those who think you can remove the problem by violence, by more killing, are dead wrong." -- CYRUS R. VANCE, United Nations envoy, in Yugoslavia.  [ A1:5. ]


Nicor Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Animals As Artistic Inspirations
"CUTE is the operative word here," said Dorothy Twining Globus, the curator of exhibitions at the Cooper-Hewitt Museum.
She was talking about "Animals in Design," which runs through July 20 at the museum, 2 East 91st Street in Manhattan.
Images include Saul Steinberg's wallpaper design of dogs behind a grid, a camel in motion as photographed by Eadweard Muybridge, and Winnie the Pooh and his pals illustrated in color.


Chief's Son Moves Up At Hospital Company
Community Psychiatric Centers of Laguna Hills, Calif., yesterday announced the retirement of its chief executive, James W. Conte, and the succession of his son, the 38-year-old Richard L. Conte.
The company, which operates 50 private psychiatric hospitals in the United States, England and Puerto Rico, said the new chief executive planned to emphasize lower-cost treatment programs that do not require hospital stays.
The senior Mr.
Conte, 64, who co-founded the company in the early 1960's, will continue to serve as chairman until Nov. 30, the company said.
His son has been the president of Community Psychiatric since 1990.


Comerica Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Tennessee County Offering Bonds
A $89.1 million tax-exempt bond issue by Shelby County in Tennessee is being offered to the public at prices to yield from 3.15 percent for an issue due 1993 to 6.35 percent in 2008.
Underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company said the financing included capital appreciation bonds, or zero-coupon bonds, which pay no interest but if held to maturity will yield from 6.4 percent for an issue due 2006 to 6.5 percent for one due 2009.
These bonds are being offered at discounted prices that range from $340.63 for $1,000 of bonds, to $418.26 for $1,000 of bonds.


Chrysler Will Sell Dual-Fuel Vehicles Soon
The Chrysler Corporation will soon begin selling cars that can run on methanol as well as gasoline, Lee A. Iacocca, the company's chairman, said yesterday.
Unlike some dual-fuel cars now being sold, the Chrysler models will be offered at no additional charge, he said.
The feature will cost the company several hundred dollars a car, automotive engineers say, but it will give Chrysler valuable credits in meeting Federal gasoline mileage requirements.


Rubbermaid Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Corrections
An article by The Associated Press on Friday about a minister who resigned as president of the Association of Free Lutheran Congregations misstated his condition.
The minister, the Rev.
Richard Snipstead, is infected by the virus that causes AIDS; he has not yet developed symptoms of the disease.


Caterpillar's Trump Card; Threat of Permanently Replacing Strikers Gave Company Advantage Against Union
The abrupt end of a five-month strike against Caterpillar Inc. showed that management can bring even a union so mighty and rich as the United Automobile Workers to its knees by asserting that experienced machinists, tool makers and technicians add no more value to the products they make than an untrained job hunter who comes in off the street.
Half a century ago, under the leadership of Walter Reuther, the union vaulted the blue-collar work force into the middle class, forcing Henry Ford and the other sultans of Detroit to treat workers as something more than biceps and sweat.
But the Caterpillar strike suggests that the Ford strain of American management is alive and well in Peoria, and Mr.
Reuther and the American labor movement are not.


LINKED TO MAFIA, UNION CHIEF QUITS
The head of the most powerful union in the New York region's construction industry resigned yesterday only hours before he was to face charges that he had been a pawn of the Gambino crime family and had helped John Gotti extract payoffs from contractors.
The labor leader, Robert Sasso, agreed to resign as president of Local 282 of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters without specifically admitting any of the allegations, according to the court-appointed investigations officer who had brought the charges.


Immucor Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Ex-S.E.C. Official in Unusual Dissent
Richard C. Breeden, the chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission, quietly celebrated last month when the thorn in his side on the panel, Edward H. Fleischman, resigned.
Now it appears the celebration may have been premature.
In two unusual letters that threaten to lift the curtain on the commission's secret enforcement proceedings, Mr.
Fleischman, who is now a partner at a New York law firm, strongly implied to a Federal judge here that the agency had mishandled a civil case brought against two accountants.
He also said he would testify about the matter if he was called.
Letters Made Public
The letters, which could prove to become highly embarrassing to Mr.
Breeden, were made public today at a hearing in Federal District Court in Washington.


Mercantile Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Bear Stearns Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 27


Vance Appeals To Serbs to Halt Bosnia Fighting
Cyrus R. Vance, the United Nations Special envoy, called on Serbian leaders in Belgrade today to suspend military actions in this ethnically torn republic.
Serbian forces pounded areas occupied by Muslim Slavs and Croats with artillery fire.
"Those who think you can remove the problem by violence, by more killing, are dead wrong," Mr.
Vance said tonight after meetings in Belgrade with Serbia's President, Slobodan Milosevic, and Yugoslvia's Acting Defense Minister, Gen.
Blagoje Adziz.


Not All Were Attentive
A pre-Easter service outside City Hall yesterday called attention to the plight of the city's homeless.
Members of the clergy led participants in an hourlong recitation of special prayers for the homeless.
A young observer was given a dispensation from the proceedings. (John Sotomayor/The New York Times)


U.S. Trust Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Russian Cabinet Wins Shaky Support of Assembly
Russia's Cabinet withdrew its resignation today after the Congress of Peoples' Deputies passed a muted declaration of support for the course of radical economic reform.
The declaration did not formally undo the resolution approved last Saturday that prompted the resignation in the first place, and a rushed vote left many lawmakers confused about what they were adopting.


CHRONICLE
In August, Lin Lin, a 34-year-old Chinese artist, was shot to death at Eighth Avenue and 45th Street during an argument with four youths over a portrait he was sketching.
Yesterday, his family and friends, along with Chancellor W. ANN REYNOLDS of the City University of New York and 250 others, gathered four blocks away at the university's Graduate Center to open an exhibition of his work.
Mr.
Lin, who received a Master of Fine Arts degree from the School of Visual Arts, was beginning to make a name for himself in New York.
He had won a grant from the Pollock-Krasner Art Foundation and had had a one-man show of his abstract art in a SoHo gallery in 1990.
But he was still forced to scrounge for a living.


Where the Money Comes From To Fuel the Boom on Broadway
In a recession, and after one of the most disastrous fall seasons in years, Broadway has 23 new productions this spring, more than at any time in recent memory.
So where's all the money coming from?


Cleanliness Is Next to Carburetors
EVERY spring brings an upsurge in gasoline sales, as warmer weather gives Americans the urge to hit the open road.
While the season usually brings new sales pitches from the nation's gasoline companies, there seem to be more now than ever.
Most of those ambitious campaigns are spending tens of millions of dollars to stress a relatively new theme -- cleansing.


Owens-Corning Fiberglas Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Lessons in Protection -- A special report.; Trade Curbs: Do They Do the Job?
In the midst of the recession and election campaign, protectionist pressures have boiled to the surface, but economists say that import restrictions have had glaringly mixed results for the industries they were supposed to help.
For a few industries like motorcycle manufacturers, protection has provided the breathing room they wanted to begin to regain their strength.
But several other industries, most notably autos, are worse off.
For some industries, like steel and machine tools, the results of protection have been less than desired.
And in most cases, economists generally agree, one clear loser is the American consumer.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
American Airlines said the lower fares it introduced last week generated a 46 percent increase in bookings.
It also announced first-quarter earnings of $20 million.  [ Page D1. ]
Apple's legal setback in its copyright suit against Microsoft and Hewlett-Packard could provide a freer environment for developing new software.  [ D1. ]


Iran Is Said to Expel Arabs From Gulf Island
Iran has stirred concern among its neighbors in the Persian Gulf by expelling Arab residents of an island in the middle of the gulf that they jointly administer with the United Arab Emirates, officials in gulf nations said.
The small island, Abu Musa, is the largest of three belonging to the Emirates that were occupied by Iranian troops in 1971.
The two others, known as Large Tunb and Small Tunb, are believed to be uninhabited.
But officials from gulf nations say Abu Musa, which lies north of Dubai, roughly midway between the two countries, has a population of about 700 Emirate citizens.


Global Marine Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Rest Your Head on My Building
PILLOWS do not have to be square, round or rectangular. They can look like a building.
The American Telephone and Telegraph Building, designed by Philip Johnson and John Burgee, has become famous for its Chippendale silhouette, and that roof line has now been immortalized in the shape of a pillow sham.


Standard Register reports earnings for Qtr to March 29


Streets of New York
As with any new sports promotion in New York, the horns have started blowing early for the Indy-car race scheduled for June 1993 around the World Trade Center.
And when it comes to excessive horn-blaring, who knows better than a New York cabdriver?
That helps explain why DANNY SULLIVAN, the 1985 Indianapolis 500 winner and former New York cabbie, was at the Javits Convention Center yesterday for the first of what figure to be many pronouncements concerning the Marlboro Grand Prix of New York.
Yesterday's news conference unveiled the race's logo and provided assurances that the streets used for the race will be properly paved for the delicate race cars.


All Mum on Marinovich
Through his agent, TODD MARINOVICH just says no.
Because of policy, the National Football League just says nothing.
And the Los Angeles Raiders aren't talking, either.


Discount Corp. of N.Y.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Grainger (W.W.) Inc. (N) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Merck &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Review/Music; Opera Without Singing, But With Scary Sounds
John Moran, a 26-year-old composer from Nebraska, jumped into the center ring of the avant-garde opera world three years ago with "Jack Benny," a quirky fantasy in which soloists mimed to an electronic sound track made from fragments of the "Jack Benny Show." His next work, "The Manson Family," peered into the peculiar relationship between the murderer Charles Manson and the members of his cult.
Since then, Mr.
Moran has been presenting sections of "The Circus of Eternity," a four-part work in progress that he calls "a mega-opera." Last year's installment, "The Hospital," was the third section.
Last Thursday evening at the Club at La Mama, 74A East Fourth Street, he presented the premiere of part one, "The (Haunted) House." The performances run through Saturday .


Babies Too Tiny, Risks Too Big
Anyone aspiring to be President, including the incumbent, would be well advised to read a new report from the National Commission to Prevent Infant Mortality.
It's a grim tale.
Don't be fooled, the report suggests, by the fact that the 1989 infant mortality rate fell to a new low of 9.8 deaths per 1,000 live births.
That only proves the U.S. is getting better at saving tiny babies, not at insuring they're born healthy.
Otherwise, 7 percent of all infants, and nearly 17 percent of black infants, wouldn't have been born with low birth weight -- the highest rates since 1978.


Diebold Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Spain's Objective: Peaceful Games
Now just three months away, the Barcelona Olympics are well on course to become the largest Games ever staged, with more countries and athletes than ever helping Spain commemorate a year also notable for the 500th anniversity of Columbus's voyage to the new world and the birth of the European Community.
Spanish authorities have planned to use more than 15,000 police and military personnel for the Games, which translates to almost one security officer for every athlete, coach, official and journalist attending the Olympics.


Standex International reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


What Iran's Vote Doesn't Change
President Hashemi Rafsanjani, reputedly a pragmatist, seems to have prevailed in Iran's parliamentary elections.
Official results give his party a commanding lead.
But before the vote, a Council of Guardians disqualified dozens of hostile candidates as spiritually incorrect.
And though the Government claimed a massive turnout, foreign reporters saw few lines at polling booths.
Even so, Westerners can hope that Mr.
Rafsanjani, newly strengthened, will now end Iran's human rights abuses at home and its terrorism abroad.
Experience cautions against undue optimism.
Last month, for the first time in four years, a leader of the Bahai faith was secretly executed.
This coincided with the expulsion of all foreign Red Cross workers for allegedly helping United Nations monitors expose the torture of political prisoners.


Chris-Craft Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Whitman Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Review/Piano; Seeking to Make a Point While Making Music
There were times, on Tuesday night at the 92d Street Y, when the framing of the concert distracted from the attention due the Portuguese pianist Pedro Burmester, a 28-year-old "distinguished loser" of the Van Cliburn International Piano Competition.
This was the last of a three-concert series dubbed Goldfingers.
Imaginatively conceived by Joseph Horowitz, the series attempted to suggest that when it comes to competitions, a loss could be as great a credential as a laurel.
In fact, immediately after the close of Mr.
Burmester's performance of Bach's "Goldberg" Variations, the pianist joined a panel on the stage for a discussion titled "Piano Competitions: Are They a Necessary Evil?"
This meant that Mr.
Burmester's playing was always heard through a conceptual scrim; he was not just performing, he was providing evidence in an argument.
But what his concert actually showed, as did the two of his predecessors, was that there may be very good musical reasons why a pianist fails to win a competition; he may also possess many musical virtues that have nothing to do with why he lost.


Tips for Tark the Shark and Other Musings
Welcome to San Antonio, Jerry Tarkanian.
Welcome to the Spurs.
Welcome to the big leagues.
After all these years of fighting with the preppie bureaucrats, all we can say is: What took you so long?
You were born to be here.
Your nickname and reputation -- Tark the Shark -- is so appropriate for the bloody wars of the National Basketball Association, not to mention the potential revenue from T-shirt sales bearing your Sharkness.


Norwest Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Plans for "Thruway 2000" to Create 6,000 Jobs


Corrections
An article by The Associated Press in Business Day yesterday about brokerage earnings misstated the increase in compensation and benefits paid by Merrill Lynch &amp; Company in the first quarter.
It was 15.4 percent.


Head of Police in Philadelphia Chosen for Chief in Los Angeles
A little over a year after the videotaped beating of a black motorist by white police officers plunged this city into racial discord, the Los Angeles Police Commission has chosen a successor to Chief Daryl F. Gates.
He would be the city's first black chief of police.
The appointee is Willie L. Williams, 48-year-old son of a Philadelphia meat cutter who has won wide praise for reducing excessive force by officers and improving police-community relations since being named the Police Commissioner of Philadelphia nearly four years ago.
Nudge Toward the Door?
Mayor Tom Bradley of Los Angeles today scheduled a news conference for Thursday morning to introduce Mr.
Williams, who arrived here this morning from Philadelphia and has avoided any public comment until the official announcement.
Earlier, Mayor Edward Rendell of Philadelphia said Mr.
Williams had accepted the offer from Los Angeles.


Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


New York Logs 500,000 Jobs Lost Since 1989, a Record High
Job losses in New York State over the last three years were worse than they have been for half a century, since records began being kept in 1939, a leading economist said yesterday.
But he also reported signs that the pain may be easing.
The report by Samuel M. Ehrenhalt, Regional Commissioner for the Federal Bureau of Labor Statistics, is just another sign of just how concentrated the national recession has been in this region.
Over the last two years, New York, New Jersey and Connecticut have suffered the second-worst declines in nonagricultural employment of any states in the nation.
The worst declines were recorded in the region encompassing Massachusetts, New Hampshire and Rhode Island.


Parents Also Have to Learn About Guns; Another Curriculum
To the Editor:
I admire the relentless fight of James and Sarah Brady for gun control, and as a teacher I share their deep concern for the deadly triad of kids, schools and guns.
I cringed, however, as I read Mr.
Brady's suggestion for change (Op-Ed, March 30): a new curriculum in the classroom.
As a second-year teacher, I have come to dread this word "curriculum" and seeing it in print sent my heart and mind racing.
I do not intend to minimize Mr.
Brady's message.
The ideas sound innovative and refreshing, and the curriculum surely proposes issues that students desperately need to discuss.


Vakhtang Chabukiani, 82, dies; Soviet Ballet Master and Dancer
Vakhtang Mikhailovich Chabukiani, a Soviet ballet master and choreographer and one of the great dancers of his generation, died on April 5 in Tbilisi, Georgia.
He was 82 years old.
He had had heart trouble for some time, The Independent reported in London.


Quantum Chemical reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


CBS Reports 79% Increase In Its Operating Earnings
CBS Inc. said yesterday that its operating income jumped nearly 79 percent in the first quarter, mainly as a result of reduced costs, especially in the network news division, which spent millions of dollars covering the Persian Gulf war last year.
The company's net income, however, fell 20.2 percent, mainly because the 1991 quarter included a one-time gain.


Italian Furniture Goes All Cuddly
THIS year at the Salone del Mobile Italiano (a k a the Italian Furniture Fair, where the shape of a chair can be as cataclysmic as the length of a skirt), there was no denying that modern furniture design had done a double somersault and landed on sweet little feet.
Trim armoires, marble-topped kitchen tables, country-style hutches and ladder-back chairs were the new cozy objects of affection.
Wood and wicker, hand-turned aluminum and bleached mahogany were the materials of choice.


Review/Television; Dr. Kildare? Well, No. But a Human Face.
It's not as if television entertainment has turned its back completely on doctors and hospitals.
There's Dr.
Huxtable in "The Cosby Show" on NBC and there's the wisecracking gang on "Nurses," also on NBC.
Over on ABC, Doogie Howser, M.D. does see patients between bouts of teen-age angst.
But where are the serious dramas about medicine, the kind that became television staples, dating back to the days of "Dr. Kildare" and "Ben Casey"?
Is the form still trying to recover from the cheeky irreverence of "St. Elsewhere"?
Perhaps.
But the producers Dick Wolf ("Law and Order" and "Mann and Machine," both on NBC) and William Sackheim (the movie "Pacific Heights") are betting that the time for a comeback is upon us and are putting their money, for better or worse, on "The Human Factor," which has its premiere on CBS at 10 tonight.
Created by John Mankiewicz, the new series revolves around a Chicago teaching hospital.


General Dynamics Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Old Mills and Factories All Over the Northeast Get a New Life
To the Editor:
As an architect and a historic preservation consultant involved in two major mill restoration projects, we would like to comment on some of the statements quoted in your March 23 article about Trenton's efforts to reclaim old factories left for dead.
While it is true that many older industrial buildings are contaminated with hazardous materials unknowingly used in the past, this does not mean that they are beyond hope of salvage.
In most cases, cleanup consists of removing or encapsulating lead paint or asbestos-lined heating units or transformers.
Where extensive contamination exists, even new construction is impossible without a thorough cleanup, often requiring state or Federal assistance.


Major Realty reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Garden Q. &amp; A.
Sand Plants
Q.
I recently bought a summer cottage in a coastal area.
What plants can I grow in the garden's sandy soil? -- Marianne Putnam, Framingham, Mass.
A.
Every soil has its advantages and disadvantages, so familiarizing yourself with the conditions in your garden will make it easier to choose appropriate plants.
The advantages of sandy soil include greater retention of winter warmth, earlier warming in spring, quick drainage and ease of digging.
Disadvantages include minimal or total lack of nutrients, rapid loss of moisture and difficulty in keeping new, large species upright.
Sandy soils can be either acid or alkaline.
Two helpful books on the subject are "Gardening on Sandy Soil in North Temperate Areas" by Christine Kelway (Dover, 1975) and "Gardening by the Sea" by Daniel J. Foley (Parnassus Imprints, 1965).
Terrace House Plants
Q.
I've had a jasmine, plumbago and several other houseplants in a sunny warm room all winter.
Is it too soon to put them on my terrace? -- Carole Rosenberg, New York City.
A.
It's much too soon.
With the lengthening days of spring, city gardeners in particular seem to want to green up their space in a hurry.
In early spring, daytime temperatures do occasionally soar and tempt the hopeful.
But it is more prudent to wait until the nighttime temperatures stabilize around 65 degrees before moving your tender houseplants outside.
When you finally do move them outdoors, be sure to shield them for the first few days from the bright sun and strong winds they are not used to.
Garden Books
Q.
You sometimes mention books that are no longer in print.
I've found some in the library but others I'd like to own.
Where can I buy them? -- Josephine Campbell, Chicago.
A.
I admit to a certain partiality to old or out-of-print garden books.
This is because it's not unusual to find more solid information in older works than in some of the editions now being published.
Quite a few booksellers specialize in these older garden books and also do mail-order shipping.
Several are: Anchor and Dolphin Books, 30 Franklin Street, P.O.
Box 823, Newport, R.I. 02840, (401) 846-6890 (three issues of catalogues, $3); Elisabeth Woodburn Books, Booknoll Farm, P.O.
Box 398, Hopewell, N.J. 08525, (609) 466-0522 (catalogues organized by subjects, $2) and the American Botanist Booksellers, 1103 West Truitt Avenue, Chillicothe, Ill. 61523; (309) 274-5254 (catalogue, $1).
Also, Garden Works, 31 Old Winter Street, Lincoln, Mass. 01773, (617) 259-1110 (catalogue, $1); Timothy Mawson Books, Main Street, New Preston, Conn. 06777, (203) 868-0732 (free flyer) and Quest Rare Books, 774 Santa Ynez, Stanford, Calif. 94305, (415) 324-3119 (catalogue, $3).


Afghan Rebels Say They Hold Major Air Base
Two rebel groups contended today that they had captured a major Government air base 30 miles north of Kabul, the capital, although it was impossible to confirm the reports.
If the reports are true, much of the Government's air power could be eliminated.
On Tuesday, rebel forces captured a provincial capital near the air base, Charikar, and a smaller military town of Jabal-us-Siraj.


Committee Urges Delay in Cloning Lincoln's Genes
An attempt to clone the genes of Abraham Lincoln to see if he had Marfan's syndrome should be delayed until DNA test techniques improve and more is known about the genetic cause of the disease, a panel of experts said today.
The experts, convened by the National Museum of Health and Medicine, which has tissue samples obtained at the time of Lincoln's assassination, said more should be learned about the gene that causes Marfan's before researchers try to find evidence of it in those samples.


Manufacturers National reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Ruling on Apple May Ease Development of Software
With most of Apple Computer's arguments in the company's four-year-old copyright infringement suit against Microsoft and Hewlett-Packard tossed out by a Federal judge on Tuesday, many industry analysts said today that a freer operating environment could ensue for software developers.
Still, they cautioned that the decision was an oral ruling by a lower court.
Federal District Judge Vaughn Walker could offer different details in his final written ruling, or an appellate court could overturn it.
Indeed, Apple Computer Inc., based in Cupertino, Calif., said it would proceed with its case.


Man In the News: Willie Lawrence Williams; An Astute Manager
A few months after the beating of Rodney King by Los Angeles police officers last spring, Philadelphia's police commissioner asked a local civic group to evaluate the police department's ability to prevent such an occurrence from happening here.
In particular, the commissioner, Willie L. Williams, asked for suggestions for improving police training and discipline, the handling of complaints and ways to identify officers who might use violence or excessive force.
It was that kind of response, measured and politically astute, that might have impressed Los Angeles officials who are scheduled to announce tomorrow that Mr.
Williams has been chosen to succeed Daryl F. Gates as chief of police there.


Johnson Controls reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Panhandle Eastern Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Review/Music; Elise Ross Sings Bartok, Ives and Others
Elise Ross finds the recital stage simply one more arena for theater.
No stationary positions in front of the piano, no trusting of her message to sheer sound.
Throughout this program of Ives, Rachmaninoff, Bartok, Ravel and Weill at Town Hall on Sunday afternoon, Ms.
Ross prowled the stage much like the caged cat in the first of her Charles Ives songs.
It can be a disastrous strategy -- a dangerous descent into overkill -- but she does it better than most, depending on a mixture of vulnerability and forwardness to sell her songs and win her audience.
Ms.
Ross is a soprano, but she is freest in the darker, almost mezzo regions of her voice.
Pressure or upward movement introduces a touch of steel into her sound; the highest notes are managed through determination.
She uses her assets wisely, bringing a muscular vitality to Bartok's "Village Scenes" and a touch of Mermanesque belt to the ballads of Kurt Weill.
His "Surabaya Johnny" at the end was an all-stops-out evocation of unhappy love.


Lake Shore Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


In Tally of '91 Income, President Lost to Both the I.R.S. and His Dog
President Bush made public his 1991 Federal tax returns today.
The numbers show that he took a drubbing not only from the Internal Revenue Service but from the family dog as well.
The joint return filed by Mr.
Bush and his wife, Barbara, declared that a book ostensibly written by Mrs.
Bush's dog, Millie, earned $889,176 in royalties last year.
It spent almost four months on the best-seller lists in 1990 and 1991


Mattel Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Creditors Fail to Agree On Alexander's Plan
Trade creditors of Alexander's Inc. failed to agree to a proposed deferred payment plan yesterday, further jeopardizing the troubled budget department store chain's viability.
The company has retained Shearman &amp; Sterling, the New York law firm, to consider options for restructuring its debt, including a possible bankruptcy filing.
The firm also represents Citicorp, which owns 27.4 percent of Alexander's.
The stake had been owned by Donald J. Trump.


Amsco International reports earnings for Qtr to March 29


Greater New York Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Third World Economies Shrink Again
For the first time since World War II, per-capita income in the third world has declined for two consecutive years, the World Bank said in a report released today.
But for the 1990's as a whole, the World Bank forecast that the economies of the third world would do better than in the 1980's, largely because many developing nations have embraced economic reforms.


Bank of New York Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Albany Reaches Tentative Labor Pact
New York State reached a tentative contract agreement with its largest public employees union today, ending a contentious period in which disgruntled state workers have labored without a contract for more than a year.
The agreement, which will affect about 100,000 state workers represented by the Civil Service Employees Association, calls for a wage increase of 4 percent next April and an increase of slightly more than 4 percent in the next fiscal year.
Workers will also receive bonuses in December 1993 and September 1994.


CHRONICLE
BRENT SCOWCROFT, national security adviser to President Bush, has been named the winner of the first Eisenhower Leadership Prize, to be awarded by Gettysburg College and its affiliate, the Eisenhower World Affairs Institute.


Parents Also Have to Learn About Guns; Waiting Period Fallacy
To the Editor:
"Senate Republicans Soft on Guns" (editorial, March 30) misses the mark when it suggests that a national seven-day waiting period (the Brady bill) is the most important provision of President Bush's crime bill.
Criminals do not wait to get their guns, and honest citizens who need them for self-defense do not commit crime with guns.
The overwhelming number of guns that enter cities like New York and the District of Columbia, two of the highest crime areas in the country, with restrictive gun laws, are stolen from stores, police, truck shipments and manufacturers.
Only a statistically insignificant number of guns sold over the counter in states with lenient gun purchase laws account for gun crimes.


Northrop Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Dutch Purchase
The Dutch sugar, foods and biochemicals group CSM N.V. said it expected to reach an agreement to take over the Dutch vegetable bottler Hak B.V.
Hak has sales offices in Germany and Belgium and employs about 355.
CSM in February completed the purchase of Eryza B.V., a rice processor, and said the deal was part of a strategy of acquisitions of high-profile brand names.


Corrections
A picture caption on Saturday about the dedication of a newly restored Upper Manhattan park originally designed by Frederick Law Olmsted Jr. misidentified the school attended by the students shown.
It is the Incarnation School, not the Immaculata School.


Dun &amp; Bradstreet Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


ISOLATION OF LIBYA GROWS AS ITS LINKS TO WORLD ARE CUT
Air traffic between Libya and the rest of the world appeared at a standstill today as both Arab and non-Arab countries began enforcing the second major punitive embargo the Security Council has imposed on a United Nations member since the end of the cold war.
Libyan passenger jets were turned back in flight and many countries began expelling diplomats from the North African nation as the sanctions against Tripoli started to take effect.


WHERE TO FIND IT
THIS Sunday's Easter Parade on Fifth Avenue will be nothing like the grand one in the old movie with Judy Garland and Fred Astaire.
Still, this is a big season for hats, according to Horace Weeks, who cleans and renovates hats for both women and men at his shop, Peter &amp; Irving, in Manhattan.
"A woman has to wear a hat if she's really dressed," he said.
"More men are wearing hats these days, too."


Inside And Out At Expo '92
TO walk in the Saudi Arabian Pavilion at the Seville 1992 Universal Exposition, which opens on Monday, "is to be indoors and outdoors simultaneously," said James Wines, a principal in SITE, a Manhattan concern that designed the the pavilion.
Fitch RS, a London design firm, created the interior.
According to its organizers, Expo '92 is a Columbian exposition, celebrating the theme of discovery; 120 countries are participating.
The Saudi pavilion is a typical SITE design, with an exterior that appears to be half-constructed, so that the interiors are laid somewhat bare.


Franklin Electric reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


Corrections
An article on Friday about the appointment of Ronald S. Johnson as New York City coordinator for AIDS policy misstated his educational background.
He did graduate work at Harvard but has no master's degree from there.


People
*
Philip A. Forman was named to the new position of executive vice president and director of marketing and strategic planning at Campbell-Mithun-Esty, New York.
He was previously president of WPP Group's U.S.
Communications unit, based in New York. *
Ron Hartwig, 48 years old, general manager of Hill &amp; Knowlton's Los Angeles office and regional general manager for the western region, was named to the additional position of president and chief operating officer at Hill &amp; Knowlton U.S.A.
He will continue to be based in Los Angeles.
Mr.
Hartwig succeeds Craig L. Fuller in New York, who resigned earlier this year to become head of corporate affairs at the Philip Morris Companies.


INSIDE
New York Job Picture Bleak, But With Light on Horizon
Job losses in New York State over the last three years were worse than they have been for half a century, but there are signs of the pain easing.
In the last two years, the New York region has suffered the second-worst job decline in the nation.
Page B1.
Helmsley Goes to Prison
Leona Helmsley, the self-styled hotel queen, became prisoner No. 15113-054 in the Federal Medical Center in Lexington, Ky.
Page B3.
What Chicago Didn't Need
Rain frustrated efforts to stem the flooding in downtown Chicago buildings, although the city's main financial markets reopened.
Page A12.
The Emperor of Peru
President Fujimori has lived up to his nickname, shutting down Congress and the courts.
And his approval ratings are higher than ever.
Page A3.


State Street Boston Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


America's Fabrics, All in One Book
SPUTNIKS flying across galaxies, tropical hibiscuses and fronds, and Mexicans in front of adobe houses are some of the images in "Fabulous Fabrics of the 50's (And Other Terrific Textiles of the 20's, 30's and 40's)" by Gideon Bosker, Michele Mancini and John Gramstad (Chronicle Books, $16.95).
The book, which is being published in May, traces the history of vintage American fabrics to their manufacturers and to their roots in popular culture.
"What appeals to me is the texture, the exuberance and the optimism of the designs," said Ms.
Mancini, who has collected fabrics for 20 years.


Vroom! Torborg's Lineup Changes Put Mets in Gear
The latest radical reconstruction of the lineup for the Mets didn't require the expenditure of millions of dollars, only some brain power.
Manager Jeff Torborg went to work with his pencil and his instincts, stitching together a lineup of substitutes, backups and hunches.
The payoff was instant.
The Mets, with a decisive display of improvisational offense, slugged and sprinted their way to a 7-2 triumph over the Phillies at Shea Stadium last night.


GFC Financial reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Study Finds Great Benefits In Early Use of an AIDS Drug
Researchers have found that early treatment with the AIDS drug AZT can significantly prolong the lives of people infected with H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS.
The study also showed that the lives of such patients were prolonged when drugs were taken to prevent a kind of pneumonia, pneumocystis carinii pneumonia, common among people with AIDS.


Students Teaching Teachers; Immigrants Reverse Language-Skill Roles in Bronx School
With the nervous expressions of students afraid of being called on, eight teachers at Theodore Roosevelt High School in the Bronx sat in a semicircle the other afternoon, while the same number of teen-agers sat beside them looking smugly self-confident.
"Maria necesita mejorar, Senora Vera," ("Maria needs to improve, Mrs. Vera"), Claire Santoro, an art teacher turned student, said hesitantly, reciting a mock teacher-parent conversation from a workbook.


Lotus Development reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


Review/Theater; Shaw's Cultured Class At the End of Its Era
The people who gather in "Heartbreak House" are intended to represent "cultured, leisured Europe" languishing before the outbreak of World War I. Complacently removed from anything remotely resembling political or social upheaval, they inhabit a stylish wasteland.
They drink tea and exchange epigrammatic insights as the conflagration begins.
In his "fantasia in the Russian manner on English themes," Shaw freely paid his debt to Chekhov.
"Heartbreak House" is a Shavian response to "The Cherry Orchard," a last estate before the end of an order.
The play achieves its continuing vitality because of the eloquence of the dialogue and the pertinence of the themes in a world of renewable isolationism.


CREDIT MARKETS;
The Federal National Mortgage Association, the federally chartered corporation known as Fannie Mae, which invests in home mortgages, priced a two-part offering totaling $1.1 billion yesterday through various securities dealers.
For $600 million in five-year debentures, the interest rate was set at 6.75 percent and offered to investors at a price of 99.84375 to yield 6.787 percent, or about 16 basis points more than Treasury securities with a similar maturity.
A basis point is one-hundredth of a percentage point.


Home Video
The Hits Are Coming
Stuck for months with generally humdrum titles, video stores will soon have a dozen splashy movies to offer for rent.
Video releases usually follow theater openings by four to six months, and from May into the fall will come the big films -- from "The Addams Family" to "The Prince of Tides" -- that got people into theaters last winter and in a couple of cases went over the $100 million mark at the box office.


Columbia Journal; Doolittle Raiders Recall 30 Seconds in History
Fifty years ago Jimmy Doolittle, then a lieutenant colonel in the Army Air Forces, flew to a small air base south of here seeking volunteers for a World War II mission that he described only as top secret and extremely hazardous.
Nearly 140 men base volunteered, and 80 of those were selected.
Their mission: bomb Tokyo.


Bausch &amp; Lomb reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


Rain Thwarts Effort to Plug Chicago Tunnel Leak
A heavy rain fell on the city today and lightning flashed across the sky, further frustrating efforts to stop the Chicago River from rushing into an abandoned underground freight tunnel system.
The breach that started out as a minor leak two months ago caused massive flooding and a widespread power blackout in the heart of downtown.
This afternoon President Bush signed a disaster declaration, making the city, businesses and individuals affected by the flooding eligible for Federal assistance.


Bag of Fetal Remains Found in Oklahoma
Two fishermen found the remains of 48 fetuses that had been abandoned in a field near Shawnee, Okla., the authorities said today.
District Attorney Miles Zimmerman of Pottawatomie County said the fetuses were in a large plastic bag along with 125 smaller bags of the type that are used to dispose of medical waste.
He said the bags were inside a cardboard box and that the box was covered by two charred boards.
Investigators found two empty lighter fluid cans nearby.


Audiovox Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  AL -- Named John Ricco assistant public relations director.
NEW YORK YANKEES -- Optioned Bernie Williams, outfielder, to Columbus of the International League.
Recalled Russ Springer, pitcher, from Columbus.
National League  NEW YORK METS -- Placed Kevin Elster, shortstop, on the 15-day disabled list retroactive to April 13.
Recalled Rodney McCray, infielder, from Tidewater of the International League.
SAN DIEGO PADRES -- Traded Thomas Howard, outfielder, to the Cleveland Indians for Jason Hardtke, infielder, and a player to be named later.
South Atlantic League  CHARLESTON RAINBOWS -- Named Vincent Nicastro director of administration.
Basketball  National Basketball League  CLEVELAND CAVALIERS -- Placed Jimmy Oliver, guard-forward, on the injured list.
Activated Craig Ehlo, guard-forward, from the injured list.
SAN ANTONIO SPURS -- Named Jerry Tarkanian coach, effective next season.
United States Basketball League  JACKSONVILLE HOOTERS -- Named Paul Prisco southeast region scouting director.
TAMPA BAY SUNBLASTERS -- Named Kim Kelly director of marketing; Ken Weisman marketing coordinator and Janet Applefield assisant to the general manager.
Hockey  National Hockey League  NHL -- Extended the three-game suspension of Philadelphia Flyers defenseman Terry Carkner for a match penalty against New Jersey's Randy McKay on March 29 for one game.
MINNESOTA NORTH STARS -- Assigned Kip Miller, center, to Kalamazoo of the International Hockey League.


AMR Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Integra Financial reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Advanta Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Books of The Times; Optimism (Relentless) on Humanity
The Fragile Species  By Lewis Thomas 193 pages.
A Robert Stewart Book/Charles Scribner's Sons. $20.
Several of his books ago -- in "The Medusa and the Snail: More Notes of a Biology Watcher," to be precise -- Lewis Thomas revealed what was news to this reader at least (and evidently to "Bartlett's Familiar Quotations"): that the source of a lovely passage in T. S. Eliot's "Little Gidding" was the words of a 14th-century nun named Julian of Norwich: "But all shall be well and all shall be well and all manner of thing shall be well."


COMPANY BRIEFS
*
Ambac Inc., New York, said its Health Care Investment Analysts Inc. unit had acquired Healthcare Knowledge Resources Inc., a unit of Thomas S. Monaghan Inc.
Terms were not disclosed. *
Associates Corp. of North America, Irving, Tex., a financial services company, reached agreement to buy the assets of Signal Financial Corp., from Corestates Financial Corp., Philadelphia.
No terms were disclosed.


Bailout Agency Falls Short
The Federal agency that is disposing of failed savings and loans institutions announced today that it would fall $15 billion short of its target for asset sales by the end of September.
Albert V. Casey, president and chief executive of the Resolution Trust Corporation, blamed Congress for the delay.
The agency's authority expired on April 1 for using Federal money for selling or closing failed institutions.
The House voted down a measure on April 1 that would have allowed continued spending.





Baxter International reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Several Big Banks Post Higher Quarterly Profits
Several large banks around the country yesterday reported large gains in profits during the first quarter as problems with bad loans declined and they benefited from a wider spread between the interest rates they pay on deposits and the interest rates they collect on loans.
The Bank of New York earned $80 million after losing $63 million a year ago, while the Norwest Corporation of Minneapolis reported a 29.7 percent gain.
The First Fidelity Bancorporation of Newark, N.J., said its profits rose 16.8 percent from a year ago.


Review/Dance; Famous Literary Bunny for Children and Adults
This is the time in the spring holiday season when greeting-card racks and gift-shop windows are filled with images of bunnies.
Therefore it is only appropriate that O.D.C./San Francisco is honoring a famous literary bunny at the Joyce Theater.
"The Velveteen Rabbit," which opened there on Tuesday night, is a two-act fantasy that should appeal to children and their grown-up companions alike.


NBD Bancorp Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats; Clinton Directs His Restored Voice Straight at Bush
After nursing strained vocal cords for a week, Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas returned to the campaign trail today, trying to claim the high ground in the contest for the Democratic Presidential nomination.
He also sharpened his criticism of President Bush, whom he accused of a "grandstand play" on labor issues.
In campaign appearances here and in San Francisco, Mr.
Clinton all but ignored Edmund G. Brown Jr., the former California Governor who remains his chief opponent for the nomination.
Mr.
Clinton said victories in New York, Wisconsin and Kansas "satisfied" him that voters had rejected Mr.
Brown's tax simplification proposal.


Studio! Life Style! Empire?
ORIBE, the star hair stylist to the star models Linda Evangelista, Naomi Campbell, Christy Turlington et al, lingered for a moment outside a converted garage on Washington Street in the West Village.
Wearing tight purple jeans and a leather jacket, he turned a well-heeled cowboy boot toward a huge glass doorway.
Running a hand through a head of matinee-idol-thick black hair, he buzzed and then entered a cavernous concrete white-washed space.
Inside, a youngish woman in T-shirt and denim overalls sat behind a black matte desk.
The phone rang.
"Industria," she said, pronouncing the word with an Italian inflection.


Profit Growth Slows at Merck and Upjohn
Reflecting the pressures on drug prices and flagging sales for older products, two large pharmaceutical companies reported yesterday that their earnings growth slowed during the first quarter.
Merck &amp; Company, the world's largest pharmaceutical company, said profits increased by a robust 17.6 percent, led by its stable of predominantly young drugs.
But analysts compared the results with gains that exceeded 19 percent last year.
Merck shares declined $4 yesterday, closing at $151.25 on the New York Stock Exchange.


Gains at A.T.&amp; T., Sprint and Telesis
A.T.&amp; T. and the Sprint Corporation, two leading long-distance telephone companies, reported strong first-quarter earnings yesterday, in large measure because of cost-cutting moves like layoffs and plant closings.
But the recession continued to take its toll with lackluster revenue growth in the quarter.
Another telephone company, the Pacific Telesis Group, the provider of local-telephone service in California and Nevada, reported that its first-quarter net income rose 24.4 percent.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  UNION CHIEF QUITS AMID CHARGES
The head of the most powerful labor union in the metropolitan region's construction industry, resigned only hours before he was to face administrative charges that he had been a pawn of the Gambino crime family and had helped John Gotti extract payoffs from contractors.
The resignation of Robert Sasso, the head of Local 282 of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters represents the latest chapter in the Federal Government's long effort to break the Mafia's hold on the union.
It is unclear how his departure might affect the union.
A1.
LINCOLN HOSPITAL LOSES ACCREDITATION
In the most glaring sign of continuing troubles at two New York City hospitals, the national hospital accreditation organization has voted to strip Lincoln Hospital in the Bronx of its accreditation and grant Kings County Hospital in Brooklyn only conditional accreditation.
B2.
HELMSLEY BEGINS PRISON SENTENCE


CBS Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Alltel Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


3 Shot, Including Retired Officer, When Queens Robbery Is Foiled
A retired police officer and his son were wounded yesterday afternoon when their routine visit to a doctor's office met up with a robbery in progress.
The officer, Robert Barberesi, 46 years old, and his son, Steven, 20, were shot as they fought with two suspects after they collided at the doctor's door.
One of the suspects was also shot and wounded in the struggle.


Pacific Gas &amp; Electric reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Hubbell Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


SunTrust Banks reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Work Force Entrants Fill Service Jobs
The Census Bureau reported today that 76 percent of the people who entered the work force from 1987 to 1989 took jobs in the service-producing industry.
A news release on the bureau's report said that 34 percent of the total jobs created in the two-year period were in the "high paying" service-producing industries, like finance, insurance and real estate, and that 24 percent were in "high paying" goods-producing industries, like manufacturing.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
THESE days, when Stephen Elliott's phone rings, he isn't surprised to hear several young girls giggling, followed by a quick "click" as they hang up.
The calls aren't for him; they're intended for his 10-year-old son.
"It happens a few times a week, especially on Friday nights," said Dr.
Elliott, a professor of educational psychology at the University of Wisconsin at Madison.
"The fifth-grade girls will sometimes get together in groups to encourage each other to make the call."


Sammy Price, 83, a Jazz Pianist Playing in Varying Styles, Is Dead
Sammy Price, a jazz pianist whose career began in the 1920's, died on Tuesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 83 years old.
He died of a heart attack, said his granddaughter, Brenda Bonelli.


New York Principals Reach Pact
After more than a year of working without a contract, New York City's 3,500 school principals and other supervisors have reached a new labor agreement with the Board of Education that provides a 5.5 percent salary increase, essentially matching features of a pact negotiated by the much larger teachers' union.
The new contract, stretching from March 1, 1991, to Oct. 12, has less than six months left to run, and the impact of its pay raise is largely retroactive.


Snap-on Tools Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


At 'Guys and Dolls,' Seeking Fun and Breaking a Record
When the head porter at the Martin Beck Theater showed up for work at 8 A.M. yesterday, the line had already formed for "Guys and Dolls." Then it grew, and grew.
Even Michael Jukovsky was impressed.
Mr.
Jukovsky, well known to theater personnel up and down Broadway as New York's most persistent patron of musicals, holds the distinction of having bought the first ticket for the first preview of "Guys and Dolls."
Surveying the crowd lining up for advance tickets, he shook his head and said, " 'Crazy for You' had lines, but nothing like this." Theater management acted quickly and set out a table with free coffee and many of those in line indulged in reminiscence.
With memories of Vivian Blaine and Sam Levene thick in the air, older patrons recalled watching the original in the same awed tones that some baby boomers use when talking about Woodstock.


Finding the Center in a Rightward Drift
To the Editor:
William Safire begins his March 23 column, "Canada's Comeback Kid," with the statement that, assuming Gov.
Bill Clinton is the Democratic nominee, 1992 will be the first year since 1932 when both major parties nominated a centrist.
Putting aside problems with Mr.
Safire's views about the Hoover-Roosevelt election -- that Herbert Hoover transformed himself from an innovative Progressive to an archconservative following 1932 and that nobody knew what Franklin D. Roosevelt stood for in the 1932 campaign -- his notion that since that election we have not had a battle of centrists is absurd.
Since the end of World War II, both major parties have tended to nominate candidates from their own centers.
Most often, these candidates fitted within the broadly defined center of American politics.


Essay; The Rising Gorge
Outrage is In.
The fashion color for spring is red in the face.
The national gorge on the rise.
Pollsters assure us that this is the year of the mad-as-hell voter.
Popularity ratings mean nothing; only the feared "negatives" are counted -- and in that inverted rating, to be behind is to be ahead.


Amsouth Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Coca-Cola Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Endangered Rock
Rock is eating its young. Rock musicians are America's most wasted natural resource.
Popular music and film are the two great art forms of the 20th century.
In the past 25 years, cinema has gained academic prestige.
Film courses are now a standard part of the college curriculum and grants are routinely available to noncommercial directors.


Winn-Dixie Stores reports earnings for Qtr to April 1


Pop and Jazz in Review
Naked City  The Marquee
Naked City's rambling show on Thursday night felt a little tired.
The band, a downtown supergroup led by the saxophonist and composer John Zorn, played its greatest hits, not so much specific songs as genres, mixing hardcore rock with surf rock, jazz, movie music and noise.
Some songs last 30 seconds, some a few minutes.
Most of them studiously avoided the signs that help people listen to music: constant rhythms and repeated melodies.
And, throwing off the set as a whole, the band took its time between songs, destroying any immediacy Mr.
Zorn might have brought to the show.


Consolidated Rail reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Accounts
*
Team One Advertising, El Segundo, Calif., said it had decided not to participate in the review for the Sega of America Inc. account, with billings estimated at $65 million.
Seven other agencies, including the incumbent shops, Bozell Inc., Los Angeles, and Della Femina, McNamee Inc., Los Angeles, were also invited to participate.
A decision is expected by July.


Stanley Works reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


Bridge
Ask any knowledgeable follower of the game to name the player with the biggest collection of master points and he would probably come up with the name of Paul Soloway of Mill Creek, Wash., who last year brought his total to more than 35,000.
Soloway and his closest rivals are all professionals, mostly from California and Texas, who follow the tournament circuit year in, year out.
But a request for the name of the top player in New York City, or on the East Coast, is likely to produce some head-scratching.
The answer in both categories is Jim Becker, proprietor of the thriving Beverly Club in Manhattan.
He was the top master-point winner last year and now has more than 17,000, putting him ahead of Kerri Shuman of Manhattan, who was in California for most of her tournament life, and Steve Robinson of Arlington, Va.


Marshall Moran, Nepal Priest, 85
The Rev.
Marshall Moran, an American-born priest regarded as the pioneer of modern education in Nepal, has died at the age of 85, his school announced today.
Father Moran, a Jesuit who spent more than 40 years in the Himalayan Hindu kingdom, died in a New Delhi hospital on Tuesday night, several weeks after learning he had cancer, the school said.


Bard (C.R.) (N) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Petrol Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Parents Also Have to Learn About Guns; Rifle Group Program
To the Editor:
Contrary to James Brady's March 30 Op-Ed article, the Center to Prevent Handgun Violence (formerly the Coalition to Ban Handguns) is not the first organization to develop a school program to reduce gun injuries and deaths.
In 1988, with the help of education and child development specialists, the National Rifle Association of America developed a firearms safety awareness program, the Eddie Eagle elementary gun safety education program.
This program has been used in more than 2,400 schools, educating more than 3 million American children.
Moreover, the association provides all materials free to schools and police departments.
As a retired member of the Lynbrook, L.I., Police Department, I can attest to the program's value.
In New York, it has been used in more than 90 schools and 24 police departments, educating more than 63,700 students.


SouthTrust Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Cooker Restaurant Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 29


Southwestern Bell Acts on Account
The Southwestern Bell Corporation in St.
Louis said yesterday that it would consolidate media buying at D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles in St.
Louis, following a review that began with 11 other agencies and media-buying services.
D.M.B.&amp; B. also handles the telecommunications firm's advertising account.


Abroad at Home; Straight and Narrow
One of Dwight Eisenhower's most important contributions as President was his choice of Federal judges in the South.
His nominees played a crucial part in leading the region away from segregation and lawlessness.
On the Court of Appeals there were Judges John Minor Wisdom of Louisiana and Elbert P. Tuttle of Georgia among others.
On the District Court there was, notably, Judge Frank M. Johnson Jr. of Alabama, later promoted to the Court of Appeals.
He was widely admired for his courage -- he faced down threats -- and for his broad-gauged legal wisdom.


Valley National Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


American Telephone &amp; Telegraph Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Helmsley Surrenders At Prison
Leona Helmsley, the self-styled queen of the Helmsley hotel empire, became prisoner No. 15113-054 today shortly after she flew overnight from New York in her private jet and surrendered at the Federal Medical Center here to begin her four-year sentence for income tax fraud.
Mrs.
Helmsley arrived at the center's main entrance door at 4:15 A.M. -- the building is surrounded by herds of cattle and tobacco farms on one side and the rolling hillsides of a city park on the other -- after being driven 80 miles from Standiford Airport in Louisville, where she had landed in an apparent attempt to avoid television crews waiting for her at Bluegrass Airport in Lexington, which is only five miles from the prison.


Ethyl Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


GROWING
I ADMIRE the gumption of the common dandelion, getting nuked every spring with weedkillers like 2, 4-D that give dogs cancer if they roll around too much on the lawn.
Dandelions do not get cancer.
They come right back up, as soon as you turn around.
Maybe that's why they make us nervous, these fuzzy little yellow flowers with the green leaves that sell for a fortune every spring in the fancy markets.
We trust a dandelion that is wrapped in plastic and costs a lot of money.
But if it is growing wild and free outside the door, it awakens suspicion.


Cincinnati Gas &amp; Electric reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Sports of The Times; Coleman's Sulking Dims Nets' Glow
THE Nets should be smiling, aglow with pride in escaping from their treadmill to oblivion.
If the Nets conquer the Indiana Pacers here tonight for their third consecutive victory and the eighth in their last 10 games, they will be closer to receiving an invitation to the National Basketball Association's playoff party for the first time since 1986.


Cards' Smith Is Out
St.
Louis Cardinals pitcher BRYN SMITH is expected to miss at least two months after underdoing arthroscopic surgery on his right elbow.
Cardinals physician Dr.
STAN LONDON said yesterday that the surgery, performed Tuesday in Los Angeles, involved the removal of fragments and general cleaning of the elbow.


Taiwan Official Resigns In Debate on McDonnell
The chairman of the Taiwan Aerospace Corporation has resigned in the midst of a debate within the Taiwan Government over whether to proceed with a deal to acquire 40 percent of the McDonnell Douglas Corporation's commercial aircraft business, industry executives said today.
The chairman, David Huang, was one of the architects of the proposed deal between Taiwan Aerospace, which is partly financed by the Taiwan Government, and McDonnell Douglas.
His departure raised new questions about whether the transaction, which has already encountered political resistance in both the United States and Taiwan, will be completed.


Henry Hurwitz, 73; Research Physicist Developed Reactors
Henry Hurwitz Jr., a research physicist who worked on plans for the hydrogen bomb and later helped develop nuclear power plants, died on Tuesday at his home in Schenectady, N.Y.
He was 73 years old.
He died of cancer, his family said.
Dr.
Hurwitz worked on the bomb at the Los Alamos National Laboratory in New Mexico from 1943 to 1946, then helped design power plants and set safety standards that were adopted worldwide.
Fortune magazine in 1954 called him "probably the most brilliant student of nuclear reactor theory in industry."


United Way Group Severs Tie
The United Way of Greater Milwaukee has severed all ties with United Way of America, saying an entirely new national organization must be created in the wake of allegations of lavish spending and financial manipulation against former top officials.
The Milwaukee chapter, which raised $26 million in 1991, is the largest to break with United Way of America, the national organization said.
Of 2,100 affiliates around the nation, only two others -- in Kalamazoo, Mich., and Warren County, Ohio -- have voted to cut ties.


Nijinsky II Destroyed at Claiborne Farm
Nijinsky II, the last horse to win the English Triple Crown and one of thoroughbred racing's brilliant stallions, was destroyed today at Claiborne Farm.
The 25-year son of Northern Dancer, out of the mare Flaming Page, had been troubled with chronic leg problems.
Walter Kaufmann, a veterinarian, had Nijinsky II destroyed after the horse experienced discomfort the last few days.


Peru's Chief: Every Bit the Emperor
Alberto K. Fujimori, Peru's pragmatic and business-suited President, has lived up to his flashy street nickname, the Emperor.
Four months ago, the President shrugged off the crown, telling a Peruvian business conference, "Even though it might be convenient if there were an emperor, that emperor won't be me, because I'm very respectful of the Constitution."


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Republicans; Quayle's Damage-Control Squad Rebuts Accuser on a Talk Show
Listeners had no way of knowing that White House damage controllers were at work early this week when a man identifying himself only as Dave called a San Antonio radio talk show to berate the guest.
Dave called the "Carl Wiglesworth Show" on WOAI-AM on Monday afternoon to interrogate the guest, Brett Kimberlin, a Federal convict who has made a jailhouse hobby out of his unsubstantiated assertion that he sold marijuana and Quaaludes to Dan Quayle in the 1970's.


First Fidelity Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


New Campaigns
*
A &amp; W Brands Inc., White Plains, is extending its "Unexpected Spokespersons" campaign with additional television commercials by Della Femina, McNamee Inc., New York, that feature characters from other products' ads.
One presents the Fruit of the Loom Gang, while another presents the actor David Leisure, who portrayed "Joe Isuzu" in Isuzu campaigns. *
In an effort to promote hassle-free infant clothing, Health-tex is introducing a humorous print campaign that asserts its apparel can ease the pain of parenthood.
One ad, created by the Martin Agency, Richmond, carries the headline "Babies tormented by their clothes. On the next Oprah."


CIT Group Holdings reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


CHRONICLE
Removing the name Union of Soviet Socialist Republics from an entire country is one thing, but erasing it from a beauty pageant is quite another.
So YULIYA YETINA, a 17-year-old student at the University of St.
Petersburg, arrived in New York this week wearing the crown of Miss U.S.S.R., which she had won in March.
What nation was she in fact representing?
Marketing officials who are traveling around the country with her, trying to line up sponsors, were hard pressed to answer.
"Hmmm," one of them said.
"She represents the Soviet Union, though it's probably now the Commonwealth of Independent States."


Board of Trade Back at Work
Futures and options trading resumed at the Chicago Board of Trade yesterday on a shortened schedule that will continue today.
Trading in all contracts opened at noon and closed at 2 P.M., central time, and the tables on page D20 reflect the shortened schedule.
Activity resumed after a two day suspension caused by flooding that forced much of downtown Chicago to turn off electrical power.
The Chicago Mercantile Exchange resumed normal trading in all contracts.


Apple Computer reports earnings for Qtr to March 27


Industrial Output Gains Second Straight Month
Aided by a weather-induced surge in demand for electric and gas, industrial output rose two-tenths of 1 percent in March, producing the first back-to-back advance since last summer, the Federal Reserve reported today.
The rise, which closely matched predictions, was seen by economists as further evidence of a modest economic recovery even though last month's gain was less vigorous than February's five-tenths of 1 percent.


Review/Dance; Not-So-Typical Views Of Sexuality in Motion
Sometimes he hits it and sometimes he doesn't.
The second program by the Mark Morris Dance Group is nowhere near as substantial, nowhere near as good as the one that opened the company's current season at the Manhattan Center, 311 West 34th Street.
Tuesday night's bill of Morris choreography included three pieces set to popular music and a New York premiere, "Behemoth," set to no music at all.
The wider range found elsewhere in Mr.
Morris's work was reduced here to two prime aspects: raunchy humor, now somewhat eroded, and formal structures, in which planes of movement are more important than steps.


Overdrafts and Overkill; Capitol Punishment for the House Bank?
The overblown House bank scandal has already driven valuable public servants from Congress, with scores more likely to leave.
In one poll, an astonishing two-thirds of the respondents say they are inclined to vote against any member who bounced as few as 10 checks, and if there were many such checks, to favor
prosecution.
Such overheated reactions can only reflect vast ignorance of what this "scandal" really amounts to.
If there was ever a time for the public to work hard to be fair, today is the day.
The House ethics committee will publish the list of more than 300 members who wrote at least one overdraft check on their House Bank accounts.


McGraw-Hill Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Pilana Journal; Village Life in India Is Invaded by Big City Tastes
Already the fields of wheat enveloping this jumble of low brick-and-mud houses are well past waist high, undulating waves of green-gold that lap into the distance, a gentle barrier fencing Pilana off from other villages and from distant towns and cities.
Small boys whack the flanks of water buffaloes as they head toward the fields.
A village crier, thumping a drum slung from his shoulder, pads down brick alleyways shouting news of a village meeting, and a few elders sip sweet tea in a small stall.
As they have for generations, the rhythms of village life hew to the commands of the wheat fields.


Protester at Reagan Speech Had Press Credentials
The anti-nuclear protester who jostled former President Ronald Reagan at a luncheon speech in Las Vegas on Monday had press credentials, a circumstance now leading the Secret Service to consider tightening its restrictions on journalists who cover Presidents, Vice Presidents and Presidential candidates.
The man, Richard Paul Springer, 41 years old, was accredited as a photographer for Indian Voices, a Las Vegas publication, said Lynn McReynolds, vice president of media relations for the National Association of Broadcasters, which sponsored the event.


Prosecutors Depict Vast Fraud Scheme By L.I. Car Dealer
A Long Island car dealer borrowed $1.75 billion from General Motors last year to finance tens of thousands of cars that did not exist, Federal prosecutors said yesterday.
They charged the dealer with fraud in what one prosecutor called "the mother of all kiting schemes."
In a civil suit two weeks ago, the General Motors Acceptance Corporation accused the dealer, John McNamara, of defrauding the company of more than $400 million.
But the staggering scope of the accusations became clearer yesterday when Federal prosecutors in Brooklyn charged Mr.
McNamara with mail fraud, wire fraud and money laundering.


Winnie Mandela Resigns a Post
Winnie Mandela resigned under pressure today from her influential post as head of social welfare in the African National Congress.
The move came two days after the announcement of her formal separation from her husband, Nelson Mandela, the congress president.
"I have taken this step because I consider it to be in the best interest of the A.N.C., whose cause and policies I will support until the end of my life," Mrs.
Mandela said.


Devils Need Inspiration, But Get Rangers Instead
Two nights after playing one of their most inspired games of the season, the Devils tonight closed out their regular season with one of their most uninspired efforts in a 7-0 loss to the Islanders at Nassau Coliseum.
Next: the Rangers in the first round of the National Hockey League playoffs.
On Monday night, the Devils dominated the Penguins in a 5-1 victory that put New Jersey in third place.
But with Pittsburgh's victory over the Capitals tonight, the Devils finished fourth in the Patrick Division, which means they will open the playoffs against the Rangers at Madison Square Garden Sunday night.
Pittsburgh, which clinched third place tonight, will play Washington in the other divisional matchup.


Corrections
A report in the Currents column of The Home Section on April 9 about a dollhouse that looks like a New York loft building misidentified Kevin Walz, one of its designers.
He is a principal of Walz Design, not an architect.


Presidential Realty reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Pacific Telesis Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
Acme Electric Corp., East Aurora, N.Y., appointed Dan Corwin chief financial officer and vice president for administration. *
Chase Manhattan Bank N.A., New York, named John P. Mellor, human resources executive for regional banking, to the additional post of senior vice president.


Reebok International reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


AT HOME WITH: John Epperson; A Day in the Life Of Lypsinka's Maid
JOHN EPPERSON has a new rug. He's
funny
about it, his press agent says.
So, would you be good enough to humor him and remove your shoes at the door?
Sure.
As you pad into Mr.
Epperson's studio apartment in Manhattan in your socks, though, you notice that the new rug is not a rug, really, but a long, wide bolt of plush fabric imprinted with the markings of some chimera cat.
The shoeless interview begins.


James Brennand, Bassist, 69
James Brennand, a former principal bassist with the New York City Opera Orchestra and a member of the New York City Ballet Orchestra, died on Saturday at Benedictine Hospital in Kingston, N.Y.
He was 69 years old and lived in Shady, N.Y.
He died of an aneurysm, said Susan Woelzl, director of publicity for the New York City Opera.


Illegal Immigrants Redefine Underclass
To the Editor:
For years, the United States, and New York City in particular, have been struggling with the problem of the underclass.
There have been endless plans and programs to raise the living standards of our poorest citizens.
Most have failed.
In "Crammed in Tiny, Illegal Rooms, Tenants of the Margins of Survival" (news article, March 23), we see evidence that we may have hit on a solution that works: Create a new, even more impoverished and hopeless underclass that makes the old one seem not so bad by comparison.
Compared with living in an unventilated, windowless electrical closet, a run-down cold-water flat in the Bronx doesn't seem so terrible.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Courier Looks Strong  Jim Courier looked every bit the top-ranked player in the world as he breezed past Martin Damm of Czechoslovakia, 6-2, 6-1, yesterday in the second round of the Salem Open in Hong Kong.
Courier, celebrating his return to the head of the ranking, needed only 64 minutes to dispose of Damm and move into the quarterfinals, where he will meet a South African, Gary Muller, tomorrow. (AP) 14-Year-Old Is Winner: Iva Majoli of Croatia, a 14-year-old rookie pro ranked 537th in the world, upset fifth-seeded Lori McNeil, 6-3, 6-3, yesterday in the Virginia Slims tennis tournament in Houston.
Majoli was given a wild-card entry into the tournament, her first appearance on the Virginia Slims tour.
Majoli broke McNeil, the world's 24th-ranked player, in the sixth game to take charge of the match.
Leading by 5-3 in the second set, Majoli also broke McNeil, who was playing in front of her hometown fans, in the final game. (AP) SOCCER  Barcelona Back in Final  Barcelona and Sampdoria of Genoa advanced to the European Champions Cup final last night and will play for the championship on May 20 at Wembley Stadium outside London.
Sampdoria, which won its first Italian League title last May, tied Panathinaikos of Athens, 1-1, while Barcelona beat Benfica of Lisbon, 2-1.
It is the third European Champions Cup final for Barcelona.
Werder Bremen of Germany and AS Monaco advanced to the Cup Winners Cup final in Lisbon, while Ajax Amsterdam and Turin advanced to the home-and-home final of the U.E.F.A.
Cup. (AP)


Yankees, Mets Tie in Ratings
In their first head-to-head confrontation on local over-the-air television this season, the Mets on WWOR-TV and the Yankees on WPIX-TV drew even Tuesday night with Nielsen ratings of 5.6.


Steinbrenner Works Out Deal With Kleinman
The Yankee partners are scheduled to meet in New York today amid reports that George Steinbrenner and Leonard Kleinman have reached a settlement of their dispute over Kleinman's lawsuit against Commissioner Fay Vincent and over the $1 million Kleinman contends the Yankees owe him.
A member of the partnership, who spoke on the condition that his name not be used, said yesterday that he had been told that the two sides had worked out an agreement under which Kleinman would receive the money, pay his lawyers and drop the lawsuit that stands in the way of a meeting Steinbrenner wants to have with Vincent about his possible return as head of the club's operation.


Morton International reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Drug Arrest of Postal Worker Shows That Trouble Can Touch Senate Too
A six-month undercover investigation at the Senate post office last year by the United States Capitol Police and the Federal Bureau of Investigation has resulted in drug charges against a Senate postal employee who sold crack to a narcotics officer at the Dirksen Senate office building.
In the annals of this city's booming cocaine trade, the case might scarcely rate a footnote, but it illustrates for the first time how the Senate, so far untouched by the recent wave of scandal over haphazardly managed institutions in the House of Representatives, is not immune from similar problems.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo; Shooting From the Lip, Retired 'Boy Wonder' Picks His Targets With Ease
Four years after fleeing Washington out of contempt for politics, Patrick H. Caddell, once the self-described "boy wonder of American politics," now jokes that he has "strapped my guns back on" like the fictional character Shane.
From his poolside chaise in the toney Brentwood section of Los Angeles, Mr.
Caddell takes aim at Gov.
Bill Clinton, the press and what he calls the sorry state of government.
But it is not clear which Presidential contender Mr.
Caddell is fighting for.


U.S. WARNS SERBIA IT FACES REPRISALS
The United States warned the Serbian-led Government of Yugoslavia today that unless it stopped its assault on the republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina and withdrew its forces in the next 14 days, Washington would press for Belgrade's suspension from a major international organization.
The warning, delivered at a meeting in Helsinki of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe, was accompanied by a series of urgent telephone calls to European foreign ministers by Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d, who is seeking a consensus on concerted international action to curb aggression by Serbia and the the Serb-dominated Yugoslav Army.
Consulting Allies
It said the United States would consult with allies about suspending "the Serbian delegation at the C.S.C.E.," and set as a deadline April 29, the next scheduled meeting of the 48-member body.
The conference was created 17 years ago in Finland.


Continental Air Gets Extension
A Federal judge gave Continental Airlines nine more weeks to file a plan detailing how creditors will be paid under its bankruptcy reorganization.
Zack Clement, the airline's lawyer, said the extension was warranted because of the complexity of the case and industry itself.
Federal Bankruptcy Court Judge Helen T. Balick said the airline should detail its plans for a hearing on May 12.
The hearing was set for June 22.


On One Side of Gun Control, She Puts Connecticut on the Other
THE State of Connecticut, through its public investment in the Colt's Manufacturing Company, has become a major, if perhaps unwitting, force in the effort to overturn or undermine restrictions on assault weapons across the nation, a leading gun-control advocate contended yesterday.
The advocate, Sarah Brady, who heads Handgun Control, the Washington-based lobby group, said here at a news conference that by almost any measure it was possible to conclude that a "pro-assault weapons policy" is the official view of the state, which owns 47 percent of Colt's stock through the state employee pension fund.


First Bank System Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


3 of 5 Youths Admit Plotting To Kill Friend
Three teen-agers pleaded guilty today to murder in the ritualistic strangulation of a friend, and agreed under a plea bargain to testify against two other suspects in the slaying.
The parents of the 17-year-old victim, Robert A. Solimine, complained bitterly during a hearing in Family Court and in a later interview that the plea agreement was too lenient.


Pop and Jazz in Review
The Winans Family  Beacon Theater
It wasn't until Marvin Winans started preaching at the end of a three-hour show on Saturday night that all the various elements of the Winans Family tour came together.
Telling the audience that leaving material things behind is the key to being close to God, and surrounded by the other nine members of his family, Mr.
Winans gave the audience what it was seeking: a dose of church.
When the show ended, with a hymn that had the audience singing along in frighteningly accurate pitch, the family finally merged entertainment and religious fervor.


Finding the Center in a Rightward Drift; 'You Gotta Believe'
To the Editor:
Gov.
Bill Clinton has offended a constituency no one can afford to ignore -- New York Mets fans.
In his New York primary victory speech, Governor Clinton adopted what he said was the slogan of the 1969 world champion New York Mets -- "You Gotta Believe." Wrong.
Real New Yorkers, not to mention Tug McGraw, know that "You Gotta Believe" were the watchwords of the Mets of 1973.


Scripps (E.W.) (N) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Tokyo Stocks Steady
Japanese stocks showed little change today after recovering from some earlier losses.
The Nikkei index of 225 issues moved above the 18,000-point level and then retreated.
Brokers said bargain-hunting helped to firm up prices.
At the close, the Nikkei was up 11.75 points, to 17,959.76.
It gained 508.43 points on Wednesday.
About 380 million shares were traded.


Ford to Take 50% Share in Mazda Plant
The Ford Motor Company agreed in principle today to buy a 50 percent interest in the Mazda Motor Corporation assembly plant in Flat Rock, Mich.
The move would draw the two auto makers closer in their worldwide affiliation.
Mazda, which is 25 percent owned by Ford, started production at the plant in 1987, building its own MX-6 model and its twin, the Ford Probe.
Mazda later added another model, the 626, but the factory has not operated near its capacity of 240,000 vehicles annually.


Incumbents Outpace Rivals in Raising Campaign Funds
Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato reported today that he added almost $1.1 million to his bulging political war chest in the first quarter of the year and for the first time had raised more money in a three-month period than any of the four Democrats seeking their party's nomination to oppose him.
In another sign of the huge financial advantage provided by incumbency, Senator Christopher J. Dodd, the two-term Democrat from Connecticut, reported raising three times as much as either of his challengers in the first quarter of this year.
He has almost 30 times as much cash on hand as the leading Republican.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
California Pollution Control Finance Authority is offering $35 million in tax-exempt pollution-control revenue bonds due 2009 through underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs.
The bond has a 6.625 percent coupon and is priced at 99.375 to yield about 6.686 percent.
However, for some investors this debt issue may be subject to the alternative minimum tax.


Caterpillar Workers' Shock: Jobs Aren't Ready for Them
Although Caterpillar Inc. agreed Tuesday night to take back the workers who have been on strike for five months, it did not say when it would do so.
So Jerry Dolan and thousands of other employees who showed up at their plants early today, hoping to put the bitterness behind them, met one more rude surprise.
Foremen told Mr.
Dolan and all other strikers: Go home and wait to be summoned to return.


Rohm &amp; Haas Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Republic New York Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Legality of CUNY Plan On Tuitions Is Questioned
In a sign that the City University of New York's proposed two-tier tuition plan may face tough political opposition, the chairman of the Assembly's Higher Education Committee yesterday questioned whether the plan was legal.
"I'm willing to see what CUNY has to say about it, but on the surface, my reading of the state's education law tells me this is illegal," said Assemblyman Edward C. Sullivan, a Democrat of Manhattan.


Parking Rules
Because of Good Friday and the first day of Passover, alternate-side parking rules will be suspended in New York City tomorrow and Saturday.
Other regulations remain in effect.


Hallador Petroleum Co.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Millipore Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Maple Leafs Get a Final Hurrah
"Oil me," the Rangers creaked tonight.
But nobody did.
The rust would not come loose at Maple Leaf Gardens, where last-place Toronto easily beat the Stanley Cup favorites, 4-2.
In their post-strike debut, their first game in 18 days, the elegant Rangers were simply a bunch of working stiffs.


Hannaford Bros.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


Oce-van der Grinten nv reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Nicholas Edwards, 42, Designer and Painter
Nicholas Edwards, a designer who specialized in murals, died on Thursday in his home in Manhattan.
He was 42 years old.
Mr.
Edwards died of complications from AIDS, said Louise Crandell, his business partner.


47th Street Photo Overcomes a Hurdle
A major creditor of 47th Street Photo Inc. yesterday withdrew its request for a court-ordered liquidation of the retailer, which is under bankruptcy protection.
A lawyer for 47th Street Photo said the withdrawal of the request, made on April 1 by the Transamerica Commercial Finance Corporation, made it likely that the Manhattan-based retailer would emerge from bankruptcy by the end of the year.


Governor of California Denies Killer Clemency
Gov.
Pete Wilson today denied clemency for Robert Alton Harris, a condemned killer who is scheduled on Tuesday to become the first person to be executed in California in 25 years.
Mr.
Harris's only hope for a reprieve now rests with the possibility of court appeals, although he would appear to have exhausted them.
Several weeks ago the Supreme Court declined to review his case.
At a clemency hearing on Wednesday, the Governor, a Republican who supports the death penalty, heard tearful pleas alternately depicting the 39-year-old Mr.
Harris as a tragic figure who should be spared and as a vicious killer who should die.


New York Philharmonic To Offer a Free Concert
The New York Philharmonic is to present a free Memorial Day performance of Benjamin Britten's "War Requiem" at 8 P.M. on May 25 at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine, 1047 Amsterdam Avenue, at 112th Street.
The concert is to be conducted by the orchestra's music director, Kurt Masur, and its assistant conductor, Samuel Wong.
The performance is part of a continuing community outreach effort initiated by Mr.
Masur when he became music director in September.


BELGRADE PRESSED ON TRUCE BY VANCE
Serbian irregulars backed by Yugoslav Army tanks and infantry routed the last pockets of local Muslim-Slav resistance in the Bosnian town of Visegrad today.
This evening, the United Nations special envoy, Cyrus R. Vance, left here for Belgrade to press the army's top general to abide by a cease-fire, republic officials said.
They said Mr.
Vance would take part in a second round of discussions in two days with Yugoslavia's Acting Defense Minister, Gen.
Blagoje Adzic.


Waste Management Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Microsoft Profits Up 44.4% On Sales to Manufacturers
The Microsoft Corporation today reported increased revenues and earnings for its third fiscal quarter, which ended March 31.
It attributed the gains to strong sales through so-called original equipment manufacturers, or O.E.M.'s, which resell its software with their hardware products.
For the quarter, Microsoft had earnings of $178.8 million, or 90 cents a share, up 44.4 percent from $123.8 million, or 65 cents a share, in the comparable period a year ago.


Review/Film; Appetites as Gigantic as His Talent
"You know, you can't put everything in a story, so I left out a few things," Babe Ruth reportedly said about his 1948 autobiography.
"Maybe there should have been two books, one for kids and one for adults."
The new film about Ruth, "The Babe," has no room for separate versions.
But it recounts a childlike success story at a time when adult-minded disclosures are sometimes thought to represent a deeper truth.
So this film does its best to bolster the mythic Ruth naivete, even going so far as to dress John Goodman as an oversize child for the title role and show him marveling at modern inventions (circa 1920) like the elevator.
At the same time, the film also acknowledges the kinds of recreational habits that would easily have kept Babe Ruth out of public office had he lived today.


Rights Now Go to State Courts for Protection
To the Editor:
"New York Court Voids Searches Allowed by U.S." (front page, April 3), on two search and seizure decisions of the Court of Appeals, this state's highest court, has implications for the controversy on whether or not to limit Federal habeas corpus review of state decisions.
The New York rulings were not isolated examples of rights expansion.
They are part of a regular practice among state courts to broaden rights by interpreting state constitutional provisions more liberally than the Supreme Court has construed their Federal equivalents.


Southwestern Bell Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Owners of Assault Guns Slow to Obey Law
On the eve of the deadline for New York City residents to sell or relinquish their assault rifles or else move them out of the city, almost two-thirds of those guns are still unaccounted for, whether out of their owners' ignorance, procrastination or outright defiance of the law.
Hailed by city officials as one of the strongest laws of its type in the country, the ban is being carefully watched by gun control advocates and opponents nationwide, who view New York as a major battleground in the debate over how to regulate the powerful weapons available.


Champion International reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Stone &amp; Webster reports earnings for Revenue


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: White House; Bush Proposes Expansion Of Student Loan Program
Responding to election-year criticism of his record as the self-proclaimed Education President, President Bush today proposed expanding the Federal student loan program to include everyone who wanted to take classes, even part time and to giving anyone up to $25,000 in loans at rates that would vary with income.
The White House presented Mr.
Bush's proposal as a major new initiative, but it seemed motivated as much by politics as by policy, as Mr.
Bush moves closer to the possibility of a campaign against Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas.
Mr.
Clinton, who has made universal access to Government loans for education a centerpiece of his campaign, immediately criticized Mr.
Bush's proposals.


A Cold-War Couple With a Couple of Peculiarities
Youngsters familiar with Saturday-morning television know there is hardly a live-action film that can't be turned into a cartoon: "Beetlejuice," "Bill and Ted's Excellent Adventure," "Back to the Future" and the like.
But presumably to include older audiences, the process can be reversed.
We've had the movies "Superman" and "Batman." Now there's "Boris and Natasha," a movie having its premiere on Showtime at 8 tonight.
The title characters here, played by Dave Thomas ("S.C.T.V.") and Sally Kellerman ("M*A*S*H") with appropriate Eastern European-sounding accents, were originally created for a television cartoon.
Fair's fair.
"Boris and Natasha" was made in 1990 but kept from theatrical release, perhaps because someone decided there were not enough ticket buyers willing to see a movie based on characters from an animated series of the early 1960's.
But then, a year or so ago, Jay Ward's "Bullwinkle Show," starring Bullwinkle J. Moose and Rocket J. Squirrel, was released on videocassettes, and a cult classic was back in circulation.
Boris Badenov and Natasha Fatale, woefully inept cold war spies from Pottsylvania, were regular characters on the series.
Evidently, Showtime was the first to have second thoughts about that movie on the shelf.


More Questions on Iran for Reagan Officials
Iran-contra prosecutors have interviewed George P. Shultz, the former Secretary of State, and Caspar W. Weinberger, the former Defense Secretary, lawyers for the two Reagan Cabinet members said today.
The purpose of the inquiry and the roles of how the two former officials in it remains unclear, but prosecutors in the office of Lawrence E. Walsh, the independent counsel, have met in recent months with several senior Pentagon and State Department officials from the Reagan era.


The Art Market
Authenticity Challenged
In November, at Sotheby's sale of Impressionist and modern paintings in New York, 17 works with an estimated total value in excess of $14.5 million by such renowned artists as Cezanne, Sisley, Pissarro and Monet were being sold by Arnold Gumowitz, a New York developer.
High reserves -- the price below which the consigner will not sell a work -- prevented all but five of these paintings from finding buyers.


Borden Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


PPG Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Bergdorf Goodman to Gain Macy's Top Arbiter of Style
Ellin Saltzman, who has steered some of the nation's best-known stores safely across the fickle shoals of fashion, will leave R. H. Macy &amp; Company on April 27 to become senior vice president and fashion director at Bergdorf Goodman.
Her departure is the fourth defection of a top Macy executive since the company filed for bankruptcy protection in January, but Mrs.
Saltzman said Macy's financial straits had nothing to do with her decision to move to Bergdorf.


At the Movies
After Clarice
In her first choice of a role since winning the Academy Award as best actress last month for her portrayal of the novice F.B.I. agent in "The Silence of the Lambs," Jodie Foster has decided to portray another actress: Jean Seberg.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The U.S. merchandise trade deficit narrowed sharply to $3.38 billion in February, with exports reaching a record and imports falling slightly.
The deficit, smaller than most economists expected, gladdened Administration officials.  [ Page D1. ]
New jobless claims fell in the latest week to a five-month low, suggesting that the recovery is inching forward.  [ D2. ]


Toreadors, Conquistadors and the Church
On Sunday, at 10 P.M., the Discovery Channel begins "The Buried Mirror: Reflections on Spain and the New World," a five-part series on Latin American history, as seen by Carlos Fuentes.
The opening episode, "The Virgin and the Bull," has the distinguished Mexican writer traveling across Spain in search of the heritage the conquistadors brought to the New World.
It was, he emphasizes, a rich and complex one, alive with Iberian, Roman, Christian, Muslim and Jewish influences.
At a bullring, where he is seen, along with other aficionados, waving a handkerchief in tribute to a victorious matador, he finds a national fascination with courage and death as well as with sex, evidenced by the matador's tight-fitting pants and pelvic display.
At one candlelight procession during Holy Week in Seville -- "a wonderful night of silver and gold" -- he finds "sexual turbulence clad in spiritual urgings."


Beverly Enterprises Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Reliance Electric reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Art in Review
John Torreano  Hypo-Bank 32 Old Slip (near Front Street) Lower Manhattan Through May 31
John Torreano's work has taken its share of critical knocks over the years.
His paintings, with faceted glass gems imbedded in their surfaces, seemed outrageously decorative even in the 1970's, after the Pattern and Decorative Movement opened the way for the use of glitzy low-art materials.
He has remained true to these components ever since.


Merchants National Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Transit Officials to Cut Subway Rush-Hour Service on 9 Lines
For the first time in more than a decade, transit officials are planning to reduce rush-hour service on a broad swath of New York City's subway lines because of sharply declining ridership.
A total of 43 trains on 9 lines will be eliminated during the Manhattan-bound morning and outbound evening rush hours, transit officials said yesterday.
Thirteen additional trains will be dropped from other routes or at other times.


Old Kent Financial Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


A Creative Tuition Increase
Budget cuts imposed by the Legislature make tuition increases at New York's public universities inevitable.
But rather than jolt all students equally, the City University of New York is planning something ingenious: a staggered increase that would go easy on current students and hit incoming freshmen hardest.
The blow to freshmen would be softened with the promise that their last semester before graduation would be tuition-free, an incentive to complete their studies.
The new state budget requires CUNY to cut $40 million and raise $52 million more through tuition and fees.
The new revenues could be generated by requiring each student to pay an additional $500 each year.
But that would constitute a 53 percent increase in tuition since September 1990, and might spark student demonstrations like those that shut down some of the university's 21 campuses after two previous tuition hikes.


Art in Review
Alison Saar  Whitney Museum of American Art at Philip Morris Park Avenue at 42d Street Through tomorrow
The kind of symbol-driven figurative installation work that Alison Saar specializes in is hard to bring off.
It can easily end up feeling either vaguely phrased or heavy-handed, and the artist doesn't entirely escape either extreme here.


Avon Products reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Seafirst Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Goulds Pumps reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


COMMITTEE NAMES ALL WHO OVERDREW AT THE HOUSE BANK
Climaxing months of political maneuvering and high anxiety in the halls of Congress, the House ethics committee today released the names of 247 current and 56 former members of Congress who overdrew their checking accounts at least once at the House bank.
Coming two weeks after the committee listed 22 members as having abused their accounts by writing frequent large overdrafts, the new list brings to 325 the number of present and former members involved in the affair.


Just Call It Russia Then? No, It's Not That Simple
On the 10th day of their tempestuous deliberations in the Kremlin, the 1,000 or so People's Deputies voted to return to their state its historic name, Rossiya, or Russia.
A standing ovation greeted the conclusion of an arduous debate over six proposed names ranging from Russian Federation (Russia) to Russia (Russian Federation).
The argument ranged from the semantic pedantic to fervent nationalist.
Settling finally on simply Russia, to cut short the arguments, the deputies rushed off to give snap interviews about the momentous event.


PNC Financial reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


On Stage, and Off
Never Too Late for New Ideas. Is It?
Glenn Close, Richard Dreyfuss and Gene Hackman are getting more of a theatrical workout than they bargained for when they signed on to Ariel Dorfman's "Death and the Maiden," directed by Mike Nichols.
After the show opened on March 17 to mixed reviews, Mr.
Nichols went to London and saw the West End production of the play starring Juliet Stevenson. (He had previously seen her in the Royal Court production.) When he returned, he announced he wanted to make some changes.
A company member says these included reducing the lighting to make the atmosphere of the show, about a former political prisoner who meets up with her torturer 15 years later, more suspenseful, as it is in London.
Also, Mr.
Nichols has given notes to the actors to eliminate some of the light comic tone that was criticized in a few reviews.
The company member calls the changes "drastic," and says that at Tuesday's performance, there were almost no laughs at all.


Ontario Joins Beer Dispute Between U.S. and Canada
Further escalating Canadian-American trade tensions, the Ontario government agency that monopolizes the sale of beer in Canada's most populous province announced a ban Wednesday night on American beer imports.
The surprise action, which was made without prior knowledge or approval of the federal authorities in Ottawa, came in response to an American threat to impose duties of up to $8 a case on beer imported from Canada, effective April 13.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt *
RJR Nabisco Holdings Corp., the parent of RJR Nabisco Inc., said its RJR Nabisco Capital Corp. unit would make its May 15 interest payment in cash on its 15 percent payment-in-kind subordinated debentures due in 2001.
The cash payment is part of the company's effort to reduce overall interest expense. *
Rykoff-Sexton Inc., a Los Angeles-based food company, has privately placed $100 million in 8.6 percent senior notes due in 2002 with a group of insurers.
Common Stock *
American Pacific Corp., Las Vegas, Nev., is offering 1.7 million common shares, up from a planned 1.5 million, at $30.50 each through Dean Witter Reynolds Inc. *
Bed Bath and Beyond Inc., Springfield, N.J., has filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for an initial public offering of 6.2 million common shares, with 5 million shares offered in the U.S. through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co. *
Big B Inc., Birmingham, Ala., a drugstore chain, has filed for a public offering of 2.2 million common shares through Prudential Securities Inc. *
Pharmaceutical Marketing Services Inc., Scottsdale, Ariz., has filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for a public offering of 1.6 million common shares through Lehman Brothers Inc. *
Republic Bancorp Inc., Ann Arbor, Mich., a bank holding company, is offering 1.2 million common shares at $7.25 each through Keefe, Bruyette &amp; Woods Inc.


Victory in Noriega Case Stunned Even Prosecutors
After a jury in Dade County convicted Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega of cocaine trafficking, racketeering and money laundering charges here last week, the lead prosecutor in the case, Michael P. Sullivan, found himself at a loss for words.
Standing on the steps of the Federal Courthouse, he could only express his "surprise" and "relief" at the verdict before walking away with a dazed look on his face.
"I just never expected a slam dunk verdict, and that's virtually what it was," Mr.
Sullivan said in an interview this week, after he and the other prosecutors, Myles Malman and Guy Lewis, had recovered their equilibrium.


Video Review Calls It Quits
Video Review, a monthly magazine about video equipment and software, is ceasing publication.
"Video Review is in a stagnant marketplace, and I do not see a real opportunity for growth," said Richard Ekstract, the president and publisher, who founded the magazine 12 years ago.
"Nothing lasts forever."


U.S. Urges Afghan Factions To Avoid Violent Anarchy
The United States called on all factions in the Afghanistan war today to cooperate with the United Nations in a peaceful transition of power, arguing that otherwise the country could slip into violent anarchy after President Najibullah's fall from power.
But behind the scenes, American officials acknowledge that the United States has very few interests at stake in Afghanistan, now that the cold war is over and the former Soviet Union no longer has a military presence in the country near the oil-producing Persian Gulf.


Review/Music; With Avant-Garde Polemics, A Self-Referential Video
The rise of video and performance art over the last two decades has been nurtured by the Kitchen, which on Wednesday night gave a benefit concert that consisted of examples of these expressive forms.
The Kitchen, which is celebrating its 20th anniversary, has been one of the centers for what was once called the avant-garde.
Of course, the notion of the avant-garde is somewhat passe since esthetic and political opposition have become commonplace sentiments.
But the polemical spirit remains, and in video and performance art it regains some attraction and novelty through the use of electronic media.
Television and video, commercial advertising techniques and electronic processing of sound become the objects of attention as well as the methods for expression, the message as well as the medium.
Thus, in a rather sardonic video piece, "Made for TV," Tom Rubnitz created a television video about television.
Punctuated by the static of purported channel hopping, it is a 15-minute portrait of pop American culture.
As the screen flickers from channel to channel, the actress Ann Magnuson appears as a teary television missionary appealing for money, as a newscaster with an almost plastic face, as a mad grotesque romping through a cemetery in a rock video and as a sincere drinker of great coffee.
Satire of television has become one of the staples of television humor; here the familiarly funny merged with a traditional avant-garde scorn for a culture that could have spawned such imagery.


Wilmington Trust Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Net at Sears Rises 35.7% In Quarter
Sears, Roebuck and Company yesterday reported a 35.7 percent jump in first-quarter earnings, as most of its businesses improved and retail operations continued to benefit from dramatic cost-cutting.
The gain was the second-largest increase in first-quarter profits in the company's 105-year history.


Reporter's Notebook; Chicago Refugees Look For Place to Call 'Office'
The soap operas are back on local television.
And there are lines at the banks and the Berghoff Cafe again.
But the flood waters that gushed into underground tunnels and office basements on Monday are still surging beneath the asphalt.
And across the city and even in the suburbs there are flood refugees, not wrapped in blankets or sleeping in armories, but doubled up in the hallways of somebody else's office so they can get their work done.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Independent; Perot Is Showing Clear Signs Of Joining Race for President
Ross Perot continues to portray himself as riding along on the public will, but there are increasing signs that he and his close associates are pushing his Presidential bandwagon toward the starting line.
The dozens of telephone volunteers and office workers who have been spread over two floors of an office building here will move next week to more spacious quarters nearby.
Mr.
Perot has leased the space through next January.


Bristol-Myers Squibb Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Injured Boy's Family Sues Bus Company in Field-Trip Crash That Killed 2 Students
The family of a 12-year-old boy seriously injured when a bus ran off the road in northern New York has filed a $5.5 million lawsuit against the bus company for inadequately checking the background of the driver.
Two other students were killed in the accident.
The driver, Dennis D. Ellis of Brooklyn, had been dismissed from two previous jobs for poor driving, and his driving record from the last six years includes several moving violations and accidents.


Lockheed Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Doggie Antics on Film
With school vacations under way and a flood of new kiddie-minded films on the market, the question of which children's films are worth seeing takes on particular urgency.
The winner this season is "Beethoven," a shaggy-dog story about a lovable St.
Bernard, and a sunny, enjoyable throwback to family films of the past.
Lacking only the Flubber of vintage Disney comedies, "Beethoven" features a cute pet, a squeaky-clean family and quaintly harmless notions of villainy.
A duplicitious vet (Dean Jones) is out to kidnap the huge, drooling Beethoven and use the dog in wicked experiments, so Beethoven's loyal owners eventually must rally to his rescue.
The rest of the time, this comedy concentrates on messy doggie antics and the endless pratfalls of a dog-hating Dad (played amusingly by Charles Grodin, a master of the slow burn).
Kids will enjoy all the uproar, and parents can count on a painless good time.





The Plight of Unlikely Altar Mates; Passover-Easter Weekend Strains Space-Sharing Schedules
During tough economic times, it is not just families and businesses that are doubling up in cramped quarters.
Houses of worship are, too, and in sharing space, they are stepping across religious, denominational and linguistic barriers in new ways.
Korean Methodists are meeting in Presbyterian church basements.
Lutherans are sharing space with Baptists.
In a few cases, even churches and synagogues are doubling up under one roof.


Corrections
The Economic Scene column in Business Day on Wednesday misidentified the company once headed by Michael Levine.
He was president of New York Air, an airline that served many cities from LaGuardia Airport before it went out of business, not of New York Airways, which provided helicopter service in the metropolitan area.


Foreign Affairs;
We face no serious military threats.
Our economy stagnates and our country crumbles.
And still our President and a Congressional majority commit us to spend nearly $1.5 trillion over the next five years on "defense."
The threats billboarded again by Defense Secretary Cheney yesterday seem mostly a mirage.


The House Bank: Trying to Halt a Scandal; Speaker Declares House Bank Case Closed But Political Reality Promises to Intrude
On a day of little Congressional good cheer, the most upbeat thought came from the House Speaker, Thomas S. Foley, who said the disclosure of 247 current and 56 former members who wrote dubious checks "brings to a close this whole matter of the House bank."
In a formal way, perhaps. But not politically.


International Multifoods Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Sports of The Times; St. John's Must Hire Noo Yawker
WE are hearing reports that some coaches are getting nervous about the St.
John's job.
Men originally from Noo Yawk named Kennedy and Cremins and Gillen and Nee have apparently been away too long, have perhaps even married Americans, and have gotten used to parking spaces at the mall and backyards for the kids, all of which are important, but are not everything.
When you come home to Noo Yawk, you should be enthusiastic.
Real crusty pizza.
The Mets and Yankees.
Jones Beach.
The city.
Noo Yawk is not for everybody.
We just got rid of Kevin McReynolds.
Shipped his sour Arkansas puss to Kansas City.
Whiner named Clinton came to Noo Yawk and we sicced our communal pit bull named Imus on him, made him sing like Elvis, show some humanity, before anybody would vote for him.


U.S. Surgical Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Tyco Toys Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Quotation of the Day
"Every compromise that was made to build this plant has come back to haunt the city and its residents. It will cost far more to fix them than it would have to do it right in the first place." -- ALBERT F. APPLETON, Commissioner of Environmental Protection, on the North River sewage plant.  [ A1:4 ]


Stanley H. Klein Dies; Housing Architect, 83
Stanley H. Klein, an architect who specialized in housing developments, died on Sunday at Long Island Jewish Hospital in New Hyde Park, L.I.
He was 83 years old and lived in Queens.
He died of a stroke, said his wife, Audrey.


The Other Election
The Mayor of Garfield, N.J., playing it safe, has voted twice on the Elvis stamp -- once for the younger Elvis, once for the older.
Bill Clinton, running for a higher office, sticks his neck out.
He prefers to remember Elvis young.
The gripping question both men confronted is, which Elvis should be on the Elvis Presley commemorative that's coming out next year?
The country of Tanzania has resolved the issue imaginatively -- and boosted its foreign exchange earnings -- by issuing
10
Elvis stamps.
The U.S.
Postal Service will issue only one.
But at least it is, for the first time ever, letting the public decide.


Art in Review
Carleton Watkins  Robert Miller Gallery 41 East 57th Street Through May 2
The photographs that Carleton Watkins (1829-1916) made of the Yosemite Valley in California in 1861 were of such startling beauty that he quickly became renowned for his views of the area.
Over the next two decades Watkins returned frequently to Yosemite, photographing its towering mountains, spectacular waterfalls and giant ponderosa pines with a camera that could produce glass-plate negatives up to 18 by 22 inches.
His pictures are credited with influencing Congress to order the preservation of Yosemite, leading ultimately to its establishment as a national park.


Sounds Around Town
Butch Morris Orchestra
Butch Morris, Village Vanguard, 178 Seventh Avenue South, near 11th Street, (212) 255-4037.
Leading an 11-piece orchestra, including a harp, a vibraphone and a few trombones, Mr.
Morris makes gauzy swells of sound.
He improvises with his band as well, and if an agitated section feels right, he'll keep it going, breaking it just when it's about to get tired.
Sets through Sunday are at 9:30 and 11:30, with a 1 A.M. show added tonight and tomorrow.
There is a $15 cover and a $7.50 minimum.
Two-Leader Band
Bobby Watson and Victor Lewis, Fat Tuesday's, 190 Third Avenue, at 17th Street, (212) 533-7902.
One of the best bands to arrive in the 1980's, Horizon, now led by the saxophonist Bobby Watson and the drummer Victor Lewis, features Mr.
Watson's idiosyncratic writing: part emotional, part tough.
Mr.
Lewis is one of the hardest-swinging drummers in jazz, just the person to prod Mr.
Watson, who has become one of jazz's more thoughtful improvisers.
Shows through Sunday are at 8 and 10, with a midnight show added tonight and tomorrow.
The cover is $12.50 and the minimum is $7.50.


Deane Keller, Painter And Art Teacher, 91
Deane Keller, a portrait painter and former professor of art at Yale University, died on Sunday at the Whitney Center, a medical unit in Hamden, Conn.
He was 90 years old and lived in Hamden.
He died of pneumonia and complications from hypertension, said his son, Deane G. Keller.


Racial Barriers Hard to Breach In Fire Dept.
Since its incorporation in 1865, the New York City Fire Department has nurtured a tradition-bound and exclusionary culture -- where men, almost all of them white, live together in cramped quarters, where they work as a team under adverse conditions, where father hands the job down to son as an artisan passes along a craft.
And even as the police and other municipal bureaucracies have made measured progress toward diversifying their ranks, the Fire Department has stubbornly resisted changing with the city around it.
The few minorities and even fewer women who have broken in say they still find themselves isolated in their firehouses, the brunt of brutal pranks and innuendoes.


EXECUTIVES
*
Bantam Doubleday Dell Publishing Group Inc., New York, a unit of Bertelsmann, named Peter Olson executive vice president and chief financial officer.
Joseph Crean was appointed senior vice president for human resources and John Choi was named senior vice president for finance.


Minding Their P's and Q's With the Keels and Sails
No two opponents could be more different: Bill Koch, the tall, slender, white-haired businessman who came into yachting less than eight years ago with enough money to buy his way into the America's Cup, and Dennis Conner, the stout, dark-haired cup champion who has spent most of his life on the water and the rest knocking on boardroom doors.
Yet Dennis Conner and Bill Koch are adversaries of the most familiar kind, having fought each other long and hard to place their boats in the America's Cup defense finals, which begin on Saturday.
Through 21 head-to-head matches and countless interviews since mid-January, the two yachtsmen have remained civil to each other, and at times, downright gracious.


Lining Up for Baylor
Take a number.
The search for a successor to GENE IBA as Baylor coach is threatening to get out of hand.
As many as 15 prospects are reported to be under consideration, among them Duke assistant MIKE BREY, Missouri assistant KIM ANDERSON, Georgia Tech assistant SHERMAN DILLARD, Louisiana Tech head coach JERRY LLOYD, and, most intriguingly, Nevada coach LEN STEVENS.
According to The Waco Tribune-Herald, Stevens, who has an 82-62 record in his five years at Nevada, including a 19-10 mark this season, has talked to Baylor officials. (AP)


Ruddick Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 29


Review/Theater: Metro; A Hit in Warsaw Lands on Broadway
WHAT'S the Polish word for fiasco?
Whatever it is, I'm not sure even it is adequate to describe the unique experience that is "Metro," the hit Warsaw musical that arrived on Broadway last night.


Lure for BMW In South Carolina
The South Carolina Senate unanimously voted to provide a $35 million incentive package for the German auto group BMW to build its first United States car assembly plant in the state.
Officials said the measure, covering $10 million for road improvements and $25 million in bond money being transferred to the state port authority, was intended to counter an incentive plan offered by Nebraska, regarded as South Carolina's main rival for the project.


Judge Bars British Libel Judgment
Calling British libel law antithetical to the protections afforded the press by the United States Constitution, a New York judge declined Wednesday to enforce a $70,000 libel judgment issued recently by a London jury against a Manhattan-based publication.
The decision, written by Justice Shirley Fingerhood of State Supreme Court in Manhattan, is the first time a New York court has refused to enforce a foreign libel decision, lawyers familiar with the case said.


Market Place; Price of Failure In Biotechnology
SHARES in Centocor Inc. continued their slide yesterday as analysts questioned whether the company's flagship drug would ever be approved in this country -- and, indeed, whether the company itself could survive.
Analysts said it was not clear how much Centocor's troubles would benefit the Xoma Corporation, its bitter rival in the race to deliver a drug to treat septic shock.
In the heady world of biotechnology, where fortunes rise or fall on a single drug, no one needs to look far to see the price of failure.
Analysts were quick to recall the fate of the Cetus Corporation, which stumbled after the Food and Drug Administration found the clinical data inadequate to approve its lead drug, Interleukin-2, and was acquired by the Chiron Corporation.
With additional data, the drug was approved earlier this year.


Diner's Journal
Raoul's Brasserie
My expectations were not exactly buoyed as I entered the newly reformulated Raoul's Brasserie and Grill on Varick Street in the West Village and was visually assaulted by sweaty, bigger-than-life basketball players on a giant projection screen hanging over the bar.
The rest of this cavernous space is attractive, with spacious dining areas, columns papered with press clippings, and soothing indirect lighting.


Ex-Wells President Back at D.M.B.&amp; B.
Richard V. Hopple, who left Wells Rich Greene BDDP in October, has resurfaced at his former agency, D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles.
Mr.
Hopple, 46 years old, who had been president at Wells Rich Greene in New York since 1986, is rejoining D.M.B.&amp; B. in New York, in an as-yet-undetermined capacity, reporting to Roy Bostock, chairman and chief executive.
Initially, he will oversee three Kraft General Foods U.S.A. accounts: Crystal Light beverages, Good Seasons salad dressing mixes and Entenmann's baked goods.


At the Bar; In attacking the work of a slain professor, Harvard's elite themselves become a target.
On April 4, 1991, Mary Joe Frug, a prominent feminist legal scholar at the New England School of Law in Boston, was hacked to death on the streets of Cambridge.
Wielding a military-style knife with a 7-inch-long blade, her assailant, as yet unknown, stabbed her four times.
On April 4, 1992, the Harvard Law Review held its annual gala banquet, when the torch of the nation's most prestigious legal journal is passed to a new generation of editors.
Among those invited: the murdered woman's husband, Gerald Frug, a member of the Harvard Law School faculty.
Had he attended, he would have found on his plate a parody of his wife's last article.
The parody, titled "He-Manifesto of Post-Mortem Legal Feminism," was produced by the Law Review's editors and paid for by the school.
It depicted Ms.
Frug as a humorless, sex-starved mediocrity and dubbed her the "Rigor-Mortis Professor of Law."


Microsoft Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


The Young McDonough Plays Ball With CBS
Having missed the first Saturday of the season, the CBS Occasional Game of the Week reawakens tomorrow in St.
Louis with Sean McDonough (son of NBC's Will) taking over for Jack Buck as analyst Tim McCarver's play-by-play boothmate.
Buck will be seated nearby in the Cardinals radio aerie.
Buck's two-year stint was ended by CBS two months after the 1991 World Series.
CBS couched its reasons for dismissing Buck by saying it wanted a new look and new sound, but the truth was that Buck anticipated the outcome of plays too often and ignored McCarver too much.


Fire Damages Plane's Engine As Flight Readies for Takeoff
The tail engine of a Delta Airlines plane bound for Atlanta caught fire last night as it prepared for takeoff from Kennedy International Airport, officials said.
The fire was extinguished almost immediately and there were no injuries to the 196 passengers and 8 crew members on board.
John Kampfe, a spokesman for the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, which runs the airport, said rescue units extinguished the fire at 7:58 P.M., four minutes after it started.
The Federal Aviation Administration said that more than four thousand gallons of water were used to put out the blaze.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows, performances and art exhibitions in the New York metropolitan region that will be closing soon: Closing This Weekend
"PARSIFAL," by Wagner, Metropolitan Opera.
Last performance of the season: today at 6:30 P.M.
Tickets: $20 to $125.
Information: (212) 362-6000.
"ELEKTRA," by Richard Strauss, Metropolitan Opera.
Last performance of the season: tomorrow at 2 P.M.
Remaining tickets: $75 and $110.
Information: (212) 362-6000.
"BILLY BUDD," by Benjamin Britten, Metropolitan Opera.
Last performance of the season: tomorrow at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $20 to $110.
Information: (212) 362-6000.
" 'TIS PITY SHE'S A WHORE," Public Theater, 425 Lafayette Street, Manhattan.
JoAnne Akalaitis directs John Ford's 17th-century drama, now set in Fascist Italy.
Final performance: Sunday at 7 P.M.
Show times: today at 8 P.M.; tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 2 and 7 P.M.
Tickets: $35.
Information: (212) 598-7150.
"WILLIAM WEGMAN: A RETROSPECTIVE," Whitney Museum of American Art, 945 Madison Avenue, at 75th Street.
Through Sunday.
Today, Saturday and Sunday, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Admission: $5 ($3 for students and the elderly).
Information: (212) 570-3600.


Rights Now Go to State Courts for Protection; Laboratories for Change
To the Editor:
You report that two Court of Appeals rulings give residents of New York greater protection under state law against unreasonable searches and seizures by the police than the Fourth Amendment to the Constitution would give them (front page, April 3).
But you did not make clear that these decisions have deep constitutional roots and are not at all radical or aberrational.
On individual rights, Federal constitutional law has always been a floor, not a ceiling.
The dissenting Judge Joseph W. Bellacosa notwithstanding, the New York decisions are not an improper declaration of independence from Federal law.
They are part of a time-honored tradition in American jurisprudence that expects states to serve as laboratories of social change so long as they do not fall below the United States Constitution's mandates.


Bank Where the Public's Money Wasn't
Unlike an ordinary commercial bank, the House bank did not offer interest on accounts, issue credit cards, lend money or charge for account overdrafts.
The bank served more like a payroll office with the unwritten understanding that members were entitled to free overdraft protection as long as their overdrafts did not exceed the amount of their next month's salary.


U.S. Sends Envoy to Bosnia As Part of Wider Campaign
Determined to reinforce its support of Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Bush Administration ordered a senior diplomat to Sarajevo today to sign documents formalizing United States recognition of the sovereignty and independence of the republic.
"We want to put a marker down to the Serbs and make our point," an Administration official said, referring to the Serbian invasion of Bosnia.


Pop/Jazz; Enjoying Blues and Funk, But Independence Best of All
Sure, Walter (Wolfman) Washington can sing and play the blues.
He sings about losing and finding love with a voice that's both velvety and long-suffering, answered by guitar solos that moan in wiry, well-turned phrases.
The blues side of his music has made up most of his albums, with a detour into soul now and then.
But on the bandstand, Mr.
Washington does more: he comes up with a blues-jazz-funk hybrid that shows both his New Orleans background and his years of making barroom audiences get happy.
He is performing tonight at Tramps.
"I like jazz and I also like funk," Mr.
Washington said by telephone from Massachusetts.
"Eight years ago, when I first started my band, people in the clubs would say, 'Play some blues.' At first I did, but then I eased my other stuff in. I'm not strictly a blues guitarist, I'm more of a soulful guitarist, and I rarely like to do the same thing over and over. When you go listen to a band, you want to hear more than the sound of the record. Unless you've got robots on the bandstand, you're not going to play the songs the same way every night."


AFGHAN PRESIDENT OUSTED AS REBELS APPROACH CAPITAL
President Najibullah of Afghanistan was ousted from power today and reportedly detained as he sought to flee Kabul in advance of the Islamic rebels and rebellious Government armies surging toward the capital.
The detention was announced by Foreign Minister Abdul Wakil.
He did not specify who had detained Mr.
Najibullah, the man the Soviets installed as President six years ago, and refused to say where he was being held.


Prize-Winning Newsday Series Criticized
The Army Times, an independent weekly newspaper based in Virginia, has accused Newsday of not giving it credit in a series of articles that won a Pulitzer Prize last week.
The Pulitzer for international reporting went to a Newsday reporter, Patrick J. Sloyan, for his accounts of how American tanks buried thousands of Iraqi soldiers alive during the Persian Gulf war and how American casualties were caused by so-called friendly fire.


Treasury Notes and Bonds Fall
Surprisingly good trade and jobless claim numbers combined yesterday with the risks that accompany a long holiday weekend to push down prices of Treasury notes and bonds, sending interest rates higher.
Credit market participants sold securities almost immediately after the Government reported that exports rose to a record in February and that the merchandise trade deficit fell to its lowest level since March 1983.


Nuclear Plant to Refuel
The New York Power Authority's Indian Point 3 nuclear power plant will be removed from service this weekend for two months of refueling and maintenance, the authority said today.
Workers will replace 80 of the 193 fuel assemblies in the reactor core, the power authority said.
The fuel assemblies are 12-foot-long bundles, each containing 204 tubes filled with uranium fuel pellets.


Bristol-Myers Squibb Posts 11.1% Profit Gain in Quarter
Joining several large health-care companies that have reported slowing profit growth, the Bristol-Myers Squibb Company said yesterday that its net income increased by 11.1 percent in the first quarter.
The company's worldwide sales were flat.
The company, based in New York, said its net income was $547.5 million, or $1.06 a share, compared with $492.5 million, or 94 cents a share, in the first quarter of 1991.
Its sales rose by 1.8 percent, to $2.78 billion.


For the Name of Macedonia, a Burst of Greek Pride
Greece seems hypnotized once again by its past, not in study of its glorious achievements, but in an extraordinary burst of nationalism set off by the disintegration of Yugoslavia to the north.
The object of this passion is the name Macedonia.
Marching in the streets, putting stickers on cars and shop windows and waving flags, Greeks are heatedly proclaiming that the name Macedonia is exclusively Greek, that it has been theirs for 3,000 years and must remain so.


Trinova Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Next Los Angeles Chief Inherits Demoralized Force in a Tense City
Formally introduced as the successor to Los Angeles Police Chief Daryl F. Gates, Willie L. Williams held out an olive branch today to the factions that have warred over the direction of the Police Department since the beating last year of a black motorist by white police officers.
At a City Hall news conference, the 48-year-old Philadelphia Police Commissioner spoke about healing the wounds caused by the March 3, 1991 beating of Rodney G. King and made a conciliatory gesture to the Police Department's rank-and-file, some of whom are said to resent the selection of an outsider to head the department for the first time in more than 40 years.


Intergraph Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Mets Keep Close Eye On Faces In Bullpen
There have been 10 games, a nice, round number, but no neat chunk of the season for the Mets from which to make conclusions or projections.


F.D.A. Restricts Use of Implants Pending Studies
The Food and Drug Administration today ordered sharp restrictions on the use of silicone gel breast implants while extensive studies of their safety are carried out.
Women who want the implants after cancer surgery will be able to get them, but only a few thousand women will be allowed to use them simply to enlarge their breasts.
All women who receive the implants must agree to take part in clinical studies.


Parking Rules
Because of Good Friday and the first day of Passover, alternate-side parking rules are suspended in New York City today and tomorrow.
Other regulations remain in effect.


CHRONICLE
URIEL SAVIR, the Consul General of Israel in New York, spends New Year's Eve with Daithi O'Ceallaigh, the Consul General of Ireland, and Thanksgiving with Wilbert Tatum, the publisher of The Amsterdam News, and he goes to Knicks games with Kathleen Turner.
Some members of the wide circle of friends he has assembled during his four-year tour of duty, which is is about to end, are now preparing for a farewell tribute and roast at the Essex House on April 28.


Audits of Bank Set Time Frame
The House bank has been plagued with financial irregularities for more than a century, and lawmakers have been allowed to write checks exceeding the amounts on deposit in their accounts at least since the early 1950's.
So why did the House ethics committee focus on overdrafts for only the 39-month period from July 1988 to October 1991?


U.S. WOULD TIGHTEN RULE ON TAKEOFFS WHEN ICE IS THREAT
Breaking sharply with a policy that gives broad discretion to pilots, the Federal Aviation Administration intends to establish rules on when pilots can take off in snowy and icy weather, the agency said yesterday.
The rules, which are to take effect Oct. 1 after hearings, come in reaction to the crash of a USAir jet at La Guardia Airport during a snowstorm on March 22.
Up to now it has been solely up to pilots waiting on runways to decide whether they should return to the gates to have their planes de-iced.
The limits will be set for all major airplanes based on information from manufacturers and other sources.


On My Mind; Jesse Jackson's Message
In Los Angeles last Saturday, Jesse Jackson delivered a speech built around a message to American Jews.
The message was this: Let's work together again, let's try to repair the political bonds between African-Americans and Jewish Americans that helped shape the history of civil rights and civil responsibilities in the United States.


CHRONICLE
An appeals court ruled yesterday that IVANA TRUMP may not discuss life with her former husband without his permission.
Ruling unanimously, the court reversed Acting Justice PHYLLIS GANGEL-JACOB of State Supreme Court, who, on her own, had deleted from the divorce decree a provision that Mrs.
Trump keep silent, although the couple had agreed to it.


Nynex Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Burlington Northern Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Sealed Air reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Linear Technology Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 29


Gillen Is Flirting With Considering St. John's Position
Pete Gillen, the basketball coach at Xavier University in Cincinnati, said yesterday that although he had no reason to believe he would be contacted by St.
John's, he would be willing to discuss the opening created by the retirement of Lou Carnesecca.
Gillen said he was surprised that Brian Mahoney, a St.
John's assistant for 16 seasons, had not already been given the job.
And he is still getting over the personal debate that led him to stay at Xavier rather than return to Villanova, where he once served as an assistant to Rollie Massimino.


A Checklist: Who Wrote Overdrafts at the House Bank and Who Did Not


All Strikers, Happy or Not, Can Go Back to Caterpillar
Saying it wanted to restore good employee relations in its plants, Caterpillar Inc. said explicitly today that it would rehire all of the workers who had been out on strike for five months and that most could be back to work Monday.
But the announcement seemed to do little to dispel the ill will many workers said they felt toward the company.


Maradona May Face Additional Sanctions
Defying international soccer authorities by playing in a charity game in Buenos Aires on Tuesday night could lead to further sanctions against the Argentine star DIEGO MARADONA, and to possible sanctions against the Argentine players who played with him.
That was the word from international authorities after Maradona, who is under international suspension for cocaine use, participated in the game, which raised money for the family of an Argentine player who died last year.


Win the Cup And Gain a Lot Of Headaches
Weeks from now, when it is finally over, after the Zamboni driver scrapes the blood off the ice and Mike the Dog drinks from the Stanley Cup, the question you will have to answer is this: Did you really want the Rangers to win?
Don't say "Yesss" too quickly.
Last night, as the Rangers skated against Pittsburgh in their final regular-season game, Madison Square Garden vibrated with an anxious energy.
There were few in the crowd who could remember the last New York Stanley Cup.
But they had all felt the thrill of defeat.
Would there be an agony to victory?
Would a championship mean the end of the cult comfort of being the lovers of losers?


BankAmerica Profit, Security Pacific Loss
On the eve of their merger, two California banking giants were a study in contrasts in the first quarter, with BankAmerica yesterday reporting a 7.4 percent profit gain, to $303 million, while Security Pacific said it lost $496.3 million.
Profits at the BankAmerica Corporation totaled $303 million, or $1.22 a share, up from $282 million, or $1.25 a share, a year earlier.
Profit per share declined because the company has issued more than seven million shares of additional stock.


Review/Dance; The Range of Okinawan Heritage
The classical and folk dances of Okinawa, like the music that accompanied them on a program entitled Okinawan Traditional Dance and Music on Wednesday night, can surprise with their emotional range.
There is the same strong distillation and refinement in these performances that are found in the mainstream dance heritage of Japan.
But Okinawa, actually the largest of the Ryukyu Islands, has its own distinct culture; the differences are reflected in this program.
These are dances of great individuality born, one suspects, from a synthesis of varied influences.


Jobless-Pay Claims Drop
New claims for jobless benefits fell in the latest week to a five-month low, the Government said today in a report that suggested the economic recovery was inching forward.
The Labor Department said the number of Americans filing first-time claims for unemployment benefits declined for the second straight week, falling 18,000, to 415,000, in the week that ended April 4.


No Headline


Trenton Backs Increase In Health Insurance Rates
The state insurance commissioner today approved an average 8 percent increase in health insurance premiums starting June 1 for about half a million individual subscribers of Blue Cross and Blue Shield of New Jersey.
The increase was immediately attacked as inadequate by officials of Blue Cross, the state's largest health insurer, who said they would go to court to overturn the decision by Samuel F. Fortunato, commissioner of the state Department of Insurance.


Grumman Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Pinkerton's Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 20


Onbancorp Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


No Charges in Melee
No charges will be filed against Buffalo Sabres players who beat up a Quebec fan in a bizarre incident during a game at the Colisee Tuesday night, police officers in Quebec said yesterday.
But the National Hockey League has begun an investigation to determine whether the Sabres involved should be fined or suspended.


Security Pacific Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Great Lakes Chemical reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Ipalco Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Corrections
An article in Science Times on Tuesday about a computer game that seems to mimic interactions among organisms misstated an affiliation of Dr.
Robert Axelrod.
He is a professor at the University of Michigan, not the University of Chicago.


Jew and Muslim Were Brothers in Spain
To the Editor:
Spain, you report (news article, April 1), has reached out to Jews 500 years after the Jewish expulsion from the peninsula by King Ferdinand and Queen Isabella.
You refer once or twice to Arabs and Muslims, without relating the tragedy of Muslim expulsion from Spain by the same monarchs.
It was shortly after the fall of Granada, which destroyed the Muslim protection of the Jews, on Jan. 2, 1492, that Ferdinand and Isabella ordered the Jewish banishment on March 31, 1492.
You refer to the influential Jewish position and contribution in Spain.
Jewish creative energy blossomed within the free environment provided by Islam, which recognized Jews and Christians as "people of the book," equal with all others in the sight of God.
Musa bin Maimoon (1135-1204) wrote his "Daleel al-Ha'ereen" in Arabic.
This great Arab-Jewish intellectual and philosopher is known in the West as Maimonides, author of "The Guide to the Perplexed."


Economic Scene; Is Liberalism Back in Saddle?
I often think it's comical How nature always does contrive That every boy and every gal,  That's born into this world alive, Is either a little Liberal Or else a little Conservative.
GILBERT AND SULLIVAN wrote those lines in 1882, about the political-genetic coding of the English.
But they have never applied to American voters.
Americans shift from liberal to conservative to liberal with the changes of generations, the rise and fall of crises and issues and the ability of particular Presidents to dominate the public agenda.


Nika Hazelton, Whose Cookbooks Influenced U.S. Tastes, Dies at 84
Nika Hazelton, whose cookbooks have been a mainstay of serious cooks for nearly half a century, died on Tuesday in Manhattan.
She was 84 years old and lived in Manhattan.
She died of natural causes after a lingering illness, said her son, Dr.
S.
A.
Standen, who lives in London.


METRO DIGEST
NEW RULES FOR PILOTS
Breaking sharply with a policy that gives broad discretion to pilots, the Federal Aviation Administration intends to establish rules on when pilots can take off in snowy and icy weather.
The rules come in reaction to the crash last month of a USAir jet at La Guardia Airport during a snowstorm.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  THE SOURCE OF THAT SMELL
After years of community outrage and scientific confusion, New York City officials have finally identified the central source of the debilitating odors at Harlem's North River sewage plant: They come from beneath an eight-block concrete roof where acres of foul air collect until periodic gusts roll off the Hudson River and blow them onto land.
A1.
A PLAN TO ENCOURAGE GIVING
Mayor Dinkins endorsed a change in tax policy intended to encourage companies to increase their contributions to museums, parks, libraries and other cultural institutions by millions of dollars.
The change would allow companies to take credits against commercial rent taxes for some charitable contributions.
B3.
RESTORING SPENDING CUTS
The Dinkins administration said it had found a way to restore $600 million in proposed spending cuts for school reconstruction and $220 million in cuts for low-income housing.
B3.
ASSAULT GUN LAW: MIXED RESULTS
On the eve of the deadline for residents to sell or relinquish their assault rifles or else move them from the city, almost two-thirds of the guns are still unaccounted for, whether out of their owners' ignorance, procrastination or defiance.
B3.
The $21 million tunnel to nowhere.
B2.
Doctor indicted in illegal abortion.
B2.
REGION  INSURANCE RISE FOR NEW JERSEY
The State Insurance Commissioner approved an average 8 percent increase in health insurance premiums starting June 1 for nearly half a million individual subscribers of Blue Cross and Blue Shield of New Jersey.
B5.
A PROFILE OF NEW JERSEY
New Jerseyans on the whole got richer, better educated, more diverse and more mobile during the prosperous 1980's, according to an economic and demographic portrait released by the Census Bureau and by the state.
Yet despite the widespread benefits of the boom, which has since passed, the decade also had its losers: the number of young children living in poverty almost doubled between 1980 and 1990.
B5.
THE LAST, BEST HOPE
Six months ago, trustees of the University of Bridgeport rejected an offer of aid from an affiliate of the Unification Church, saying they feared damage to the university's reputation and holding out hope that other aid might materialize.
When trustees reversed themselves on Wednesday and decided to pursue an affiliation with the church group, one factor had changed: there was no longer any hope of another rescuer.
News analysis, B5.
Injured boy's family files suit in bus crash.
B3.
Releasing tax returns: ritual of the season.
B2.
Our Towns B4


Sealright Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Dinkins Aides Plan to Restore Housing and School Funds
The Dinkins administration said yesterday that it has found a way to restore $600 million in proposed spending cuts for school reconstruction and $220 million in cuts for low-income housing without increasing the city's overall cost of borrowing to finance those projects.
The restored financing will allow the city to build 10 new schools and fix 36 schools in disrepair, thus helping to alleviate overcrowding, the city's School Construction Authority said.
The housing money will allow the city to build at least 6,000 apartments for poor families each year for the next four years.


Ladd Furniture reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


List Contains Surprises for New York
Representative Charles B. Rangel, a Manhattan Democrat who is known as a quintessential political maneuverer, has for weeks avoided spcific answers to questions about any role he may have played in the House bank scandal.
But the House ethics committe today identified him as among members from the New York region who overdrew their bank accounts dozens of times.
In releasing the list of those who had overdrawn their accounts, the committee also disclosed that Representative Thomas J. Downey, a Suffolk Democrat who has been considered one of the rising stars of the region's delegation, had written 151 overdrafts.


Business Tax-Credit Plan Would Aid Arts Groups
Mayor David N. Dinkins yesterday endorsed a change in tax policy intended to encourage companies to increase their contributions to museums, parks, libraries and other cultural institutions by millions of dollars.
The change would allow companies to take credits for some charitable contributions and apply them against the amount they pay in commercial rent tax.
Early reactions by other political figures needed to insure the proposal's ultimate passage were favorable.


Even the Arabs Boycott Libya
Col.
Muammar el-Qaddafi may for a time survive the mandatory sanctions the United Nations has now imposed against Libya.
Despite an embargo on air traffic, Libyans can make their way by sea to Malta or by land to Egypt and its airports.
And Libya can still export oil.
But the U.N.'s blow is nevertheless hard, lawful and laudable.
Especially heartening is the cooperation of Arab states, including radical Syria, in canceling flights to Tripoli.
It cannot be easy for Arab leaders to ignore Libya's fervent appeals to Arab solidarity, and Arab criticism of the U.N. action is understandable.
What matters more is that countries like Egypt and Saudi Arabia, having stuck their necks out against Saddam Hussein, are doing so again to isolate Libya's outlaw regime.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Named Rick Dempsey organizational instructor.
BOSTON RED SOX -- Signed Bob Geren, catcher, to a minor league contract.
National League
CINCINNATI REDS -- Placed Hal Morris, first baseman, on the 15-day disabled list.
Football  National Football League
NEW YORK JETS -- Re-signed Raul Allegre, kicker. College
DENVER -- Named Kurt Smitz men's and women's ski coach.
EAST TENNESSEE STATE -- Extended the contract of Alan LeForce, men's basketball coach, through 1995.
JACKSON STATE -- Named James Carson football coach.
WELLESLEY -- Named Sue Landau women's field hockey and lacrosse coach.
Announced the resignation of Laurie Katz, women's fencing coach.


The Spoken Word
READING, Ear Inn, 326 Spring Street, Manhattan.
The writers Melanie Neilson and Jeff Derksen will read from their work.
Tomorrow at 3 P.M.
Admission: $3.
Information: (212) 226-9060.
LECTURE AND WALKS, Lower East Side Tenement Museum, 97 Orchard Street, Manhattan.
"Peddler's Pack," a walking tour of the Lower East Side, Sunday at noon, followed at 1 P.M. by "House of Heritage," a slide show and lecture on the history of the museum's building, and at 2 P.M. by "La Dolce Via," a walking tour of Little Italy.
Separate admission is required for each event.
Lecture tickets are $4; walking tours are $12 ($10 for students and the elderly).
Information: (212) 431-0233.
GALLERY TALKS, Brooklyn Museum, 200 Eastern Parkway, at Prospect Park.
"Decoration in American Indian Ceremonial Art," by Armando Chisari, today at 2 P.M.; "Ancient Splendors: Highlights of Pre-Columbian and South Asian Art," by Marlene Holtan, tomorrow at 2 P.M.; "American Landscape Paintings," by Nancy Uberman, Sunday at 2 P.M.
All talks are free with museum admission of $4 ($2 for students, $1.50 for the elderly).
Information: (718) 638-5000.
GALLERY TALKS, Metropolitan Museum of Art.
"Arms and Armor at the Metropolitan Museum," by Amey Larmore, today at 11 A.M.; "The Royal Art of Benin," by Alisa LaGamma, today at 3 P.M.; "Japonisme and American Design," by Deborah Goldberg, tomorrow at 11 A.M.; "Understanding Medieval Art: Love in the Middle Ages," by Daniel Kletke, tomorrow at 7 P.M.
"Medieval Stained Glass," by Ena Guirescu, Sunday at 11 A.M.


Corrections
An article on Tuesday about Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato's 1991 income-tax returns described his tax payments incorrectly.
Mr.
D'Amato and his wife paid 41 percent of their taxable income -- not of their total income before deductions -- in state and Federal taxes, Social Security and Medicare.


Morrison Knudsen reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


SCEcorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Central &amp; South West reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Making the Hard Choice at Bridgeport U.: Opting to Stay Alive
Six months ago, the trustees of the University of Bridgeport rejected an offer of aid from an affiliate of the Unification Church, saying they feared damage to the university's reputation and holding out hope that other aid might materialize, perhaps from the state.
When the trustees reversed themselves on Wednesday and decided to pursue an affiliation with the Unification Church group, the Professors World Peace Academy, one factor had changed: there was no longer any hope of another rescuer.


Imcera Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Star Banc Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


High Equitable Official To Join Money Manager
Brian F. Wruble, the chief investment officer for the Equitable Life Assurance Society of the United States, will become president and a director of Delaware Management Holdings Inc., a Philadelphia-based money management company, both companies said yesterday.
The move is expected to take effect next month.
The 48-year-old Mr.
Wruble, who was also chairman, president and chief executive of the Equitable Capital Management Corporation, said he was joining Delaware because he expected to help lead it to strong growth in the next few years.
That, and the prospect of moving his family closer to their summer home on Chesapeake Bay, made the job in Philadelphia irresistible, he said.


Philip Morris Companies reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


American Maize-Products reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Asian Thugs Prey on Flushing's Chinatown
Sitting behind the cash register of her Korean restaurant in Flushing, Queens, Soon Park first insisted that she knew nothing about Asian-on-Asian crime in her neighborhood.
Then she changed her story.
Four times in the last year about midnight, she said, large groups of well-dressed Korean and Chinese teen-agers had come into her restaurant and ordered many expensive sushi dishes, only to then demand money from the register.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.25-6.5
6.25-6.5
9.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
6.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.87
4.02
6.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.64
3.60
5.70
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.76
3.71
5.73
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.10
7.01
7.91
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.92
7.87
8.17
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.88
8.85
9.23
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.68
6.67
7.25
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


'Velveteen Rabbit'
Ask longtime readers about their favorite childhood books and "The Velveteen Rabbit" is sure to be mentioned.
This Margery Williams classic, published in 1922, tells of a toy rabbit who grows older and more beloved until he finally comes to life.
A modern-dance company, O.D.C./San Francisco, has captured a good deal of the book's drowsy, tender charm in "The Velveteen Rabbit," a two-act piece that the company will perform this weekend at the Joyce Theater.
The dance, choreographed by K. T. Nelson, stays close to the book.
Forget about fuzzy Easter rabbits, Disney's bounding bunnies or even the endearing Beatrix Potter characters that Sir Frederick Ashton brought so magically to life in dance.
This rabbit is soft plush but nicely droopy and understuffed, just like the real thing.


Overseas Sizzle for McDonald's
With its profits abroad growing nearly three times as fast as those at home, McDonald's is stepping up the pace of its expansion overseas.
Last year, for the first time, McDonald's opened more restaurants overseas than in the United States: 427 abroad, compared with just 188 in the United States.
The company plans to open 450 in foreign countries and 250 in the United States this year, with Latin America and Asia expected to be the fastest-growing areas.


Seacoast Banking Corp. of Fla.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Georgia-Pacific reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Women's Federal Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


BRIEFS
*
Computer Sciences Corp., El Segundo, Calif., was awarded a two-year contract by Britain's Defense Ministry to define the requirements for a modernized logistics system for the British Air Force.
The contract is valued at about $23 million.


U.N. Pushes Peace Plan
The United Nations sought to preserve its plan for a political settlement in Afghanistan today, saying it offered the only hope for ending the bloodshed, promoting national reconciliation and preserving the country's borders.
The Security Council said in a statement that there was still "no viable alternative" to the United Nations peace plan, which calls for a group of neutral Afghan leaders to choose a broadly based interim government to prepare national elections to decide the country's future.


Review/Art; A Black Painting Blacks With an Enigmatic Hand
It's difficult to get a handle on the art of Archibald J. Motley Jr. (1891-1981), 50 of whose paintings are at the Studio Museum in Harlem.
In the 1920's this black artist from Chicago devoted himself to painting black life, and he made portraits of family and friends that bestow on their subjects a remarkable, rarefied dignity.
How could he also be responsible for pictures like "Lawd, Mah Man's Leavin' " (1940) with its cartoonish stereotypes of the lazy farmhand snoozing under a tree and the bosomy mammy?
To read Motley's description of his art is only to compound the confusion.
"For years many artists have depicted the Negro as the ignorant Southern 'darky,' to be portrayed on canvas as something humorous; an old Southern black Negro gulping a large piece of watermelon; one with a banjo on his knee; possibly a 'crapshooter' or a cotton picker or a chicken thief," he once said.
"This material is obsolete, and I sincerely hope with the progress the Negro has made, he is deserving to be represented in his true perspective, with dignity, honesty, integrity, intelligence and understanding."


Dionex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Devils Get Wish, and Rangers Are Glad
Ever since John McMullen bought the franchise and moved it to New Jersey from Denver 10 years ago, the Devils have been craving a playoff series with the Rangers.
"Everyone's been wanting this for as a long as I can remember," Devils Coach Tom McVie said of the first playoff meeting between the two crossriver rivals, which will start Sunday night at Madison Square Garden.
"Everyone's excited about it."


NBB Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Dow Up 12.74, Closing at Another Record
Blue-chip stocks edged higher yesterday in jagged trading, as sporadic selling cooled the week's rally.
The Dow Jones industrial average rose 12.74 points, to 3,366.50, a third consecutive closing record, but other indicators dipped.
The Dow, which weathered two selloffs in the morning and another in the afternoon, was lifted nearly 15 points in the session's final minutes, apparently by index arbitragers who adjusted their positions in expiring futures and options contracts.


Art in Review
Michael Joaquin Grey  Barbara Gladstone Gallery 99 Greene Street SoHo
Through April 25
Michael Joaquin Grey's second solo exhibition in New York City lacks the dazzle of his 1990 debut, but it still is an intriguing and often impressive display of sculptural ambition.
Mr.
Grey is an artist of wit, intelligence and idiosyncrasy whose work alternates between an almost sweet playfulness and a somewhat vexing obscurity.


Art in Review
Albert York  The Davis &amp; Langdale Company 231 East 60th Street Through April 25
The 35 paintings in this show date from 1963 to 1991, and only 3 were done in the 90's.
Yet in a sense date doesn't matter much with Albert York's work, since its basic style does not change appreciably over three decades.
The artist has always worked small (the average painting here is about 10 by 12 inches) and his subjects continue to be the flowers, animals, people and landscapes of his bucolic Long Island neighborhood.


It's That Season: Politicians Release Tax Returns
Politicians are not required to disclose income-tax returns, but the practice has become a rite of the season.
In election years, opponents can also try to turn the practice into a small spring storm.
In this year's Senate campaign in New York, Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, a Republican, has challenged Geraldine A. Ferraro, a Democrat who is seeking her party's nomination to unseat him, to release all information about her husband's partnerships.


Black &amp; Decker Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 29


Olivetti's Chief Is Convicted In Collapse of Bank in 1982
An Italian court today convicted one of Italy's most powerful businessmen, Carlo de Benedetti, and 32 co-defendants on charges of fraud stemming from the sensational 1982 collapse of Banco Ambrosiano, once Italy's largest private bank.
In a decision that stunned Italy, the court in Milan sentenced Mr. de Benedetti, chairman of Olivetti, the Turin-based computer giant, to six years and four months in jail.
Lawyers said he would go to prison only if both an appeals court and the Supreme Court confirmed the verdict.
The appeals process could last several years.


Books of The Times; What Makes a Child of the West
Where the Bluebird Sings to the Lemonade Springs  Living and Writing in the West  By Wallace Stegner  227 pages.
Random House. $21.
The title of Wallace Stegner's new book of essays comes from the same song that supplied the title of one of his best known novels, "The Big Rock Candy Mountain." The song, a hobo ballad supposedly written by Harry McClintock in the 1920's, describes "a land that's fair and bright, where the handouts grow on bushes," where "the sun shines every day" and "the blue bird sings in the Big Rock Candy Mountains."


What Is a No-Hitter? Matt Young Knows
Matt Young should know that some people in New York have been gleefully quoting him this week.
A Boston Red Sox pitcher who last Sunday did not permit the Cleveland Indians a hit in his complete-game effort against them, Young shrugged off the bureaucratic trashing of his feat by saying a no-hitter is supposed to be when the pitcher strikes out the last batter, the catcher runs to the mound and everyone jumps around.
Young was speaking philosophically, with resignation that the Red Sox lost the game, and the bureaucrats in New York are quoting him to defend the questionable action they took last September when they made up their own definition of a no-hitter.
The problem is their definition is the one major league baseball recognizes because major league baseball made them into a committee that decides such matters.


Knicks Work Hard to Fritter Away a Title
No matter how you look at the Knicks' recent collapse, it looks ugly.
Rarely does a professional basketball team lose a five-game lead with eight games to play.
Rarely does a team score just 61 points in one game, then fail to score for the final 3 minutes 41 seconds of another game just three days later.
But the Knicks have done all that during the last two weeks, putting themselves on the verge of losing a division title that was theirs for the taking.


GATX Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Premark International reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


Tarkanian's Money Talk
The contract terms are an official secret, but according to two newspapers, JERRY TARKANIAN won't be destitute during his term as coach of the San Antonio Spurs.
The San Antonio Express-News reported yesterday that Tarkanian would get $500,000 a year under a two-year contract plus an option year.
The San Antonio Light said he would make $600,000 a year for three years. (AP)


Review/Theater; An Insider's Comical Look At the Making of a Flop Play
In "One of the All-Time Greats," Charles Grodin chronicles the misfortunes of a Broadway disaster entitled "Thunder Road." Happily, Mr.
Grodin's new comedy is not one of those horrible examples.
It is an airy, light-fingered commentary on the vagaries of theatrical production, an object lesson showing how experienced professionals can be carried away into a collective act of self-incrimination.
The play opened last night in the intimate surroundings of the Vineyard Theater, in a nimble production staged by Tony Roberts.
Under the guidance of Mr.
Grodin and Mr.
Roberts (themselves expert comic actors), "One of the All-Time Greats" is an insider's report written with humor and affection.


Nets' Playoff Hopes and Discipline Start to Unravel
The Nets increased the pressure on themselves tonight as they failed to clinch a playoff berth by allowing the Indiana Pacers to stage a fourth-quarter rally and escape from Byrne Meadowlands Arena with a 119-113 victory.
The Nets (39-42) can still make the playoffs for the first time since 1986, but they can also miss if they lose their regular-season finale Saturday night against the Orlando Magic and Miami and Atlanta win their remaining games.
The Nets will advance with a victory or with a single loss by the Hawks or the Heat.


Sears, Roebuck &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Rights Now Go to State Courts for Protection; Voting Remedy
To the Editor:
In "Judgeships Should Be Color-Blind" (Op-Ed, March 23), Elizabeth McCaughey misses the point of the Federal class action lawsuit instituted by the Center for Constitutional Rights to remedy the underrepresentation of minorities on the Supreme Court in New York City.
She acknowledges the laudable goal of placing more minority members on the bench and does not question that minorities are grossly underrepresented in New York judgeships, as found by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's Task Force on Judicial Diversity.
The only matter at issue is how to correct this.


DNA Fingerprinting: Built-In Conflict
Reaction to the report on DNA fingerprinting by the National Academy of Sciences has emphasized a wide difference in character between science as done in academic laboratories and science as it is used by the legal profession.
Lawyers, in essence, are interested in certainty; scientists, in defining the limits to certainty.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about the political consultant Patrick H. Caddell referred incorrectly in some copies to a description he coined about Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas.
He used the phrase "finest pandroid politician" to mean someone who panders to those whose support he wants and who is robotlike; he did not say Mr.
Clinton was a "paranoid politician."


A White House Gambit To Limit a Rights Law
In a Supreme Court brief filed this month, Bush Administration lawyers abandoned a recent court victory rather than hold to a legal theory jeopardizing their argument that the new civil rights law is not retroactive.
Last September the Government won a civil suit against a housing project manager in Birmingham, Ala., by persuading the Federal appeals court in Atlanta to apply a 1988 Federal law to actions that had occurred more than three years before the law was passed.


Semifinalists Named By Mastercard
Mastercard International in New York has announced the names of the six semifinalist agencies, selected from a list of 24 contenders, that will pursue its $60 million American advertising account, which has been in review since February.
As expected, one is Lintas New York, the incumbent since 1987.
The others are smaller, "hot" shops with reputations for particularly innovative creative work: Ammirati &amp; Puris in New York, Fallon McElligott in Minneapolis, Messner Vetere Berger Carey Schmetterer in New York, Hal Riney &amp; Partners in San Francisco and Wieden &amp; Kennedy in Portland.


Landmark Sex Harassment Case in Japan
In a decision that marked the first successful legal action against sexual harassment in Japan, a district court ruled today that a company and one of its male employees had violated a woman's rights because of crude remarks that drove her to quit her job.
The action by a local court in Fukuoka in southern Japan was featured as a main story in newspapers and television broadcasts this evening as a startling triumph for Japan's small feminist movement that could have far-reaching effects in the workplace.


Review/Photography; That Elusive Quality Called Style
FASHION is an industry based on fantasy, and nowhere is that more apparent than in the glossy, fantastic pages of fashion magazines.
Photography, with its blend of fact and fiction, provides a crucial tool for presenting fashion's carefully calculated illusions.
More than simply depicting clothes for sale, the best fashion photographs hold out the promise of a life that is more dramatic, more exciting, than the humdrum realities of everyday existence.
"On the Edge: 100 Years of Photographs From Vogue," now at the New York Public Library, provides an intriguing if uneven picture of the central role photography has played in the long history of Vogue magazine.
Not surprisingly, there's a strongly self-congratulatory air to this exhibition, which is sponsored by Conde Nast, Vogue's publisher, and organized by a group of curators that includes Alexander Liberman, the magazine's editorial director and eminence grise; Anna Wintour, its editor in chief, and a number of other Conde Nast staff members.


A Dose of Good News in a Little Fixer-Upper
THE dream comes true today.
This morning, after nearly 10 months of 15-hour workdays and seven-day weeks, a few sleepless nights, a little luck, some bargaining, a squad of devoted friends and supportive parents, uncounted pizzas, plentiful plans penciled on plywood, 15,000 pounds of bricks and a dose of hugs, Tony and Sandy Kaiser and the twins move into their very own dream house over on Peak Street.


Strong Profit Rises Posted By Grumman and Lockheed
The Grumman Corporation and the Lockheed Corporation reported strong first-quarter earnings increases yesterday, a reflection of the efforts of military contractors to adapt to a period of deep Pentagon budget cuts.
Following are the results of the companies' first quarters: Grumman
Grumman, based in Bethpage, L.I., said net income rose 40.4 percent, to $31.6 million, or 92 cents a share, from $22.5 million, or 65 cents a share, in the quarter last year.
Revenue rose 9 percent, to $957.2 million.
In last year's first quarter, Grumman's results were affected by a one-time pretax charge of $46.5 million from the settlement of claims involving a bankrupt supplier, and a gain of $30.7 million from the release of funds the company had held as tax reserves.
The company's aerospace segment benefited from increased deliveries of F-14D fighter planes to the Navy.
The company is scheduled to deliver the last four new F-14D's under order during the second quarter, although it will continue to work on upgrading older models for one more year.
Grumman's electronic systems division was helped by gains on its contract to build a radar and communications airplane known as Joint Stars for the Army and Air Force.
Operating profits in the information systems and vehicles divisions declined.
Renso Caporali, Grumman's chairman, told the annual meeting that Grumman had cut its debt nearly in half, to $465 million, since the beginning of 1990 and that it expected to pay off its remaining $50 million in bank debt in the next few months.
Grumman's stock gained 12.5 cents a share on the New York Stock Exchange yesterday, closing at $19.50.
Lockheed
Lockheed, based in Calabasas, Calif., said first-quarter earnings rose 22.2 percent, to $66 million, or $1.06 a share, from $54 million, or 85 cents a share, in the quarter last year.
Sales fell slightly, to $2.23 billion.
Lockheed said the profit gains came primarily from its electronic systems and missiles and space divisions.
The company said it also benefited from lower interest expenses and other cost reductions.
Lockheed won a heated competition last year to build the Air Force's next fighter plane, and it has won a series of other contracts as well.
Nonetheless, its financed backlog of orders declined slightly, as it worked off the contracts awarded during the 1980's, to $8.7 billion at the end of the first quarter compared with $8.8 billion at the end of 1991.
Lockheed shares gained $1.75 yesterday, closing at $47 on the New York Stock Exchange.


Charles P. Ginsburg, 71, Leader In Developing Video Recording
Charles P. Ginsburg, an electrical and radio engineer who played a pivotal role in the development of videotape recording, died on April 9 at Sacred Heart Hospital in Eugene, Ore.
He was 71 years old and moved to Eugene from the San Francisco area, his longtime home, two years ago.
The cause of death was pneumonia, his family said.


Minnesota Power &amp; Light reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


MGIC Investment reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrat; Clinton Challenges Bush on Economy
Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas, broadening his attacks on President Bush, called today for a new national economic strategy that emphasizes education, investment tax credits and converting military spending to domestic uses.
In a speech delivered at the Wharton School of Business at the University of Pennsylvania, Mr.
Clinton offered a sweeping but essentially repackaged version of ideas he has offered for months.


West Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 29


Texas Instruments Reports First Profit Since Late 1990
Texas Instruments Inc., benefiting from cost-cutting programs, higher royalty payments and improving demand for its engineering products and computers chips, reported its first profitable quarter since the fall of 1990.
Net income totaled $40 million, or 35 cents a share, compared with a loss of $54 million in the comparable period last year.
The company's revenues rose by 3 percent, to $1.69 billion.


Caravaning and Footing In French and English
To the Editor:
Further on "When Words Cross the English Channel" (letter, April 3) by Jacques Barzun: The French have always had a penchant for using English words ending in "ing," often incorrectly, or fabricating others.
Take "smoking," used since 1890 for dinner jacket and, recently, "caravaning," for traveling in a trailer or camper.
I object, however, to Mr.
Barzun's translating "footing" as "walk," when it is much more like hiking.
In addition, any classified ad in France that uses "living" means an informal living room, as opposed to "salon." A studio apartment is listed as a "studio." SAMUEL ZISKIND New York, April 3, 1992


Hunt (J.B.) Transportation Services Inc.(O) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Dinkins Reactivates A Cultural Commission
Mayor David N. Dinkins has reactivated the Cultural Affairs Advisory Commission, an unpaid, nonpartisan group that assists the Department of Cultural Affairs, and has named 19 members and 5 ex-officio members to the panel.
The chairman is Ellen Liman, a painter and the author of six books on interior design who has been associated with the Department of Cultural Affairs in many capacities over the last 11 years.


Sounds Around Town
Mary Cleere Haran
Mary Cleere Haran, Oak Room, the Algonquin Hotel, 59 West 44th Street, (212) 840-6800.
Ms.
Haran sounds a little like the mid-1940's Doris Day, looks somewhat like Myrna Loy crossed with Rita Hayworth and writes her own brilliant patter, in which she sounds like a warm-hearted contemporary version of Dorothy Parker.
The centerpiece of her newest show is a tribute to the songwriting team of Jimmy Van Heusen and Johnny Burke.
Along with crystalline pop-jazz renditions of "But Beautiful," "Moonlight Becomes You" and "Polka Dots and Moonbeams," the section includes her witty critique of the Bing Crosby-Bob Hope "Road" pictures.
Shows are at 9:30 and 11:30 tonight and tomorrow night.
Admission is $25 with a $10 minimum.
Dixie Carter, Cutting Up
Dixie Carter, Cafe Carlyle, 36 East 76th, at Madison Avenue, Manhattan, (212) 744-1600.
The star of the television series "Designing Women" is a superb cabaret performer who can go from raucous comedy to heart-tugging pathos in the blink of an eye and take the entire audience with her.
The comic high point of her newest act is her naughty-Southern-belle rendition of "Let's Do It," part of which is sung dangling upside down from atop a grand piano.
The most gripping moment is her ominously dramatic version of "The Fire Inside" by Bob Seger.
It's quite a stretch from Cole Porter to Mr.
Seger, but Miss Carter is one of the few who can make it.
Shows are at 8:45 and 10:45 tonight and tomorrow night.
There is a $35 cover charge and a $10 minimum.


Gillette Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Yankees Throw One Away Against Blue Jays
The script was moving from scene to scene in such a sweet manner for the Yankees this afternoon at the Skydome.
They hustled back from a 4-1 deficit against the Blue Jays, Don Mattingly crushed a two-run homer off Jack Morris that smelled like a game winner and the Yankees were ready to leave Canada proudly with a split in the four-game series.
But the script turned sour for the Yankees in the ninth inning with a few unexpected twists that enabled the Blue Jays to score twice, pilfer a 7-6 victory and increase the best record in the major leagues to 9-1.
The most damaging twist was the high-flying act of a ball thrown by Roberto Kelly, which sailed over third baseman Charlie Hayes's head and bounced into Toronto's dugout, allowing Roberto Alomar to score the deciding run.


Leaving Consumers on the Edge of Their Seats
THE three most popular words in American advertising these days may not be "Just do it" or "Gotta have it," but "To be continued."
More and more advertisers are asking their agencies to come up with serial or episodic campaigns that mimic the cliffhangers of radio and television soap operas, from "Ma Perkins" in the 1930's to "Homefront" in the 1990's, or the early movie serials like "The Perils of Pauline."


Parker Hannifin reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


A Checklist: Who Wrote Overdrafts at the House Bank and Who Did Not


Restaurants
Park Avenue Cafe
Few restaurants have created as much enthusiasm in the last few years as Park Avenue Cafe, the upbeat creation of Alan Stillman, a prominent New York City restaurateur, and David Burke, the inventively puckish former chef of the River Cafe in Brooklyn.
I have waited several months to assess this place, not out of sympathy for a new establishment that needs time to get its sea legs, but because holding back yields a portrait of the restaurant that holds up over time.
Premature reviewing often leads to highly equivocal assessments that have little value.


February Trade Gap Narrowed
The nation's merchandise trade deficit narrowed sharply to $3.38 billion in February, with exports reaching a record and imports falling slightly.
The deficit, smaller than most economists expected, gladdened Administration officials, who are looking for an election-year bonus in export sales to help lead the nation into recovery.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about Cyrus R. Vance's call for an end to the fighting in Bosnia and Herzegovina named Yugoslavia's Acting Defense Minister incorrectly.
He is Gen.
Blagoje Adzic.


Sundstrand Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Yankees Partners Meet
The Yankees' partners met in New York yesterday, but no new developments surfaced in the reported settlement of the dispute between the Yankees and Leonard Kleinman.
Two partners indicated that George Steinbrenner was irate over a report in The New York Times yesterday that quoted a partner as saying he had been told that Steinbrenner and Kleinman had resolved their dispute over Kleinman's lawsuit against Commissioner Fay Vincent and his contention that the Yankees owed him $1 million.


Wood to Add Its Own Derby Contender
One dozen colts and one filly were entered yesterday in the Wood Memorial, which will be run at Aqueduct tomorrow with twin prizes: a $500,000 purse and a trip to the Kentucky Derby in two weeks as New York's candidate in the first and foremost race for the Triple Crown.
In keeping with the coast-to-coast and international spin of the Derby this year, four states and two countries will be represented in the Wood, one of the final tests for 3-year-old horses auditioning for the classic.
The race has lost some luster in recent years because it is staged so close to the Derby.
But since it was inaugurated 67 years ago, 11 horses have won the Wood and then gone on to win the Derby, and four of them went beyond that and won the Triple Crown.


Review/Film; New Scenes From a Mall, With Music
In "Window Shopping," Chantal Akerman's Belgian-French co-production opening today at Le Cinematographe in Manhattan, the world is a place where the sun doesn't shine though it's always fair weather.
The locale is a piece of late 20th-century environmental art, an underground shopping mall in which the air is conditioned, the temperature controlled by thermostat, and the lighting fluorescent with zingy neon accents.
Anyone familiar with the Belgian-born director's earlier films, including the chilly, severe "Jeanne Dielman" (1975) and "All Night Long" (1982), might expect "Window Shopping" to be some kind of indictment of consumer society.
It may be, in its own devious way, but "Window Shopping" is more interested in the tiny problems that loom so large in the lives of the people within that society.


Georgia Gulf Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


OUTLOOK IN LIBYA: ADAPT, IMPROVISE
There are more hours needed now to travel to and from Libya and less certainty of arrivals and departures.
But Libyans are quick to remind outsiders that they have suffered far worse from their mercurial leader, Col.
Muammar el-Qaddafi, than from sanctions imposed by the United Nations.
During the 22 years of Colonel Qaddafi's rule, Libyans have put up with Government bans on everything from travel abroad to private enterprise.


Bank in MGM-Pathe Move
The main lender to the MGM-Pathe Communications Company said today that it was taking legal steps to sever all remaining links between the movie studio and Giancarlo Parretti, the Italian financier whose acquisition of MGM several years ago collapsed under a mountain of debt.
The lender, Credit Lyonnais Bank Nederland, said it would foreclose on the 98.5 percent stake in MGM-Pathe that it is holding as security for loans it made to the studio and its parent company, the Pathe Communications Corporation.


Heart Procedure for Parcells
Bill Parcells, the coach of the Giants until he resigned last May, will undergo a heart procedure today for the third time in four months.
Dr.
Patrick Whitlow, a cardiologist, is scheduled to perform an atherectomy on the 50-year-old Parcells at the Cleveland Clinic.
Parcells is expected to remain in the hospital overnight and be discharged tomorrow.
Four months ago today, at the Valley Hospital in Ridgewood, N.J., Parcells underwent an angioplasty procedure to clear his left anterior descending artery, which had a blockage of 95 percent to 99 percent.
In that procedure, an inflated balloon compresses the plaque that blocks the artery.
In February, the angioplasty was repeated.


Citibank's Credit Card Rates To Be Cut for Best Customers
Citibank, defending its position as the leading issuer of bank credit cards, said yesterday that it would reduce interest rates for nine million of its best card customers at the end of the month.
The banking company is also planning other features, including a card that bears a photograph of its holder, to bolster its business.
The moves by Citibank, with more than 30 million credit card customers, come when competition is rising and interest rates are generally declining.
That has led many other card issuers to reduce their interest rates, cut or eliminate annual fees and offer extra benefits.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-10  AFGHAN PRESIDENT DEPOSED
Six years after his installation by Soviet occupiers, President Najibullah was overthrown in Afghanistan.
His Foreign Minister said he had been detained.
Muslim guerrillas who have waged a 13-year war against the Government surged toward the capital.
A1  U.N. peace negotiators called for a noviolent transition of power.
A10  PERU'S CHIEF SEEKS SUPPORT
Seeking to break Peru's impasse after seizing broad powers last week, President Fujimori called on "all political forces" to take part in a "national dialogue for peace" starting May 1.
Politicians quickly dismissed the idea.
A3  HARASSMENT RULING IN JAPAN
In a decision making the first successful legal action against sexual harassment in Japan, a court ruled that a company and one of its male employees had violated a woman's rights because of crude remarks that drove her to quit her job.
A3  ITALIAN FINANCIER CONVICTED
One of Italy's most powerful businessmen, Carlo de Benedetti, was convicted by an Italian court on charges of fraud stemming from the 1982 collapse of Banco Ambrosiano, once Italy's largest private bank.
He was sentenced to six years.
D1  'MACEDONIA' RIVETS GREECE
Greece seems hypnotized once again by its past, not in study of its glorious achievements, but in an extraordinary burst of nationalism set off by the disintegration of Yugoslavia to the north.
The object of this passion is the name Macedonia.
A9  LIBYANS SAY THEY'VE SEEN WORSE
It takes much longer to travel to and from Libya now, but Libyans are quick to remind outsiders that they have suffered far worse from their mercurial leader than from sanctions imposed by the U.N.
A5  'MINI-BOOM' IN CAMBODIA
Phnom Penh Journal: The inflow of thousands of United Nations personnel has given Cambodian towns an economic lift.
People who have fled to the West since the Communist takeover are sending money to their families now or trying their luck in enterprises in the capital.
A4  RUSSIA CUTS IT SHORT
On the 10th day of their tempestuous deliberations in the Kremlin, 1,000 or so lawmakers voted to return the Russian Federation to its historic name Rossiya, or Russia.
A2  National A12-18  CHECKS AND IMBALANCES
The House ethics committee issued a list of 247 current and 56 former lawmakers who overdrew on their accounts at the House bank.
A1  NOW, FOR THE HUNTING SEASON
News analysis: In the official sense, the release of the check-overdraft list brought the House bank affair to an end.
In the political sense, something remains: the fall election campaign.
A1
The House list included a few surprises in the New York region.
A15  NEW WEATHER RULES FOR PILOTS
Breaking sharply with a policy that has long given broad discretion to airline pilots, the Government intends to establish rules telling them when they may take off in snowy or icy weather.
The new policy results from the crash at LaGuardia Airport last month.
A1  F.D.A.
SETS BREAST-IMPLANT RULES
Women who want silicone-gel breast implants after cancer surgery will be able to get them.
But relatively few women will be allowed to use them simply to enlarge their breasts, and everyone who receives them must agree to take part in clinical studies.
A1  PEROT: PUSHED, OR PUSHING?
Ross Perot continues to portray himself as riding along on the public will, but there are increasing signs that he and his close associates are shoving his Presidential bandwagon toward the starting line.
A1
Speaking at Wharton, Clinton widened his attack on Bush.  A16
The President proposed an expanded student loan program.  A16  CATERPILLAR REHIRING ALL
Putting to rest considerable uncertainty, Caterpillar said it would accept back on the job all the 12,600 workers who struck the company for five months.
A12  GUAM ABORTION LAW SET BACK
A Federal appeals court ruled that Roe v.
Wade was still binding and that Guam's particularly restrictive anti-abortion law was in conflict with it.
A13  A GAMBIT ON THE CIVIL RIGHTS LAW
Rather than jeopardize their argument that the new civil rights law is not retroactive, Administration lawyers have abandoned a victory in an unrelated case.
A18  Reporter's Notebook: The flooding in Chicago's Loop.
A12  A survey faulted the writing skills of American schoolchildren.
A12  Law Page B16  Metropolitan Digest, B1 SOLVING A SMELLY PROBLEM
The central source of debilitating odors -- long an object of community outrage -- at New York City's sewage plant on the Hudson River in Harlem has finally been identified: The odors come from beneath an eight-block concrete roof where acres of foul air collect until periodic gusts roll off the river and blow them onto land.
A1  Business Digest, D1  Weekend C1-26  Baseball, fans and history.
C1  Theater: On Stage, and Off C2  "Metro," from Warsaw.
C1  "All-Time Greats." C3  Film: At the Movies C8  "The Babe." C8  Music: Presenting video and performance art.
C16  Art: Vogue photographs.
C1  The Art Market C17  Sports B6-14  Baseball: Yanks falter in ninth.
B6  Mets keep close eye on bullpen.
B9  Basketball: Knicks work overtime to fritter away title.
B7  Nets lose to Pacers.
B10  Gillen has eye on St.
John's job.
B12  Boxing: No retirement plans for Foreman.
B12  Columns: Vecsey on picking a Noo Yawker B7  Lipsyte on Rangers B10  Hockey: Vanbiesbrouck in top form.
B10  Dream matchup for Devils.
B10  Horse Racing: The Wood points to Derby.
B14  Sports People B12  Obituaries A19  Editorials/Op-Ed A26-27  Editorials A26  In Russia, democracy!
Even Arabs boycott Libya.
A creative tuition increase.
The other election.
Letters A26  A. M. Rosenthal: Jesse Jackson's message.
A27  Leslie H. Gelb: $1.5 trillion for "defense." A27  Thomas S. Foley: Criticism of the House Bank is overdrawn.
A27  Jocelyn White: Superfund -- pouring money down a hole.
A27


Survey Shows U.S. Children Write Seldom and Not Well
Many American children do not write much in school and when they do, they do it poorly, according to a survey of the writings of fourth and eighth graders made public today by the United States Department of Education.
The survey showed that though American students are imaginative and creative in the subjects they write about, the writings are generally disorganized and lacking in critical and analytical content.


Corrections
A report in the Book Notes column on Wednesday about the author Eudora Welty misstated her age.
She is 83.


Stench at Sewage Plant Is Traced; Millions Pledged for Repair Work
After years of community outrage and scientific confusion, New York City officials have finally identified the central source of the debilitating odors at the city's sewage plant on the Hudson River in Harlem: they come from beneath an eight-block concrete roof where acres of foul air collect until periodic gusts roll off the river and blow them onto land.
Correcting the design problem -- and several others in the city's newest, most expensive and most angrily protested sewage plant -- calls for up to $100 million to be spent to enclose the plant fully, according to city officials.
Mayor David N. Dinkins, who as a West Harlem political leader spent nearly 20 years fighting the plant, has told aides he will commit at least $50 million in capital funds for repairs to a project that has already cost $1.3 billion.


Criticism of the House Bank Is Overdrawn
Yesterday, the House Ethics Committee released the names of current and former members who had at least one overdraft at the former House bank.
This final step, following the closing of the bank and other administrative reforms, means the bank story should by rights be over.
The members named yesterday did not abuse their privileges at the bank.
It would be more accurate to say that most members were abused by the bank and its practices.


Walter Engels, 80, A Pioneer Executive In Television News
Walter D. Engels, the first news director at WPIX television and an innovator in that field, died on Sunday at his home in Hampton Bays, L.I.
He was 80 years old.
He died of lung cancer, his family said.


For Children
Spring break is finally here.
And with no classes to attend, the children are sure to be looking to you expectantly, waiting to be entertained.
If your only ambition is to drag them along to the supermarket and the cleaners, you could lose your parent's license.
Boredom is not allowed.
But why not take the children to places where you can have fun, too?
No, not puppet shows, but activities that will engage adults as well as children.
Have you ridden any of the ferries that crisscross the Hudson, or climbed the Weehawken cliffs?
What do you know about the Superdot System at the New York Stock Exchange?
Have you walked around the rooftop pavilion at the Dia Center for the Arts in Chelsea?
Well, then: Skip the cleaners and buy the groceries another time.


INSIDE
A Tax Plan to Aid Culture
Mayor David N. Dinkins endorsed a tax-credit proposal that could increase gifts to museums, parks and libraries by $60 million.
Page B3.
Fewer Subways at Rush Hour
For the first time in a decade, New York City transit officials plan to cut rush-hour subway service because of a sharp decline in ridership.
Page B1.
Big Improvement in Trade
The nation's merchandise trade deficit narrowed sharply to $3.38 billion in February, with exports reaching a record and imports falling.
Page D1.
Surprise Conviction in Italy
One of Italy's most powerful businessmen, Carlo de Benedetti, was convicted of fraud related to the collapse of Banco Ambrosiano.
Page D1.
The Greeks' Fury
A Yugoslav territory's desire to be known as the independent republic of Macedonia has inflamed Greeks, who say the name is theirs.
Page A9.
Furor at Harvard Law
A parody produced by editors of the Harvard Law Review poked fun at the last article written by a scholar murdered last year.
Law, page B16.


Schedule For Markets
The Chicago Board of Trade operated on a shortened schedule yesterday, which is reflected in the futures and options tables on page D14.
Activity continued to be curtailed as a result of flooding that forced much of downtown Chicago to turn off electrical power this week.


Who Needs Cake When There's Bamboo?


Monsignor in Bank Robbed of Tuition
A 69-year-old Roman Catholic monsignor was hit in the head and robbed by two men yesterday afternoon inside a Brooklyn bank as he waited in line to deposit the tuition from his church's parochial school.
The monsignor, James J. Haggerty, pastor of St.
Saviour's Church on Eighth Avenue in Park Slope, was carrying $600 to $700 in cash and almost $50,000 in checks from quarterly tuition payments to the St.
Saviour Elementary School when the robbery occurred at 1 P.M. in a Chemical Bank branch on Flatbush Avenue, a block north of the Grand Army Plaza, the police said.


McClatchy Newspapers Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Jets Sign Allegre
RAUL ALLEGRE, the former Giant place-kicker who put the Jets into the playoffs with an overtime field goal as an emergency replacement in the final game of the 1991 season, has been re-signed by the Jets after being left unprotected by the team under the Plan B free-agency system.
Allegre, who became a Jet hero after PAT LEAHY pulled a hamstring, will be competing with Leahy and JASON STAUROVSKY, who was signed as a Plan B free agent. (AP)


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Love Fires 2 Eagles, 3 Birdies  Davis Love 3d was up, down and all around the Harbour Town Links in Hilton Head, S.C., yesterday.
But when the first round of the Heritage Classic was done, Love was up front with a four-under-par 67 that included two eagles, three birdies and three bogeys.
Love is trying to become only the second player to win the Heritage in two consecutive years.
He had a one-shot lead over four golfers.
Tied at 68 were Lanny Wadkins, Brad Faxon, Ed Humenik and 43-year-old Bruce Fleisher, whose 31 on the front nine was one stroke off the course record. (AP) Horror Show on Links: A three-club wind rocked players back on their heels, produced some ridiculous scores and turned the first round of the PGA Seniors Championship into a golfing horror show yesterday in Palm Beach Gardens, Fla.
Gary Player and Larry Ziegler, each with a 69, were the only players to break 70.
The average score was slightly over 78 and more than one-third of the field shot 80 and up in winds the weather bureau said gusted to 30 miles an hour.
The 56-year-old Player, a three-time winner of the event, said he could recall only two instances in his globe-trotting, 36-year career in which winds were more severe.
Lee Trevino matched par and the defending champion, Jack Nicklaus, birdied the 18th for a 73.
Arnold Palmer struggled to a 77. (AP) Ridgeway Holds 3-Shot Lead: Angie Ridgeway, a 27-year-old rookie, shot an eight-under-par 64 to hold a three-shot lead after the first round of the S.E.G.A.
Women's Championship yesterday in Stockbridge, Ga.
Ridgeway, who qualified for the Ladies Professional Golf Association Tour last October after four years on the Futures Tour, had no bogeys in her lowest round since graduating from Appalachian State University in 1987.
Tied for second were Caroline Pierce of England, Laurel Kean, Missie Berteotti, Deb Richard and Val Skinner. (AP) TENNIS  Sampras and Forget Win Easily  Top-seeded Pete Sampras of the United States and second-seeded Guy Forget of France advanced to the quarterfinals of the Nice Open in France with straight-set victories yesterday.
Sampras beat a former French Open champion, Andres Gomez of Ecuador, 7-6 (7-5), 7-5, while Forget defeated German Lopez of Spain, 6-2, 6-3.
In other second-round play, Henri Leconte of France defeated Tomas Carbonell of Spain, 6-3, 6-1, and seventh-seeded Javier Sanchez of Spain breezed past Nicklas Kulti of Sweden, 6-1, 6-2.
Leconte will play Sampras in the quarterfinals today.
Leconte beat Sampras in a crucial Davis Cup match last December in Lyons when France upset the United States in the final.
Sampras struggled a little against Gomez, but managed to beat another good clay-court player.
In the first round, he beat Martin Jaite of Argentina, the defending Nice champion.
Forget defeated Lopez in just 55 minutes. (AP) Chang and Gilbert in Quarterfinals: Michael Chang and Brad Gilbert won second-round matches in the Salem Open in Hong Kong yesterday and advanced to the quarterfinals.
Chang, seeded second, beat a fellow American, Jim Grabb, 6-2, 6-4.
Gilbert, seeded fourth, defeated Michiel Schapers of the Netherlands, 7-5, 6-3.
Shuzo Matsuoka of Japan outlasted the 1991 finalist, Wally Masur of Australia, 7-6 (7-3), 6-3, and also made the quarterfinals along with sixth-seeded Jan Siemerink of the Netherlands, who defeated a German qualifier, Bernd Karbacher, 7-5, 7-5.
Matsuoka, ranked 87th in the world, will play Gilbert in the quarterfinals.
South African-born Kevin Curren, who now plays out of the United States, may have to withdraw from his quarterfinal match today because of a leg injury.
He had X-rays taken last night and was to learn this morning if he could play against Australian Todd Woodbridge. (AP) Agassi Beats Unseeded Italian: Second-seeded Andre Agassi was all business yesterday in beating Claudio Pistolesi of Italy, 6-1, 6-2, yesterday in a second-round match at the United States Tennis Association clay-courts championships in Tampa, Fla.
Agassi needed just 57 minutes to dispatch the unseeded Italian and set up a quarterfinal meeting with unseeded Franco Davin, a 4-6, 6-3, 6-4 winner over Jean-Philippe Fleurian.
Earlier, fourth-seeded Jaime Yzaga of Peru also reached the quarterfinals by edging unseeded Jacco Eltingh of the Netherlands, 6-4, 6-4.
Yzaga will meet unseeded Mark Woodforde, who advanced by downing unseeded Todd Witsken, 6-7 (5-7), 6-1, 6-3. (AP)
Gildemeister and Cecchini Advance: Laura Gildemeister and Sandra Cecchini, the sixth- and seventh-seeded players, had straight-set victories yesterday to move into the quarterfinals of the $350,000 Virginia Slims of Houston tournament.
Gildemeister of Peru, currently ranked 25th in the world, crushed an American, Halle Cioffi, 6-2, 6-1.
Cecchini of Italy outlasted Germany's Sabine Hack, 7-6 (7-2), 7-6 (7-3).
Bettina Fulco-Villella of Argentina fashioned the second upset of the tournament, a 6-4, 6-3 victory over eighth-seeded Magdalena Maleeva of Bulgaria.
Fulco-Villella will face Monica Seles, the No. 1 women's player and defending champion in the Houston, today. (Reuters)


For Stewart, a Loss That Comes With a Bonus
Sunglasses concealed the 12 stitches over his right eye and the still-reddened pupil of his left eye.
But in his gray suit and print tie, Alex Stewart looked mostly recovered from his brutal fight against George Foreman last Saturday.
Stewart, who lost a majority decision in that Las Vegas bout, was in New York yesterday, reviewing a checkered career that was given a boost by his gutty performance against Foreman, even in defeat.


Peru Chief Asks Dialogue but Foes Scoff
Seeking to break Peru's political impasse, President Alberto K. Fujimori called on "all political forces" today to take part in a "national dialogue for peace and development," starting May 1.
But politicians here quickly dismissed the idea, describing the President as untrustworthy.


Italian Village Out of Immediate Danger From Mount Etna Lava


VLSI Technology reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


Review/Film; Societal Evils in Microcosm
Satyajit Ray's "Branches of the Tree" has the gravity if not the dramatic complexity of a play by Ibsen staged with a mortifying emphasis on the text.
Sparely and rigorously directed by Mr.
Ray, who also wrote the screenplay, the film is a lament for the loss of ethics in an Indian society where money increasingly dominates behavior.
It opens today at the Walter Reade Theater.
The film takes place almost entirely in the house of Ananda Majunda, a self-made Bengali businessman who is respected as much for his high moral principles and many charities as for the fortune he has amassed.
After Ananda suffers a heart attack on his 70th birthday, his family gathers to stand vigil.


Watching Baseball On Green Fields Of Memories
THIS is the time of year when normally calm and sensible sports writers go a little mad, excavating and dusting off their most exaggerated adjectives and talking about such wildly preposterous things as "the sweet spot of the soul" and "the end of the silent spring," breathlessly intoning our culture's curious mantra of rejuvenation.
Baseball is back.
Not the indistinct smoke signals and lazy action of the Grapefruit and Cactus Leagues, but the real thing, the closest we come to real March (and April) Madness.
Sure, we might get more excited by other sports -- they can often be more dramatic and action-filled in the moment -- but when it comes to baseball, nothing else has the depth and profundity, the generational resonance, the sense of providing real insight into the American character and experience.


James Ford, a Sculptor And Print Maker, 45
James Ford, a sculptor and print maker, died on Tuesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 45 years old.
He died of AIDS, said his companion, Peter Reed.


Doctor Is Indicted For Abortion
A Lower East Side doctor who the police said severed the right arm of a baby he was trying to abort was indicted yesterday on charges of assaulting the infant and her mother while performing an illegal abortion.
The doctor, Dr.
Abu Hayat, was also charged with assault and sexual abuse in the cases of two other women, Robert M. Morgenthau, the Manhattan District Attorney, said .


Laclede Steel reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Caravaning and Footing In French and English
To the Editor:
Re Jacques Barzun's April 3 letter: For a Franglais equivalent of "blue jeans," why not use the original French word for the material, "denims," a corruption of "de Nimes"?
The Southern French city of Nimes proclaims in its tourist brochures (another French word) that denim was first milled there.
CARL FAITH Princeton, N.J., April 3, 1992


Philip Morris Profit More Than Doubles
The Philip Morris Companies said yesterday that its profits more than doubled from the quarter a year ago, when an accounting change reduced profits.
Weakness in its North American food business was offset by strong growth in its international food business and in tobacco.
Excluding the effect of the 1991 accounting change, first-quarter earnings rose 12.7 percent, to $1.02 billion, compared with $905 million for the quarter a year ago.
Earnings per share rose to $1.20, from 99 cents for the quarter last year, excluding the accounting change.


A Sampling of Events for Passover and Easter
Today
RADIO CITY MUSIC HALL.
The 60th anniversary of the "Radio City Easter Show," with music, dancing, a parade and the Rockettes, 7:30 P.M.
Through Thursday.
Tickets range from $25 to $33.
Show times and other information: (212) 247-4777 or (212) 307-7171.
SEDER, 92d Street Y, at Lexington Avenue, Manhattan.
The traditional celebration featuring a reading of the Haggadah, songs in Hebrew and English, and a Seder meal, 6:30 P.M.
Tickets: $50 ($25 for children).
Information: (212) 996-1100.


Why Go to Texas to Repair Verrazano Bridge?
To the Editor:
You report that Greiner Engineering Inc. of Irving, Tex., has been chosen to design repairs for the Verrazano-Narrows Bridge in New York City (Business Day, April 7).
It is both shocking and disappointing to me that the municipal officials responsible for granting this contract were not able to find a competitive engineering and design organization from the many that have their offices in the five boroughs of New York City.
As a start, I refer them to the listings in the Manhattan Yellow Pages.


Florida Progress reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Torchmark Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Valmont Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


Texas Instruments reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


No Headline
An obstetrician has told sheriff's deputies here that he was responsible for dumping the remains of at least 60 fetuses in a field near Shawnee, Okla., the authorities said today.
The doctor, Nareshkumar Patel, said he and an employee took the fetuses to the field in Pottawatomie County on Tuesday night and tried to burn them with two cans of lighter fluid, District Attorney Miles Zimmerman said.
He did not say why Dr.
Patel tried to burn the fetuses.


Vanbiesbrouck in Top Form in Finale
John Vanbiesbrouck refused to step gracefully aside from his crease last night, sending one final message to the Rangers' decision makers before the Stanley Cup playoffs begin on Sunday.
As the regular season ended to loud applause at Madison Square Garden with a franchise-record 50th victory, Vanbiesbrouck was in top form in a 7-1 victory over Pittsburgh.
He stopped deadeye Kevin Stevens point blank on two occasions, making 27 saves and remaining unbeaten in his last nine games (8-0-1).
On Wednesday night in Toronto, goaltender Mike Richter looked far less assured while struggling with rebounds and wrist shots in a 4-2 loss.


I.B.M. Bet: Pen as Mighty as a Mouse
I.B.M. announced a portable computer yesterday that is controlled with a pen, rather than with either a mouse pointing device or a keyboard.
While it is not the first company to introduce a pen-based computer, the International Business Machines Corporation is entering the market more quickly than it has approached other new computing markets.
Although its new machine, at six pounds, is slightly heavier than some of its competitors', the new market is just getting started, and I.B.M. is expected to play a significant role.


Chief Executive Quits At Cray Computer
The Cray Computer Corporation said yesterday that Neil Davenport had resigned as president, chief executive and a director, and that Seymour R. Cray, the company's founder and chairman, would assume his duties "for the time being."
In February, Cray Computer halted development of the $30 million Cray-3 supercomputer for lack of a buyer for the first machine, raising questions about whether the four-year-old company, which is based in Colorado Springs, would survive.


Behold, in Russia: Democracy!
Americans watching the turmoil in the Russian Parliament this week have two reasons to be pleased, even thankful.
Moscow's young reformers, confronted by strong opposition, triumphed on the economic front.
What made the victory even sweeter, the struggle provided reassuring evidence that a rough-and-tumble parliamentary democracy is beginning to take shape.
In the midst of crisis, with the structure of the economy and constitution at issue, politicians devised a workable compromise.
Those who expected President Yeltsin to strong-arm or short-circuit the Parliament waited in vain.
The process left many loose ends but it worked, giving reformers the leeway needed for essential changes.


Money Fund Assets Off
The assets of the nation's 590 money market mutual funds decreased by $7.87 billion, to $492.52 billion, in the week that ended on Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
The assets of the 214 institutional funds decreased by $5.11 billion, to $168.79 billion.
The assets of the 285 general-purpose funds were up by $1.14 billion, to $178.52 billion.
The 91 broker-dealer funds decreased by $1.62 billion, to $145.21 billion, the institute said.


Hollywood Portrays Psychotherapists Unfairly
To the Editor:
Much has been said and written about portrayals of gay men and lesbians in the movie "Basic Instinct." Overlooked, however, is another group unfairly portrayed in it, and in three other major movies this year: psychologists and psychiatrists.
In "Silence of the Lambs," the psychiatrist is a serial killer and cannibal.
His psychologist caretaker is arrogant and incompetent.
In "Prince of Tides" the therapist has a business and sexual relationship with the brother of her patient (who is also arguably a patient).
In "Final Analysis" the therapist also has an affair, and in "Basic Instinct" the psychologist has an affair with a patient and discloses confidential material.


National Geographic And New Republic Win
National Geographic and The New Republic were the big winners yesterday as each received two National Magazine Awards to the cheers of a record crowd of 1,300 at the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel.
National Geographic won the general-excellence award for magazines with a circulation over one million because "its writers and photographers find adventure and the rich diversity of life everywhere." The magazine, which has won seven awards in past years, also won the photography award for its "astonishingly fresh images that are often as beautiful as they are informative."


A Housing Project in Harlem Moves Ahead


A Beauty, A Beast And a Dog That Isn't
Once there was a Beauty who arrived at a Beast's enchanted castle, only to find . . . that Jean Cocteau had got there first.
Although Cocteau's 1946 version of the fairy tale begins with an appeal to "childhood simplicity," it is one of the most sophisticated and visually elegant films of all time.
The mournful undertone of this tale takes it far beyond the grasp of children.
Today, Film Forum 2 (209 West Houston Street, Manhattan) begins a weeklong run of "Beauty and the Beast" and "Un Chien Andalou" (1929), Luis Bunuel and Salvador Dali's 17-minute Surreal romp.
Both will be shown in gloriously fresh prints that sweep away the dust of nostalgia.


St. Jude Medical Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


New Jersey Got Richer In the 1980's
Like that of its neighboring states, New Jersey's population got richer, better educated, more diverse and more mobile during the prosperous 1980's, according to an economic and demographic portrait of the state released by the Census Bureau and by the state yesterday.
Yet despite the widespread benefits of the boom, which has since given way to recession, the decade also had its losers: the number of young children living in poverty almost doubled between 1980 and 1990, the years for which the Census Bureau reported.


Owens &amp; Minor reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


McCann-Erickson Gets Johnson Work
In the latest in a series of account consolidations, Johnson &amp; Johnson has consolidated its accounts for oral care products, naming McCann-Erickson New York to handle Reach toothbrushes, Act fluoride rinse and Johnson &amp; Johnson dental floss.
Cadwell Davis Partners in New York had handled the Reach account for 15 years and the Act account for 5; combined billings were estimated at $10 million.
In a telephone interview yesterday, Frankie Cadwell, the agency's president, said that the consolidation did not come as a surprise, adding that Cadwell Davis had been named to handle an undisclosed new-product account.


Constar International reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Phnom Penh Journal; Through the Upheavals, a Child's Smile Abides
"Hello!" the children of Phnom Penh say now when they spot a Western face.
Not long ago, it was "Soviet!" -- in the belief that any non-Asian here in the period of Vietnamese dominance was likely to come from the Soviet Union or other allied countries, among which Cambodian children drew no distinction.
Earlier, "Bonjour!" was the greeting offered, and in between were the Pol Pot years, when the city stood nearly empty and almost no Westerners were allowed.


Request for Leniency
Prosecutors in Miami recommended yesterday that former University of Miami running back MARTIN PATTON be given a lenient sentence in exchange for his cooperation and guilty plea to credit-card conspiracy charges.
Two other charges, obstruction of the mail and credit-card fraud, would be dismissed when he is sentenced June 8, prosecutors said.


Escalade Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 21


Heritage Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Associated Banc-Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


As Euphoria of Unity Fades, Eastern Germans Feel Scorned and Excluded
Like many people in eastern Germany these days, residents of this town are angry at their western cousins.
The euphoria they felt in the first days of unification in 1990 has faded, and a psychological pall has settled over many of them.
The topic that everyone and no one in Neubrandenburg wants to discuss is the sudden disgrace of their most famous neighbor, Katrin Krabbe, the world sprinting champion.
Miss Krabbe is beloved here, and residents were shocked when German sports officials asserted in January that she had tampered with a drug test.


House Reformers of '74 Have Own Woes in '92
With the Watergate scandal still hanging in the air, Representatives Stephen J. Solarz, Thomas J. Downey and a slew of freshman Democrats came to Congress 17 years ago to clean it up and turn it inside out.
Now these one-time young reformers are senior members of the House, and many are finding that their careers are caught up in a new scandal of their own, the House bank affair.
The story of the 26 remaining members of the freshman Class of 1974 demonstrates that the institution can imperil even the most reform-minded members.


Review/Film; A Night At the Ballet Run Amok
"Brain Donors" is a short, reasonably snappy attempt at nothing less than a present-day Marx Brothers comedy, with a cigar-waving John Turturro mugging furiously in the main role.
Mr.
Turturro can't beat Groucho, but he can toss off criminally bad jokes and shameless double- entendres with charming abandon.
As written by Pat Proft and directed by Dennis Dugan, "Brain Donors" will stop at very little to get its laughs, and Mr.
Turturro has just the right silliness for the occasion.
In this attempt to do for ballet what the real Marx Brothers did for opera, Mr.
Turturro appears as Roland Flakfizer, an ambulance-chasing lawyer who's angling to control the prestigious Oglethorpe Ballet Company by sweet-talking Lillian Oglethorpe, a patron of the arts. (Nancy Marchand appropriately plays this as the Margaret Dumont role.) Flakfizer is aided in his efforts by two other stooges, Jacques (Bob Nelson) and Rocco (Mel Smith), who appear to have watched just as many vintage smart-talking slapstick comedies as he has.
Together, this trio can turn the words Gorbachev, gesundheit and Baryshnikov into what sounds like an extended group sneeze.


Dura Pharmaceuticals Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Major Unit Dissolved At Digital
The Digital Equipment Corporation, still reeling from last week's announcement of a $294 million quarterly loss, is radically overhauling its corporate engineering structure in a move that analysts expect to lead to huge layoffs.
The company has not made an official announcement, but in response to an inquiry today it confirmed a report circulating among analysts that it was dissolving its hardware engineering group and moving its functions into the marketing division.


2 Children Drown, a Third Is Missing in Flood


Continental Bank reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Huntington Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Borden Chemicals &amp; Plastics Ltd. Partnership reports earnings for Qtr to March 27


Carolina First Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


F.F.O. Financial Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Review/Pop; Evoking the Memories Of a Bygone Vie en Rose
It is as heartening as it is unexpected when a charismatic young performer takes an older musical tradition and reinvents it in terms that are personal and contemporary but also respectful of the past.
That is what Harry Connick Jr. has done for big- band music in the United States.
And it is what Patricia Kaas, a 24-year-old singer with classic gamine appeal, is doing for the French music-hall tradition of Edith Piaf and Charles Aznavour.
The singer, who appeared at Town Hall on Tuesday evening, is the youngest of seven children born to a French coal miner and a German mother.
She was discovered by the French actor Gerard Depardieu, who produced her first single.
Her second album, "Scene de Vie," which is available on Columbia Records, remained the best-selling record in France for more than three months and swept the major awards in the French equivalent of the Grammys.
Now Miss Kaas is courting an American market that has proven notoriously elusive to pop stars from the European continent.


Riley Tries to Shake Knicks Out of Their Doldrums
The Knicks arrived in Milwaukee today, still trying to cope with their predicament.
Pat Riley held a 20-minute closed-door meeting with the players in one of the hotel meeting rooms before today's practice.
The Knicks' coach was concerned that the team was still emotionally shaken from Wednesday's 95-94 loss in Atlanta, a defeat that might have cost the Knicks the Atlantic Division title.


Trenton Sees Proposed Train Station Stealing Its Business
Trenton's leaders have long complained about the way development has seeped away from the city and into its suburbs, leaving behind joblessness and decay.
The malls that grew up along U.S. 1 in the 1970's helped end the city's role as a retail center.
In the 1980's, a rapidly expanding government seemed to put as many new state office buildings outside the capital as in it.
Now, as a crowning blow, city officials say, the state-run commuter railroad wants to build a new passenger station in this suburb, where Trentonians fear it will compete for riders with Trenton's station less than four miles down the line.


Cuomo Puts In a Vote On St. John's Search
So what if some big-name coaches have expressed reservations about the St.
John's opening because they wouldn't want to move their families to big, bad New York City?
Who needs them, anyway?
That, more or less, was the stance taken yesterday by one New York-bred St.
John's alum, the state's sports-minded Governor, MARIO M. CUOMO.


Volunteer Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Cuomo Reports a 1991 Income of $304,405
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo reported income of $304,405 on his 1991 tax returns, including $124,200 in compensation for eight speeches he gave last year.
The Governor, who is considered one of the country's most gifted Democratic orators, was paid an average of $15,525 per speech.
It was the fifth consecutive year that Mr.
Cuomo has nearly doubled his annual state salary of $130,000 by delivering speeches.
The Governor has averaged $133,590 in honorariums from 1987 to 1991, a period when Mr.
Cuomo has been in demand as a speaker at least partly because he was a potential Presidential candidate.
His most lucrative year was 1989, when he received $151,150.


Fifth Third Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about Ross Perot's testing of a run for the Presidency referred incorrectly in some copies to the policy of his volunteer campaign about financial contributions.
A spokeswoman, Sharon Holman, said the campaign was not accepting any contributions.


Victory by Firm Stance Kicks Off Busy Weekend
New York may no longer be staging the East's toughest audition for the Kentucky Derby when it runs the $500,000 Wood Memorial today.
But it did open a theatrical series of weekend stakes races yesterday when Firm Stance outran 13 other fillies and mares in the mud to take the Top Flight Handicap, the first Grade I event of the season in town.
The race set the stage for an unusual program of five stakes this afternoon that will include the Wood, the season's debut of the star filly Versailles Treaty and the return of Salt Lake, Agincourt and other racing celebrities.
And the stage was set with flourishes and a mass photo finish in the Top Flight.


First Federal Savings (Utah) (O) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Boatlift Cubans Languish in Our Prisons
To the Editor:
May will mark the 13th anniversary of the arrival of the boatlift of about 125,000 Cubans who sailed from Mariel to accept President Carter's invitation to seek refuge in our country.
Several thousand Cubans are still indefinitely detained in many county, state and Federal penal facilities.
They have completed sentences for offenses committed in the United States, from relatively slight infractions to hard-core crimes, but are still subjected to indefinite detention.


New AIDS Policy Chief Starts Off With a Personal Disclosure
Before agreeing to become New York City's first official coordinator of AIDS policy, Ronald S. Johnson had to decide whether he wanted to tell the world that he was H.I.V.-positive.
Mr.
Johnson, 44 years old, had kept his infection with the virus that causes AIDS a secret from all but those closest to him -- because of feelings of shame at first, as a matter of privacy later on -- even as he became a prominent advocate for people with AIDS, particularly members of minorities.
Had he stayed silent, he said, he would have turned down Mayor David N. Dinkins when offered the City Hall job last month.


American Fructose reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


First Regional Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Flexsteel Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


SUNY Access For Military Is Upheld
The State Commissioner of Human Rights yesterday upheld the right of the United States Armed Forces to recruit on the campus of the State University of New York at Buffalo, despite the Government's longstanding policy barring gay and lesbian people from military service.
The Commissioner, Margarita Rosa, said a 1984 state education law giving military and corporate recruiters equal access to the State University campuses took precedence over a 1983 executive order by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo that barred state agencies from discriminating on the basis of sexual orientation.


Computer Research Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Bank of San Francisco Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Make the Most of Spring Creek
Two developers, with very different approaches and goals, want to use Spring Creek, a vast stretch of Brooklyn landfill, to build something New York City sorely needs: low- and moderate-priced housing.
If the Dinkins administration can handle the rivalry adroitly, it can win the best of both proposals.
The Koch administration and the old Board of Estimate designated a developer for Spring Creek three years ago -- the Starrett Housing Corporation, builders of nearby Starrett City.
The Dinkins administration later concurred, and ordinarily that would have been the end of it.


NBSC Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Coast Distribution System reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Bank South Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Classical Music in Review
Mozart on Period Instruments Alice Tully Hall


Solitary Empire


Classical Music in Review
City of Birmingham Symphony Orchestra Carnegie Hall


Boatmen's Bancshares Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


The Numbers Don't Lie: Mets' Offense Multiplies, and Cone Adds a Victory
The heart of the lineup manufactured five runs.
The final third of the order was suddenly a guerrilla force of surprise offense.
The pitching line was solid and unspoiled.
The box score, then, was a snapshot of perfection for a club trying to give a clear indication of what the big picture for the Mets is likely to be in 1992.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League


Economic Watch; Czechs Tread a Minefield On the Way to Capitalism
If there were a book on how to make the leap from socialism to free markets, one might guess they wrote it in Czechoslovakia.
In the last 15 months most price controls have been lifted, subsidies abolished, budgets balanced and businesses freed to exchange the local currency for dollars and marks.
Yet unemployment remains in single digits and inflation, the curse of the former Soviet republics, is running at an acceptable 10 to 15 percent.


Buying a Used Car? There's Help Out There
If a consumer faces any greater quandary than buying a new car, it is buying a used one.
The uncertainties abound.
Did that nice old lady really drive her car, or was it used by a hot-rodding grandson?
And what about that used-car dealer?
Is his price reasonable?


CyCare Systems reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Fisher Business Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Cyberoptics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Ever So Warily, People Are Buying Again
Connie Santucci of Valley Stream, L.I., is shopping for spring clothing, and she is not about to compromise on either quality or value.
"Just because clothing is on sale, I'm not going to settle," she said.
Attracting customers like Mrs.
Santucci is a daunting task these days for retailers and catalogue merchants.


Hall Beach Journal; New Order Up North? Eyes Open for Armageddon
At Fox Main, despite the collapse of the Soviet Union, it's still all systems go.
Inside a white Kevlar dome, which looks like a jumbo golf ball, the new 24-foot-square antenna of the Fixed Position Search 117 long-range radar ceaselessly scans for friend and foe in the desolate Arctic sky.


Hawkeye Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


CPB Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


INSIDE
New Attacks by Serbs Threaten U.S. Aid Plan
Serbian militias seized a town 30 miles from Sarajevo, the capital of Bosnias and Herzegovina, raising new security concerns for an American airlift of humanitarian aid that is scheduled to start today.


42% of Young Black Males Go Through Capital's Courts
After a decade in which both the drug trade and police sweeps expanded with similar zeal, 42 percent of the black men in the District of Columbia, aged 18 through 35, were enmeshed in the criminal justice system on any given day last year, according to a study made public today.
"In effect, the social safety net has been replaced by a dragnet," said Jerome G. Miller, president of the National Center on Institutions and Alternatives, which conducted the study.
The nonprofit group promotes alternatives to imprisonment. 21 Percent in Prison
The study found that 15 percent of Washington's black men in this age group were in prison, 21 percent were on probation or parole and 6 percent were out on bond or being sought by the police on any one day in 1991.
Mr.
Miller said a vast majority of these people had committed felonies.


Shoemaker Files Suit
A year after his car tumbled down a California embankment in what authorities described as a drunken-driving accident that left WILLIE SHOEMAKER a quadriplegic, the former jockey has filed a damage suit against the state, asserting that he was not drunk at the time and that state negligence was to blame for the accident.
In a suit filed in Los Angeles Superior Court by Shoemaker and his wife, CINDY, the couple charge that the state did not install guard rails or a sign warning of a dangerous road condition.
Shoemaker seeks $20 million and his wife wants $5 million to compensate for the loss of her 60-year-old husband's services.


Forget Those Slapstick Truant Officers of 1920's Two-Reelers
To the Editor:
Your April 2 report on Richard Green, "community worker, youth leader and truant officer, 90's-style, for Prospect Park High School, a troubled school in Crown Heights that has long struggled with chronic attendance and dropout problems," requires some clarification.
New York City and State have never had "truant officers."


METRO DIGEST
INCUMBENTS' PROTECTIONS UNDER FIRE
New York's state legislators have the highest re-election rate of any state legislators in the country.
But now two of the underpinnings of incumbents' success, the ways districts are drawn and the election law is written, are the focus of a battle between the Governor and the Legislature whose outcome will shape state politics for years to come.
Political memo, Page 1.
MUD AND POVERTY IN HAMILTON COUNTY


American International Petroleum reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


BankAmerica Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


CBL Medical Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Romanies, Not Gypsies
To the Editor:
In giving examples of how New York City's most marginal immigrants survive (news article, March 23), you state that some "drive gypsy cabs in neighborhoods where yellow cabs won't go."


Corrections
Charts on April 9 and 11 about the British Parliament misstated the number of seats in the old House of Commons.
It was 650; it is now 651.


Carolco Pictures reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Nets Keep Quarreling Right Down to the Wire
Tuesday, Derrick Coleman refused to obey a directive from Bill Fitch.
Thursday, it was Chris Morris.
Yesterday, there was no fine and no disciplinary action from the coach, and no plan for intervention from above as the Nets headed into the final weekend of the National Basketball Association regular season.
"If Bill comes to me and wants my advice or has a problem, then I'll deal with it," said Willis Reed, the Nets' general manager and senior vice president in charge of basketball operations.
"How would someone like it if I go start telling Bill who to play, who not to play? That's his domain and he's pretty much accepted that."


Peter Jay Sharp, Hotel Developer and Owner of Carlyle, Dies at 61
Peter Jay Sharp, a leading Manhattan hotelier and real-estate developer, died on Friday at Mount Sinai Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 61 years old and lived in Manhattan and Edgartown, Mass.
He died of melanoma, his family said.


FirstFed Michigan Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Central Indiana Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Patents; Extending Lab-Grown Skin's Life
A SMALL Massachusetts company has patented a technique to extend the shelf life of human skin that is grown in a laboratory so that it can be shipped over long distances to patients who have been severely burned or injured.
The method was developed by Biosurface Technology Inc. of Cambridge, Mass., which is one of several companies developing artificial skin produced through a process known as tissue culturing.
The skin grown by Biosurface Technology, the only such product commercially available, is grown in plastic flasks over a three-week period from a small sample of cells removed from the person who needs the graft.


Caere Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Amax Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Community First Bankshares reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Economic Policy; Clinton Proposals Seek Political Middle Ground
Gov.
Bill Clinton told his audience at the Wharton School of Business at the University of Pennsylvania on Thursday that, if elected, he would be "a different kind of President with a very different economic policy" from George Bush's.
By all accounts, he would be.
Mr.
Clinton wants to pull the American economy in the direction of the managed capitalism found in Japan and Western Europe, where governments play a larger role than Washington in shaping industries and markets.
And to achieve that transformation, he is offering a bundle of programs, from tax breaks for start-up businesses to a multibillion-dollar agency for commercial research and skills training for all American workers.


Brenco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Engraph Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 29


Religion Notes
'Taxes for Life'
As Americans rushed to complete and mail their income tax returns before the midnight deadline Wednesday, small groups of people who refuse to pay the portion of their taxes that goes to the military gathered in churches to pray.
One by one, they dropped some of their withheld taxes onto collection plates.


Grand Valley Gas Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Review/Film; In This Sinister World, Beware the Garbage Cans
Easily the most intriguing selection in "The Fourth Animation Celebration: The Movie" is "Canfilm," an 18-minute political allegory by the Bulgarian film maker Zlatin Radev.
Set in a claustrophobic cardboard-box environment that suggests the miniature city of a child's nightmare, it portrays a totalitarian society whose clashing political forces are symbolized by different kinds of tin cans.
Ominous black garbage cans representing repressive police agents break down flimsy cardboard doors to arrest and escort cans of cherries to prison.
At a tumultuous tin-can rally, lids flap up and down in synchronized precision like hundreds of arms raised in a Nazi salute.
In the most violent scene, cans of stewed tomatoes spurt into the forced-open mouths of the previously loyal cherry cans.


From Evangelical TV Roots To a Stock Offering's Riches
Pat Robertson, one of the best-known television evangelists and a 1988 Presidential candidate, has been achieving much quieter success as a television executive.
International Family Entertainment Inc., the parent company of his Family Channel, plans to sell shares to the public next week.
The sale will leave Mr.
Robertson with stock worth as much as $14.4 million and his son Timothy with stock worth up to $33.6 million -- more than 500-fold gains on shares they bought for 3 cents each.


Horizon Financial reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Equivest Finance Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Hingham Institution For Savings reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


GREENSPAN OFFERS MORE UPBEAT VIEW ON ECONOMIC DATA
Encouraged by a series of upbeat statistics in the last few days, Alan Greenspan, the chairman of the Federal Reserve, said today that the economy grew at an annual rate of 2 percent in the January-March quarter.
That is an unusually specific projection for Mr.
Greenspan and is more optimistic than his previous statements.
Such a growth rate would make the quarter the best since the comparable 1989 period, during which President Bush was inaugurated.


Intense Fighting in Sarajevo Threatens U.S. Aid Flights
Serbian militias stepped up their attacks near the capital today, overrunning a town only 30 miles away and pounding Muslim Slav neighborhoods with mortar fire.
The fighting raised new security concerns for a United States airlift of humanitarian aid scheduled to begin on Saturday.
One Serbian militia leader suggested partitioning Sarajevo, the capital of the newly independent republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina, which was granted formal recognition by the United States and the European Community last week.
The Serbian militias are fighting to carve out their own part of this republic that is made up of Serbs, Croats and Muslim Slavs.


A Rural New York County Mired in Poverty
If wealth could be measured solely by natural surroundings, no one would be poor in Hamilton County, where the last vestiges of snow are giving way to the magnificent greenery of an Adirondack spring and the lakes glisten as they thaw in the sunshine.
But gauged by numbers, the landscape here is grim.
This winter the unemployment rate hit 19.1 percent, the highest of any county in the Northeast, and labor officials expect that it will rise above 20 percent for April now that the North Country's mud season has arrived and most timber companies have shut down their logging operations until late May.


Fulton Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Parcells Is 'Well'
BILL PARCELLS underwent his third heart procedure in four months yesterday, and the former Giants coach was reported to be doing "extremely well" afterward.


Quotation of the Day
"At Easter last year, just after the war ended, we were sitting here empty. We couldn't beg for tourists. But now every night we have to turn people away because we have no vacant rooms." -- HANNA STREBEL, who runs a youth hostel in East Jerusalem.  [ 1:5. ]


Baldor Electric reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


Cybernetics Products reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Liberty National Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Great Western Financial reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Co-operative Bank of Concord reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


F &amp; C Bancshares Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Who's Game To Capture The Stanley This Time?
Because of the recent strike, the Stanley Cup finals might end on a warm night in mid-June, in a muggy arena with a puck bouncing through fog across slushy ice that is surrounded by perspiring spectators in short-sleeved shirts and bermuda shorts.
It's almost as ludicrous as a World Series game outdoors at midnight in late October, with bundled, shivering spectators watching balls skim across frosty artifical turf for unnatural doubles.


Armstrong Pharmaceuticals reports earnings for Qtr to March 30


A Year After Missiles Fell, Jerusalem's Tourists Return
Near the heart of the Old City, at the intersection of two ancient stone passages, there was traffic gridlock this morning.
Good Friday processions of French and Maronite Catholic pilgrims carrying large wooden crosses had collided with Arabs and tourists coming from the opposite direction.
Suddenly, no one was moving, and everyone was shoving.
"Whatever you do, don't shout 'fire,' " said Edie Pettis, a student from Grand Rapids, Mich., who was flattened against a wall as Israeli police officers in blue baseball caps and flak jackets waded into the tangled crush of bodies, to clear a path for the pilgrims.


Evans &amp; Sutherland Computer Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 27


A Good Harvest Leads to an Extension of the City's Gun-Buying Program


United New Mexico Financial Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Ceradyne Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Anthony G. DePalma, Banana Marketer, 73
Anthony G. DePalma, retired president of the world's leading banana company, died last Sunday at his home in Chester, N.H.
He was 73 years old.
He died of prostate cancer, his family said.


Collaborative Research reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Bay Area Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Classical Music in Review
Aysegul Durakoglu  Pianist Merkin Concert Hall


Business Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Corcom Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


Quiet Neighborhoods Give Most Guns to City Program
Confirming suspicions that New York City's gun-buying program would do little to disarm criminals, police statistics released yesterday showed that the month-old program was most successful in collecting weapons from some of the city's lowest crime areas.
Conceding that the program would probably do more to prevent domestic crimes than street violence, Mayor David N. Dinkins said yesterday that it had surpassed his expectations by reducing the number of weapons in people's homes and announced he would extend the program for another 30 days.


First Inter-Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Observer; Two Planets Apart
This so-called public "rage" against Washington and "the system" gives me a pain.
For one thing, rage is an unseemly emotion.
Displaying emotion, even seemly emotion, makes it hard for serious men to conduct serious business, and what are Washington and "the system," after all, but aggregations of serious men?
Yes, of serious women too.
Washington and "the system" now have serious women galore.
On a recent "MacNeil/Lehrer News Hour" I saw a woman described as a "Republican pollster." If that's not serious, pray tell what is.


Valley Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about a housing project in Harlem for low-income and homeless families misstated its cost and the number of apartments involved.
Ninety-five apartments will be built, at a cost of $15 million, as part of a larger project for Manhattan, the Bronx and Brooklyn that is to provide about 1,000 apartments at a cost of $170 million.


Barry (R.G.) Corp.(A) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


National Savings Bank of Albany reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


First Union Real Estate reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Glendale Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Steinbrenner Drops Suit Against Reporting Firm
George Steinbrenner yesterday dropped his lawsuit against a court stenographic firm involved in the commissioner's investigation of him, providing another indication that he may be close to announcing an agreement under which Leonard Kleinman would withdraw his lawsuit against Commissioner Fay Vincent.
Because he alone had brought the lawsuit against the Esquire Reporting Company in 1990, Steinbrenner has always had the ability to end it.
But Steinbrenner, the Yankees' principal owner, has said that he didn't want to drop the suit until Kleinman withdrew his legal action against the commissioner.


Rules Eased for A.T.&amp; T.
The Federal Communications Commission today gave the American Telephone and Telegraph Company greater flexibility in the way it sells complex packages of long-distance services to large corporations.
Today's action reverses a policy under which A.T.&amp; T. customers who wanted to change their contracts were not allowed to buy a package of services that included toll-free "800" numbers.


Data Transmission Network reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Aquarion Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


KeyCorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Galileo Electro-Optics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Curtiss-Wright reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


National Community Banks Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Execufirst Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Pinnacle Banc Group Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Chipcom Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


Pianist in Recital
Roy Eaton, a pianist, is to play a recital at 3:30 P.M. tomorrow at Alice Tully Hall.
The first half of the program features the premiere of Adolphus Hailstork's Trio Sonata, the Prelude and Fugue in C sharp minor from the second book of Bach's "Well-Tempered Clavier" and Mozart's Sonata in A (K. 331).
The second half, titled "The Meditative Chopin," consists of a prelude, a waltz, a nocturne and the Sonata No. 2, "Funeral March." Tickets are $20.
Information: (212) 875-5050.


CFS Financial reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Gingrich Tries to Avoid Heat Of Voter Outrage He Fanned
"There's a difference," Representative Newt Gingrich tells audiences here these days, "between being embarrassed and being a scandal."
Mr.
Gingrich, whose hyperbolic verbiage about corruption in Congress has seldom bothered with such fine distinctions, now says that while he is embarrassed about overdrawing his account 22 times at the House bank in the last three years, he is part of the solution and not part of the problem there.


First Commerce reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Mother and 2 Sons Hurt In Fire Started by Candle
As Abraham Frank and his family performed the symbolic search for the leaven, a final preparation for Passover, a candle ignited a fire that swept their Brooklyn home late Thursday night.
What had been intended as a joyous beginning to eight days of celebrations with family and friends instead left his wife, Shira, and their two youngest boys critically injured and their home destroyed.
The fire, at 799 East Eighth Street in Midwood, has brought together the family's friends and neighbors as well as strangers in the closely-knit neighborhood in a way that many of them said showed the true meaning of the Jewish holiday.


A Yankee Meltdown, and at the Hands of Cleveland, No Less
The Cleveland Indians, one of the youngest and least experienced teams in the major leagues, seemed to be ripe for a veteran pitcher to take to school.
The Yankees, with their craftiest and winningest pitcher of a year ago on the mound, seemed to be ready to teach.
For three innings last night at Yankee Stadium, Scott Sanderson, who can throw a ball into a tea cup when his control is right, seemed able to do that at will.
But when his pitches started finding the middle of the plate, the Indians started finding more than a few pitches to their liking.
The result: an 11-1 Cleveland romp.


Chemfix Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


News Summary
International 2-5  AFGHAN REBELS MASSING
Muslim rebels took up positions on the edge of the Afghan capital and demanded the surrender of the army and the newly declared Government.
Najibullah, who was ousted as President on Thursday, stayed out of sight.
The United Nations was said to be trying to negotiate safe passage out of the country for him.  1


M.T.A. Labor Contract Talks Break Down
Contract talks between the Metropolitan Transportation Authority and the union representing 32,000 New York City subway and bus workers have broken off, and transit officials said yesterday that they had asked the state to appoint an arbitrator.
M.T.A. officials said they had asked the state to declare an impasse in the talks because the union was demanding additional concessions that the authority insists it cannot afford.


Corrections
An obituary yesterday about the cookbook author Nika Hazelton misstated the day of her death and the date of a memorial service.
She died on Wednesday, and the service will be on April 27, at 3 P.M., at the Church of St.
Agnes, 141 East 43d Street, in Manhattan.


How to Complete Democracy in Korea
In these, his final months in office, President Roh Tae Woo has the opportunity to finish the job of democratizing South Korea.
President Roh, who cannot run for re-election, has already earned a place in his country's history by leading the way to freely elected government and toward reunifying North and South Korea.
But before he departs, one further step is needed:
Abolition of the repressive National Security Law and release of all those jailed for peaceful political expression.


Keeping a Missile-Free Watch for Asteroids; The Events at Gibeon
To the Editor:
"Star Warriors on Sky Patrol" (Op-Ed, March 25), the exemplary analysis by Prof.
Robert L. Park of the latest "Star Wars" fantasy, is marred by one notable error.
Professor Park states, as a "remarkable fact," that "in all of recorded history there is not a single account of anyone being killed by a meteorite." But just such an account is given in one of the most famous passages in the Bible.


About New York; After England and Hollywood, Beans Win Out
A conversation with Rupert C. Barneby sparkles like a sunny day in April.
Just ask him how he became one of the world's experts on beans.
"They choose you," he said.
"I don't think I chose them."
Mr.
Barneby was at his desk at the New York Botanical Garden.
Overhead hung some enormous dried pods of the sort we learned are a wonderful laxative for horses.
Pictures of other legumes occupied the places where most people put pictures of family.


2 Cars? Not Enough
Michelle M. Hendershot drives her 1992 Dodge Shadow to her job as a secretary in Hauppauge, L.I., each morning.
Her husband, Richard, a teamsters' union negotiator, takes the 1990 Chevy Caprice to his office in Bay Shore.
A third car, a 1987 G.M. van, stays in reserve in their driveway in Selden: It's for camping trips.
"I know it sounds crazy, but we need the van to pull our camper," Mrs.
Hendershot said.
"Basically, what we've got is two work cars and one recreation car."


Coastal Banc Savings reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Patents; One-Handed Clock Easier to Read?
Convinced that traditional clocks need a face lift, Scott L. Sullivan of Arlington, Va., has invented a one-handed clock that tells both the hour and minute and which he says is easier to read.
In place of the two hands on a standard clock, the new one features a circle that moves around the face to each hourly position.
At the same time, the circle rotates on its own axis so that a mark on the circle depicts the passing of minutes in each hour.


Navy Dept. Works To Do Things Better
To the Editor:
The anonymous Federal worker who recited a litany of complaints about Government bureaucracy in "Our Do-Nothing Government" (Op-Ed, March 30) is right that large Government organizations resist change to avoid risks and consume more time and energy than they should in delivering their "products." Hasn't anyone, he wants to know, "ever read W. Edwards Deming?"


First Hawaiian Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


BSB Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Car Dealer's Fraud Case Puzzles Industry Officials
Auto industry officials have expressed incredulity that John McNamara, the Long Island auto dealer charged with fraud, could have convinced a subsidiary of General Motors to finance tens of thousands of nonexistent vehicles, as Federal prosecutors have maintained he did.
According to the charges, Mr.
McNamara borrowed $425 million supposedly to buy 17,000 converted vans from Kay Industries of Indianapolis in December, then sell them to the Cydonia Trading Company in Cyprus.


U.S. Bond Price Dips In Japan
Reacting to a slide in the United States on Thursday, Treasury securities traders in Japan sold modest amounts of notes and bonds during overnight trading.
The slight dip in prices occurred before strong March housing starts data were released yesterday morning in Washington.
Those figures may have an influence on credit market participants when trading resumes in the United States on Monday.


The Last Cat's-Paw War
With the collapse this week of a Soviet-installed regime in Kabul, not just a war but an era has ended.
Afghanistan was one of seven devastating cat's-paw wars, all fought in impoverished third world societies, between belligerents backed by either Moscow or Washington.
As the last of these proxy battles gutters out, Americans are left wondering whether they should still care.
Consider Afghanistan.
Its politics were messy, ethnic and nonaligned until 1978, when an ultra-leftist faction seized power.
A conservative tribal rebellion followed, and in 1979 Soviet troops poured in to save a Marxist client regime.
Thus began a bloody stalemate that cost two million lives and turned one of every three Afghans into refugees.


Calnetics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Sampras Beats Leconte


Gander Mountain reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Alliance Well Service reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Bridge
The standard of ethics among good players is generally high, and has improved in the last 30 years.
But there are still wide variations.
At the American Contract Bridge League's Spring Nationals last month there was one player would have scored zero on a 0-10 scale.
In an end position that presented no difficulty to him, he markedly hesitated and induced his opponent to believe that he had been squeezed.
Such tactics are a breach of the laws and proprieties, and when the declarer accepted the hesitation at face value and failed in his contract, a committee gave the innocent side redress and made them winners of the match.


Market Closing
All stock and commodities markets were closed yesterday in the United States and most foreign countries for Good Friday.
There was also no United States trading in corporate, municipal or government securities.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Taxes; Clintons Paid $49,828 to I.R.S. on Earnings of $244,356
Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas and his wife, Hillary, earned a total of $244,356 last year, most of it by Mrs.
Clinton, a lawyer and member of several corporate boards, according to tax returns made public by the Clintons yesterday.
The returns showed that the Clintons paid $49,828 in Federal income taxes and $12,424 in Arkansas state income taxes.


Dominion Resources reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Review/Music; A Violin Virtuoso From Britain Who's an Original Down to His Socks
Nigel Kennedy participated in two separate events at Avery Fisher Hall on Thursday night.
The first was simply to walk on stage, an act that the young British violinist made into a cultural experience all its own.
With his coonskin-cap haircut, patched jacket, flowing scarf, running shoes and amazing parti-colored socks, Mr.
Kennedy moved among the tail-coated members of the New York Philharmonic like a myna bird among penguins.
He leered briefly at his audience as the orchestra tuned, a particularly outrageous party crasher who has gotten past the butler and made himself at home.
Mr.
Kennedy's other activity was to play the Sibelius Violin Concerto on the first half of a Philharmonic subscription concert.
This was another act of iconoclasm but, I think, a very different one.
His clothes, the stage speeches and stiff little imitations of jazz-musician handshakes had been an exercise in anomaly, an "I don't belong here and don't care" demeanor made piquant by a musical ability superior, or at least equal, to that of anyone on stage who did "belong."


BRIEFS
*
Guy F. Atkinson Co., South San Francisco, Calif., a heavy construction concern, said its Commonwealth Construction unit had been awarded a contract currently worth $286 million for the building of a new pulp and paper mill near Terrace, British Columbia, for Orenda Forest Products Ltd., West Vancouver, British Columbia. *
Bristol Holdings Inc., Las Vegas, Nev., said its shareholders had approved a change in the company's name to Sports-Tech Inc., effective Monday.


Your Taxes; I.R.S. Is Auditing Sport Federations
MILLIONS of fans will be watching next month when American gymnasts compete in the Phar-Mor U.S.
Gymnastics Championships.
So will the Internal Revenue Service.
The agency is considering new guidelines for assessing "unrelated business income" taxes against nonprofit organizations, including the U.S.
Gymnastics Federation, that earn money from corporate sponsors.


BB&amp;T Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Hubco reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Staying Upright: Choosing a Cane That Fits Right And Feels Right
Many people who use canes injure themselves because they don't do the necessary research before buying one.
That is an early conclusion of a continuing study on canes sponsored by the American Association of Retired Persons.
According to Dr.
Margaret Wylde, vice president of the Institute for Technology Development in Oxford, Miss., which is conducting the study, the conclusion is based on a review of recent medical and rehabilitation literature and on more than 1,000 letters solicited from A.A.R.P. members who are regular cane users.


German Terrorist Group Says It Will End Attacks
The Red Army Faction has surprised Germany by announcing an end to its 20-year campaign of violence.
In a letter issued this week, the guerrilla group said it would now "reflect about what we did wrong."


Man Grabs Officer's Gun, Using It to Kill Himself
Carrying $150 and a hotel key in his pocket, a 31-year-old man snatched a revolver from a transit police officer's holster and shot himself in the head as they stood on a deserted subway platform in lower Manhattan early yesterday morning, the police said.
Kenneth Trent died at New York Downtown Hospital at 5:40 A.M., Albert O'Leary, a police spokesman, said.


New Mayor's 'Shaky' Start Has San Francisco Puzzled
After 100 days of Frank Jordan as Mayor, San Franciscans are still debating whether his amiable but inexperienced governing style is refreshing or inept, and whether he is his own man or the pawn of his handlers.
The early months of the Jordan administration have included some surprising appointments, botched dismissals and assorted blunders.
The new Mayor concedes he has had a "shaky" start.


Brooktree Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


SHAMIR SAYS U.S. GAVE ARABS VOW
Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir said in an interview published today that the United States refused Israel's request for $10 billion in loan guarantees because the Bush Administration had already promised Arab countries it would withhold the guarantees unless Israel stopped building settlements in the occupied territories.
"No doubt about it, no doubt about it," Mr.
Shamir said in an interview with The Jerusalem Post.
"There was some kind of promise. The Arabs say so."


Corrections
An obituary on March 31 about the actress Leueen MacGrath misstated the date of a theater appearance in London.
She performed in John Mortimer's "Voyage Round My Father" in 1971.


Some College Costs Should Be Tax Deductible
As the Government spends increasingly less on student financial aid, many leading colleges and universities are using a greater percentage of tuition revenues for scholarships.
Just as income tax breaks are given for charitable contributions, this portion of tuition should be tax deductible.
Statistics compiled by the Consortium on Financing Higher Education, which does research and analysis for 32 member colleges, show the growing importance of tuition for scholarships.
In 1980, the consortium schools spent an average 9.8 percent of tuition revenues on financial aid; last year, that figure rose to 15.9 percent.
It will continue to rise as Federal and state financing drops further.


Keeping a Missile-Free Watch for Asteroids
To the Editor:
In "Star Warriors on Sky Patrol" (Op-Ed, March 25), Robert L. Park makes the error of tarring good and important science with the same brush he applies to an overenthusiastic emphasis on nuclear weapons.


CCB Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


First United Bancshares Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Corrections
An article yesterday about proposed tax credits for donations to cultural institutions misstated the timing of the Dinkins administration's most recent cut in city appropriations for the arts.
The 28 percent reduction occurred in this fiscal year, which ends June 30.


Florida First Federal Savings reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Classical Music in Review
S.E.M. Ensemble Paula Cooper Gallery


Solemn Celebrations For Christians and Jews


Trustmark Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Sports of The Times; New Jersey Calling In Sick
Fritz Massmann's post-game retirement reception on Thursday was pleasant, but not as upbeat as the New Jersey Nets had hoped.
The 64-year-old Massmann, who spent 22 years as the Nets' trainer, will retire after the Nets' last game, and management had wanted Fritz's reception to be a double celebration.
The Nets could have clinched the franchise's first playoff berth since 1986 on Thursday with a victory over Indiana.
Instead, they squandered a 12-point lead and dropped a 119-113 decision to the Pacers.
Now they'll have to defeat Orlando tonight, in their final game of the regular season, to clinch a playoff berth.


Progressive Bank Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Clary Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Comet's Farewell
Catherine Comet's last appearance as music director of the American Symphony Orchestra is to take place at 3 P.M. tomorrow at Carnegie Hall.
In its last concert of the season, the orchestra is to present the New York premiere of David Ott's Symphony No. 2, the Schumann Piano Concerto with Christopher O'Riley as soloist, and Ravel's orchestration of Mussorgsky's "Pictures at an Exhibition." Tickets are $6 to $40.
Information: (212) 247-7800.


Granite Broadcasting Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


C.R. Gibson Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Baltimore Gas &amp; Electric Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Mark Twain Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Excel Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


When Products Are Tied to Causes
It used to be that the last thing companies wanted to do was to take a stance on a controversial issue that could offend a single customer.
Aiming to please everyone, they chose to help mainstream, do-good causes to which only a Scrooge would object: Toys for Tots, Easter Seals, the March of Dimes.
But a new generation of corporate executives, by linking their products to abortion rights, AIDS prevention, gun control and other issues that roil the nation, is gradually beginning to change the way many goods and services are sold.
Point-of-purchase politics, as it is called, aims to appeal to some consumers but definitely not to others, winnowing them through a striking strategy of speaking out.


Amtech Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Dial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Keystone Heritage Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


The Class of '74
They entered the House eager and reform-minded in the wake of Watergate.
Now many have been caught up in the bank affair.
Page 8.


Diceon Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


Which Pole Where? This Tent Knows
Pitching a tent can be frustrating for seasoned and neophyte campers alike.
Figuring out what goes where on the first camping trip of the year can tax all but the most mechanically minded.
North Face, an outdoor equipment manufacturer in Berkeley, Calif., has addressed this problem with its No Hitch Pitch system.
Bob Howe, the company's equipment designer, developed the system, which was introduced last year and revamped to accommodate new tent designs.
It works on the notion that the poles stay attached to the tent, even after the tent has been folded and put away.


Drug Charges for Ex-Postal Aide in House
Federal prosecutors charged a former supervisor at the House post office today with possession of cocaine and conspiracy, the first instance in which a manager at the mailing service has been accused of criminal wrongdoing.
The charges were announced just one day after the ethics committee made public the names of hundreds of lawmakers who overdrew their checking accounts at the House bank.
Although the post office is a separate issue, the case seemed to further complicate attempts by the House Speaker, Thomas S. Foley of Washington, to extricate the Democratic leadership from criticism over mismanaged House institutions.


Golden West Financial reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


U.N. Mission Toils as Cambodia Takes a Holiday
Cambodia celebrated a national holiday today, the 17th anniversary of the entry of the Khmer Rouge troops of Pol Pot into this capital and the beginning of a reign of horror that uprooted the nation, emptied its cities and left more than a million dead.
Called the Day of Victory over American Imperialism, the holiday is now referred to by some Cambodians as Liberation Day.
But that same name is also applied to Jan. 7, another national holiday, which celebrates the overthrow in 1979 of the Pol Pot regime by the invading Vietnamese Army.


Review/Dance; From 5 Choreographers, 13 Works
An evening of 13 dance pieces canseem overgenerous.
That was certainly the case with "Puzzles," a program of work by five choreographers that was presented on Tuesday night at the Washington Square United Methodist Church on West Fourth Street.
A more serious problem was that, with very few exceptions, it was hard to imagine the dances proceeding from any idea or image or concern that gripped the choreographer unavoidably.
The two major exceptions were "Drops" and "Lovely Day," both excerpts from Howard Fireheart's "Circus Luscious." The first dance, a solo for the choreographer, might have been a noodling improvisation, with Mr.
Fireheart emerging from and disappearing into the dark.
What made the solo more solid was the portrait it offered of a catlike dancer with a fiercely glittering gaze and an appropriative attack.


Greece's Premier Wins Vote in Parliament
Prime Minister Constantine Mitsotakis won a vote of confidence in Parliament early today after seeking support for his economic policies and his hard line toward the neighboring Yugoslav republic of Macedonia.
Mr.
Mitsotakis called for the vote of confidence after dismissing Foreign Minister Antonis Samaras this week in a dispute over policy on the republic, which is seeking recognition as an independent nation.
A region of northern Greece is also called Macedonia, and the Yugoslav republic's desire for independence under that name has inflamed nationalist passions in Greece.


Lawyer for Libyan Suspects in Jet Bombing Hints at Trial in West
The two Libyans wanted for trial in the bombing of a Pan Am jumbo jet over Lockerbie, Scotland, in 1988 would be prepared to go to trial in the West if they were given guarantees that the trial would be fair, their lawyer told news agencies in Tripoli today.
But the statement, coupled with a restatement of the longstanding Libyan position that a trial in Scotland or the United States would be prejudicial, was greeted with skepticism by Western officials.


Political Memo; Cuomo and Legislators Near Showdown On Election Law
New York's state legislators have a re-election rate of 98 percent, the nation's highest for state lawmakers.
But now two of the underpinnings of this incumbency success, the way districts are drawn and the way the election law is written, are the focus of a showdown between the Governor and the Legislature.
The battle seems likely to dominate the second half of this year's legislative session, and the outcome will shape politics in the state for years.


Bombay Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 29


Commerce Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Carlisle Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


First Amarillo Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to April 1


Traffic Alert
Because of the first day of Passover, alternate-side parking rules are suspended in New York City today.
Other regulations remain in effect.


Ardent Preacher of Radical Change
Michael Hammer is preaching to yet another flock of managers about casting off their old hierarchies and redesigning departments to "find imaginative new ways to accomplish work."
This time, the former M.I.T. professor, technology expert and now one of nation's hottest industry consultants, is in Manhattan mesmerizing a group of Time Warner executives and senior managers.
As he prowls the stage, he tells them they had better rethink how they do everything, from buying notebooks to responding to customers' complaints -- or else.


BUSINESS DIGEST
THE ECONOMY
Greenspan said the economy grew at a 2 percent annual rate in the first quarter.
That is the most specific, and optimistic, projection he has made and would make the quarter the best since the 1989 period, when President Bush was inaugurated.  [ Page 1. ]
Construction of new homes and apartments rose 6.4 percent last month to their highest level in two years, the Government said, in the latest sign of an economic rebound.
Private economists cautioned that the 6.4 percent increase probably overstated the strength because the gain came solely from a surge in apartment building that they said was unsustainable.  [ 34. ]


Altera Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Newspapers' Owners Gain
Affiliated Publications Inc. and the Pulitzer Publishing Company have reported that they each returned to profitability in the first quarter after losses a year earlier.
McClatchy Newspapers Inc. posted a 36.7 percent rise in earnings.
The reports, issued on Thursday, were the latest in a pattern of improvement in the media business this year, particularly in comparison with results a year earlier, which were depressed because of the Persian Gulf conflict.


Driver for Aged Fatally Shot In an Elevator
A 30-year-old driver and aide at a Jewish home for the elderly and blind, on his way to pick up his 1-year-old daughter from a baby sitter, was shot dead during an apparent robbery attempt in a Bronx apartment building last night, the police said.
Five to eight youths, between the ages of 14 and 18, followed Lazaro Roberto Perez and his wife when they entered the elevator at 2630 Kingsbridge Terrace, in Kingsbridge Heights, about 6:30 P.M., said Sgt.
Tina Mohrmann, a police spokeswoman.
Mr.
Perez was wearing a gold chain, and one of the suspects flashed a handgun and demanded it, she said.


Briggs &amp; Stratton Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


A Candidate Says No To the National Gallery
John Walsh, the director of the J. Paul Getty Museum in Malibu, Calif., who was believed to have been chosen by the search committee at the National Gallery of Art in Washington as the new director of the gallery, withdrew from consideration yesterday.
His surprise announcement followed daylong meetings he had with the board of the Getty Trust, parent organization of the museum.
In a statement, Mr.
Walsh said: "I've withdrawn as a candidate for the position in Washington. I was flattered to be considered, but I feel I still have a great deal to accomplish at the Getty."


The Fingerprint Myth Turns Real
A Queens detective recently solved a six-year-old murder case with a technology that is turning the fingerprint myth into practical reality.
The myth, that fingerprints are widely used to solve crimes, probably flourished because of the old "Dragnet" television series.
As Sgt.
Joe Friday deadpanned his questions to witnesses at a crime scene, a technician would diligently brush powder on shiny surfaces in search of incriminating fingerprints.
The prints, everybody knew, might lead directly to the suspect and a quick arrest.
Indeed, savvy crooks wore gloves.


Marvyn Kornberg, Counselor in the Spotlight
As he crossed Queens Boulevard, Marvyn Kornberg, counselor at law, was hungry.
Not for the pasta in the Pasta Lovers Trattoria down the street.
Not for the pastrami in the Pastrami King deli nearby.
No, as he strode briskly to the Queens County Criminal Court, he hungered for what was on the menu there: prosecution witness.
And he intended to do the roasting himself.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Senate; Anti-Incumbency Fervor Has Specter Running Scared in Pennsylvania Race
Arlen Specter, a moderate United States Senator with a high approval rating among Republicans, has a huge lead in the polls and has raised more than 10 times what his opponent in the coming primary has raised.
But as a measure of the difficulties incumbents are facing this year, Mr.
Specter is running scared.
He has been spending $200,000 a week on a $2 million statewide television advertising campaign.
His opponent, Stephen F. Freind, has been running a single radio commercial in just a few markets.


INB Financial reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Dover Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Citizens Banking Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Corrections
Because of an editing error, two front-page articles yesterday about the House banking scandal misstated the numbers of former and current House members on lists of those who wrote overdrafts.
An initial list, issued on April 1, included 5 former and 17 current members.
The list issued on Thursday included 51 former and 252 current members, not 56 former and 247 current members.


Patents; Potential Drug To Fight AIDS
Genelabs Technologies Inc., a biotechnology concern in Redwood, City, Calif., has patented the genetic code to reproduce a potential drug to fight AIDS that is derived from a Chinese flowering plant called Trichosanthes kirilowii.
Alpha-trichosanthin, the compound isolated from the plant, has been used in China to induce abortions and belongs to a broad family of chemicals that inhibit the genetic machinery of cells that is responsible for synthesizing proteins.


More Than a Favorite Pastime
It is the middle of the afternoon at Dodger Stadium -- still two hours away from the first pitch of the night -- but Deion Sanders says he can't wait for the game to start.
He is pulling on his wrist bands and adjusting his cap, and he is thinking about the game.
Just the game.
Not football.
Not the Atlanta Falcons or training camp or punt returns.
If someone wonders aloud whether Sanders will choose to spend the entire season with the Atlanta Braves or suddenly bolt for the Falcons at the end of July, he will simply shrug.


Scooper Patrol
To the Editor:
Despite the willingness of more than 4,000 auxiliary police officers serving with the New York City Police Department to enforce the canine-waste law, your March 24 report that dog owners are flouting the scooper law testifies to inertia.


First Federal S&amp;L Assoc of East Hartford reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


'The Player': What's So Funny?
Dozens of inside references are lurking in Robert Altman's new film, "The Player," an acid portrait of Hollywood.
Elements of the movie, written by Michael Tolkin, may elude that vast portion of humanity outside the film business.
But to those within earshot of giggling cognoscenti, here are a few "in" jokes.
SCENARIO: The sleazy studio executive Larry Levy (Peter Gallagher) introduces himself to Burt Reynolds (as himself).
Says Levy: "Burt. Larry Levy. I hope you don't remember me, and if you do, I hope there are no hard feelings. I was only working for Kastner at the time."


June Wedding For Ms. Barkin
Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen Barkin of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter, Elizabeth Barkin, to Nathan David Leight, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul Leight of Bay Harbor Islands, Fla.
A June wedding in planned.
Ms.
Barkin, 24 years old, is a therapist at the Post Graduate Center for Mental Health in New York.
She graduated from the University of Rochester and received master's degrees in counseling psychology and education from Columbia University.
Her father is a real-estate investor and developer in New York.


Industry-Aid Bill Stirs Tax Battle
DEPENDING on where you sit, a bill that breezed through the State Senate on April 2 and the Assembly last week could cost residential taxpayers tens of millions of dollars, could save industrial taxpayers tens of millions of dollars -- or none of the above.
The sponsors of the bill, called the Business Retention Act, say it will keep business and industry from leaving the state by exempting equipment and machinery from local property taxes.
They say the bill simply reiterates a previous law that has been diluted beyond recognition by a recent series of Tax Court decisions.


It Was All Mr. Preston's Idea
To the Editor:
"The Glorious Oversight Revolution" (Forum, March 15) erroneously attributed the reason for the change in the compensation package of Avon's chief executive to "response to investor requests."


Her Life Through Their Eyes
HOW WE SURVIVED COMMUNISM AND EVEN LAUGHED
By Slavenka Drakulic. 189 pp. New York: W. W. Norton &amp; Company. $22.95.


Plants That Honor the Memory of People
WHAT spring would be complete without the bright yellow little bells of forsythia?
The shrub seems to be growing everywhere, a cheerful sight indeed, bringing graceful garlands of flowers to a landscape that is frequently still quite bare.
It is just about the easiest shrub to grow, and if it is kept in bounds, with judicious pruning right after coming into bloom, forsythia will be around to flower for many springs to come.
But how many gardeners realize that forsythia commemorates someone?
William Forsyth, gardener to George III of England, is credited with having built the first rock garden in England, with stones taken from the Tower of London and with lava brought from Iceland by Sir Joseph Banks, who was an explorer and naturalist.


Sweet Alternatives
Come years ago, when consumption was truly conspicuous and excess really wretched, one of those Texas stores that liked to offer twin Learjets for the couple who had everything came up with a Bordeaux chateau as the ultimate Christmas gift.
They chose a place in Sauternes and laid on the works -- 18th-century house, vineyards, cellars, stocks and a couple of faithful retainers -- all for something in the neighborhood of $1 million.


Parting Ways
Winnie Mandela lived apart from Nelson Mandela for almost all of the 33 years since they were married, serving as his surrogate while the African National Congress leader was imprisoned for 27 years.
She accumulated power in the anti-apartheid movement and, many colleagues now say, grew to abuse that power.
Last week, a series of events made it plain that her marriage and political career were over.
Last May, she was convicted as a kidnapper and accessory in the assault of four young men; on Monday, her former driver said she had ordered the kidnapping and helped beat the young men.
On Tuesday, Nelson Mandela announced poignantly that he and his wife had agreed to separate -- although, he said, "my love for her remains undiminished." Two days later, Mrs.
Mandela resigned her powerful post as the congress's head of social welfare, saying the move was "in the best interest of the A.N.C., whose cause and policies I will support until the end of my life."


Noted With Pleasure
Art's Private World
Even the most realistic writing is not a transcription of life but a creative response to it, according to Roger Kahn in a piece celebrating the work of the journalist John Lardner.
It is included in "Games We Used to Play: A Lover's Quarrel With the World of Sport" (Ticknor &amp; Fields).


Social Events
Helping AIDS Patients
April 21 -- The Momentum Project, which provides food, clothing and counseling to AIDS patients, will benefit from a preview performance of the play "Shimada." A pretheater reception will be held at the Australian Consulate, 630 Fifth Avenue (50th Street), from 6 to 7:30 P.M.
Tickets, $75, from (212) 268-2610.


Neville Brand, 71, Craggy Actor Known for Many Roles as Villains
Neville Brand, a World War II hero who capitalized on his rough-hewn features in dozens of tough-guy roles in movies and television, died Thursday at Sutter General Hospital in Sacramento, Calif.
He was 71 years old and lived in Sacramento.
A spokeswoman for the Sacramento County Coroner said Mr. Brand died of emphysema.


In the Fracas Over a Prize, No One Won
To understand why the music jury for this year's Pulitzer Prize is angry and why its anger should not be ignored, one need only listen to Ralph Shapey's hourlong "Concerto Fantastique." The four-movement work, which was first performed last December, by the Chicago Symphony Orchestra under Mr.
Shapey's direction, deserves a commercial recording.
It begins with pungent brass proclamations alternating with fervently declaimed timpani solos.
It ends in a rondo that furiously strains at one's sense of order; through a mass of sound one hears, glinting, fragments of the timpani theme.
The music is obsessional; it screams, mourns and sighs, using a distinctive and powerful language.
The concerto is at once overwhelmingly intricate and brutally simple; it sometimes recalls the music of Shostakovich.
The Pulitzer jury, composed of George Perle, Roger Reynolds and Harvey Sollberger, unanimously chose the "Concerto Fantastique" for the Pulitzer.
"Long the creator of original and visionary works in a wide range of musical media," the jury explained, "Mr. Shapey has in this work achieved a striking summation that integrates the craggy and uncompromising materials of a very personal language on a grand scale." The honor was long due.
But now it will have to wait: for the first time in the distinguished history of the Pulitzer Prize in music, the Pulitzer board rejected the jury's recommendation, choosing instead "The Face of the Night, the Heart of the Dark," by Wayne Peterson.


Technology; Ferrofluids Are Making the Ball Bearing Look Passe
Suspending tiny particles of magnetic iron oxide in a liquid creates a product with remarkable properties.
A ferrofluid, as the combination is known, can be held in place permanently with a magnetic field.
This means these fluids can be used to help cool a loudspeaker, to seal in emissions from the rotating shaft of a pump or to replace ball bearings in a high-speed computer disk drive.
In addition, ferrofluids can be moved by manipulating magnetic fields.
This may permit physicians to direct medicines to certain parts of the body to treat localized problems like cancerous tumors.


STEVE ROSS DEFENDS HIS PAYCHECK
I submit that Steve Ross's compensation is, arguably, inadequate!
It is difficult to fairly compensate him in dollars when his contributions are unique.
The Warner empire was built on Ross's inventive "loose-leash" mentality.
That is his talent: looking ahead, letting his team run.
Every corporate shareholder should be lucky enough to have a C.E.O. like Ross at the helm.
FREDDIE GERSHON
New York, N.Y.


A Painter's Retrospective Spans 56 Years
FOR the first two decades of its existence, the Astor Theater in Manhattan gave its customers more than movies for their money.
What seems to be wallpaper covering the interior turned out to be a painting.
This, executed on 224 5-by-10-foot more or less contiguous canvases, may not have been the world's largest mural, but it must surely have been the largest-ever Abstract Expressionist image painted predominantly in blue.
In Buffie Johnson's retrospective at PMW Gallery in Stamford are a few fragments of this mural -- enough to show that the basic shape, which evokes aerial views of cities at night, is hardly typical of her work.
Then again, there is no one item or phase in this output of 56 years that sums up Ms.
Johnson's contribution; there is not even a connecting thread, unless it is in the sense of Surrealist waywardness.


CAMPUS LIFE: Louisiana State; Biracial Living As Part of Course Has a Slow Start
A university course in race relations is seeking to end racial myths not by teaching that myths are, in fact, merely myths, but by having students live with families of another race.
So far, however, the course is working out better on paper than in real life.
Carey Johnston, a 21-year-old junior from Shreveport who is majoring in English and criminal justice, is the only student who has volunteered so far to live with another family, though 12 other students, black and white, are enrolled in the course.


Karen Muller To Wed in June
Thomas O. Muller 3d of New York and Barbara Reese of Rome, Ga., have announced the engagement of their daughter Karen Hart Muller to Edwin Bowman Fort, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John T. Fort of Lookout Mountain, Tenn.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Muller, 25 years old, is a sales associate at Neiman Marcus in Atlanta.
She graduated from the University of South Florida.
Her father is a senior vice president of Merrill Lynch Inc. in New York.
Her mother owns Reese &amp; Smallwood, porcelain makers in Rome.


Spring Is Ideal Time For Shingle Inspection
BECAUSE of their durability and low cost, asphalt shingles are the most popular roofing material in the United States.
Like all roofing, shingles should be inspected at least once a year and, if damaged, repaired promptly to prevent roof leaks.
Spring is the best time for a roof inspection.
If major repairs are necessary, it is better to start them with warmer weather on the way than to be pressed to finish the job before fall begins.


The Latino's Legacy
Played as greasers and Lotharios since silent film days, Latinos in movies and TV have rarely been admirable figures like Ricky Ricardo (Desiderio Arnaz, above, with Lucille Ball).
The composer and actor Ruben Blades looks back over history to trace the evolution of the Hispanic image in popular culture.
Page 34.


Woman Injured and Fiance Slain By Man Who Then Kills Himself
A man armed with a .22-caliber rifle went to the house of a former girlfriend early today, her wedding day, killed the man she was to marry and wounded the woman and the bridegroom's brother, the police said.
Shortly after the shooting, the police said, the man returned to his own apartment and took his own life, apparently using the same weapon.
The police identified the gunman as Eusebio Torres, 34, a former boyfriend of Ms.
Rodriguez.
The police identified the man he killed as Manuel Saldana, 36 years old.
Mr.
Saldana's fiancee, Emily Rodriguez, 30, was in stable condition at Arden Hill Hospital in Goshen tonight.
The third victim, Jose Saldana, 34, who was shot in the shoulder and the back, was taken to Community General Hospital in Monticello and was then to the Westchester County Medical Center in Valhalla, where he was listed in fair condition late tonight.
Monticello Police Chief Walter J. Ramsay said his department received a call reporting a shooting at 36 Thompsonville Road at about 3 A.M.
The two male victims were found outside the blue one-story frame house, and Ms.
Rodriguez was found inside.
Naomi Fernandez, Ms.
Rodriguez's mother, who was present at the time of the shooting, said her daughter was washing dishes when she looked out the window and saw Mr.
Torres standing in the woods behind the house.
Ms.
Fernandez said her daughter went to the basement to get her fiance, Manuel Saldana, who was putting up decorations for their wedding reception.
She said their wedding was to be at a Baptist Church near Monticello at 4 P.M. today.
Ms.
Fernandez said that Mr.
Saldana went to the backyard and that his brother followed him.
"That's when I heard the shots," Ms.
Fernandez said, adding that no word had been exchanged between any of the men.
She said that Manuel Saldana, who was a carpenter, was shot first and that Jose Saldana was shot in the back as he tried to run to the front of the the house.
Ms.
Fernandez said her daughter rushed to the kitchen door to see what had happened, and was shot twice, once in the left ear and once in the right arm.
"It was horrible," Ms.
Fernandez said, adding that her daughter's three children, all under 10, were in the house at the time.
She said Ms.
Rodriguez, a nurse's assistant, called the police.
Chief Ramsay said that Ms.
Rodriguez was able to provide the police with a description of the incident and Mr.
Torres's address, 52 Pleasant Street in Monticello.
The police went to the apartment building at that address and found Mr.
Torres dead from what was apparently a self-inflicted gunshot from the rifle.
A neighbor, Scott Wallace, described Mr.
Torres as a quiet man who never caused any trouble in the building.
He said that about a month ago, Mr.
Torres had offered to sell him the rifle for $40, an offer Mr.
Wallace said he declined.
"Now, I wish I had bought it," he said.


Children's Books; Bookshelf
Additional titles of interest:
WHERE'S OUR MAMA?
Written and illustrated by Diane Goode.
Dutton. $13.95. (Ages 3 to 7) Holding the baby in her arms, Mama runs after her hat in a French train station, telling the two older children to wait for her.
A friendly police officer tries to help them find her.
The pretty, stylized illustrations suggest Paris in the
belle epoque
. Never fear, Mama returns.


Europe Is Getting Jittery About Arranged Union
Just four months after the European Community signed a landmark treaty on economic and political unity, the organization is suddenly being shaken by challenges to the agreement and new uncertainty over the region's future.
Although agreement on the Treaty on European Union was the result of tough bargaining before it was approved last December at a meeting of European leaders in Maastricht, the Netherlands, ratification by the community's 12 member nations was taken for granted.


CAMPUS LIFE: New Hampshire; Pressed by Women, College Restores Their Tennis Team
For years female athletes at the University of New Hampshire accepted the fact that they had fewer athletic opportunities than their male counterparts.
Then the women's tennis team was cut and angry team members threatened to file a sex-discrimination suit.
Administrators have now reversed their decision and reinstated the team.
"The administration probably thought, 'What are 13 girls going to do if we cut the tennis team?' " said Jayme Hyde, the captain.
"Little did they know that 13 girls can make a big stink."


David Levy to Wed Annabel Shull
Annabel Pagett Shull, a law student at Harvard University, and David Jack Levy, a lawyer in Houston, are engaged to be married in December.
Ms.
Shull, 26 years old, graduated magna cum laude from Yale University.
She is a daughter of Elizabeth and Hugh H. Shull Jr. of New York.
Her father, who retired as general counsel of Kidde Inc., is a lawyer in New York.
Her mother is a graduate student in social work at Columbia University.


This 'Streetcar' Doesn't Travel Far Enough
If you intend to catch the revival of "A Streetcar Named Desire" starring Jessica Lange and Alec Baldwin at the Barrymore Theater, I have two pieces of counsel for you.
First, take a magnifying glass.
Wherever you're seated -- in the back of the balcony or fifth-row center -- you're going to need it.
If this production were twice as big and three times as loud, it would still qualify as a miniature.
Rarely has Tennessee Williams's play, one of the sublime achievements of the American theater, seemed so small, so private, so bound up in itself.


Wall Street; Talk of a Payoff Centers on Men
Although 5 million women in the United States have trouble conceiving and will pay dearly for any product that offers a ray of hope, the potential market for fertility drugs is considered too small to receive much attention from the American pharmaceutical industry.
Not everyone with fertility problems seeks medical treatment because it is costly and few health insurers cover the expense in full.
"It's not a priority for us," said David Thompson, a spokesman for Marion Merrill Dow, which gets 1.2 percent of its $2.9 billion in revenues from Clomid, a fertility drug.


The Union Movement Loses Another Big One
A prominent economist described the future of the labor movement this way: "American trade unionism is slowly being limited in influence by changes which destroy the basis on which it is erected.
"The changes, occupational and technological, which checked the advance of unionism in the last decade appear likely to continue in the same direction."


Public Television; Timing Is All
To the Editor:
I liked Walter Goodman's proposal of "affirmative action" for right-wing TV shows.
I don't object to left-wing shows; I enjoy many of them.
I just want a wider range.


Grim Airports
To the Editor: My husband and I have recently returned from a delightful two-week vacation in Paris.
We hope to return.
"Hope" is important, as we are both well into our 70's.
However, our vacation was marred by the airports.
We flew American Airlines both ways.
The crews on both flights were attentive and gracious.


Abroad at Home; Hair on Their Chests
The American press prides itself on its courage, its selflessness, its influence.
But in the current political campaign those claims sound like a bad joke.
The press is distinguished by its cynicism and its self-regard.
Yes, it does have influence -- for the worse.
The notable example at hand is the press treatment of Bill Clinton.
Even serious newspapers have become parodies of attack-dog journalism, eager to find something -- anything -- nasty to print about Governor Clinton.


THAIS ARE ANGERED BY GENERAL'S RISE
In an uncharacteristically blunt display of opposition to military rule, dozens of Thai politicians say they will begin wearing black to sessions of Parliament to make clear their anger over the appointment of the general who led a coup last year as the new Prime Minister.
The politicians said on Wednesday that they would wear black T-shirts stenciled with "Sacrifice your life, not your word," a reference to the broken promise by the officer, Gen.
Suchinda Kraprayoon, who had said earlier that he would refuse the job of Prime Minister.
This protest is part of a larger, fast-growing crusade by pro-democracy forces in Thailand to end military rule and install true democracy.


Corrections
Articles on Dec. 8 and last Sunday about moves to reverse secret ordinations of Roman Catholic priests in Czechoslovakia in the Communist era misstated the marital status of the late Rev.
Felix Maria Davidek.
Associates say he was single and did not have a common-law wife.
The writer learned of the error in December and improperly neglected to submit a correction; the second occurrence resulted from editors' use of the first article in preparing the second.


Unraveling Puzzle of L.I. Car Dealer Reveals Layers of Personal Mystery
Most residents of this quaint waterfront village never exchanged a word with him or caught more than a quick glance as he strode by in one of his sober business suits.
But he was thought of as the big guy in town, the very incarnation of success.
They liked it that he was a devout Roman Catholic, who seemed to go to Mass almost every morning, usually at the Infant Jesus Church here.
They welcomed his charity: if anyone needed money for a good cause, he was a soft touch.
And they envied his nimbleness in fashioning an empire worth hundreds of millions of dollars.


Paying for the Sand At the Shore
The sand replenishment for Sea Bright and Monmouth Beach will be under the United States Corps of Engineers as taxpayer financed, except for an allotted portion to be paid by the State of New Jersey.
The latter share is somewhere between $7 million and $10 million.
The money for the state share will be paid by the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey.
New Jersey has allowed or will allow the authority to increase tunnel bridge tolls.
In a sense, the auto owner will be paying.
I wonder how many auto owners know that.


POSTINGS: The Polish Consulate; Beaux-Arts Style Restoration
As Andrzej S. Bak sees it, the De Lamar mansion at 233 Madison Avenue, now home to the Polish Consulate (with an entrance on 37th Street), has faced several enemies since 1905 -- time, vibrations from heavy traffic and pollution.
After seven months, Mr.
Bak, the head of Artenova of New York, a 20-year-old Brooklyn restoration firm, is nearly done restoring the exterior.
His 18-member crew of metal craftsmen, sculptors and masons has repaired the leaky roof, dented copper crestings, deteriorated limestone facade and chipped marble columns, restoring the Beaux-Arts style splendor.


IN SHORT: FICTION
CROSSOVER By Dennis A. Williams. Summit, $21.


In a Flurry Born of Fervor, New York Marks Holidays
It is a rare day when New Yorkers heave a collective sigh, the streets unclog and restless tourists can hail a cab on any midtown corner just by adopting a lost, plaintive look.
It is rarer still when that condition lasts for more than 24 hours.
This weekend, with the simultaneous celebration of Passover and Easter and weather cold and rainy enough to drive an agnostic indoors, the city seems to have slipped to the brink of something like mass meditation.
But this
is
New York.
So first there was a flurry of activity.
On Friday, pre-Passover rituals dictated a frenzy of cooking and cleaning in many Jewish homes.
Matzoh bakeries in Brooklyn erupted in a Babel of Yiddish, English and Russian as white-bearded owners pushed cutters, rollers and bakers to work (faster, faster) to satisfy the lines of black-robed Hasidim waiting in a drizzle outside.
Waves of Worshipers
At St.
Patrick's Cathedral, waves of worshipers transformed aisles into flows and eddies of prayer, while at Fifth Avenue and 51st Street, fire and brimstone was provided -- at high volume -- courtesy of a dozen people who said they belonged to the Universal School of Practical Knowledge.
A flier handed out by group stated, "Jesus and the Jews and all the children of Israel were colored people and are colored people today."


Knockout
To the Editor:
Your article about boxers who deserted the ring in favor of the silver screen left out an outstanding practitioner: Bob Hope  [ "For the Sweet Science on Screen, a Split Decision," March 29 ] .
Fighting under the name of Packy East, Mr.
Hope at age 18 fought in the featherweight division in Cleveland, site of the Ohio state championships.
At the dripping-wet weight of 128 pounds, he reached the semifinals before being knocked out.


No Comment From Howe
Steve Howe declined to comment yesterday on a Federal magistrate's decision to allow a written confession by the Yankee pitcher to be used in a Federal trial when the pitcher faces misdemeanor cocaine charges next month.
The ruling, handed down by United States Magistrate Bart Erickson on Friday in Kalispell, Mont., denied the pitcher's request to suppress the confession, a setback for Howe, who is scheduled to go to trial on May 5.


Family Connections
To the Editor:
I have not yet read Joseph W. Alsop's autobiography, " 'I've Seen the Best of It,' " but I would be surprised indeed to find that he had obscured his mother's origins, as implied by your reviewer (March 15).
A bit more than "distantly related to the Roosevelts," Corinne Alsop was in fact Theodore Roosevelt's niece, as well as first cousin to Alice Roosevelt Longworth and Eleanor Roosevelt.
WALLACE FINLEY DAILEY Cambridge, Mass.


Creeping Along in a Pricey Puzzle
WHAT is red, white and blue, has a price tag of $125,000 and will take you from a standstill to 60 miles an hour in 25 ho-hum seconds?
Well, it is this minivan that I am cajoling into action, a Plymouth Voyager with markings on the door, a somewhat weird interior and very special underpinnings.
Bob Davis is in the seat next to me, and we are both filled with angst at the prospect of venturing into the flow of traffic on New York's West Side Highway.


Corrections
A chart on April 5 listing a sampling of American spas misstated the address of Doral Saturnia International Spa Resort.
It is 8755 N.W. 36th Street, Miami, Fla. 33178.


Accent de Trop
To the Editor:
The headline "TV: Why Even the New Seems Like Deja Vu"  [ April 5 ]  rates a rapped knuckle.
In the future, be more circumspect with your circumflexes.
Adding one to "vu" does look stylish, but if the French don't feel a need for it, why should you?
LOUIS JAY HERMAN New York


Cormac McCarthy's Venomous Fiction
" You know about Mojave rattlesnakes?" Cormac McCarthy asks.
The question has come up over lunch in Mesilla, N.M., because the hermitic author, who may be the best unknown novelist in America, wants to steer conversation away from himself, and he seems to think that a story about a recent trip he took near the Texas-Mexico border will offer some camouflage.
A writer who renders the brutal actions of men in excruciating detail, seldom applying the anesthetic of psychology, McCarthy would much rather orate than confide.
And he is the sort of silver-tongued raconteur who relishes peculiar sidetracks; he leans over his plate and fairly croons the particulars in his soft Tennessee accent.
"Mojave rattlesnakes have a neurotoxic poison, almost like a cobra's," he explains, giving a natural-history lesson on the animal's two color phases and its map of distribution in the West.
He had come upon the creature while traveling along an empty road in his 1978 Ford pickup near Big Bend National Park.
McCarthy doesn't write about places he hasn't visited, and he has made dozens of similar scouting forays to Texas, New Mexico, Arizona and across the Rio Grande into Chihuahua, Sonora and Coahuila.
The vast blankness of the Southwest desert served as a metaphor for the nihilistic violence in his last novel, "Blood Meridian," published in 1985.
And this unpopulated, scuffed-up terrain again dominates the background in "All the Pretty Horses," which will appear next month from Knopf.


Playing It Safe; The Paralysis of No-Pain Politics
In politics, 1992 seems to be the year of the ostrich.
Most politicians are hiding their heads in the sand rather than addressing fundamental problems facing the country.
And the few who raise the central issues do so at their peril.
Americans in the past have often put off action on difficult political problems.
But what is different nowadays is that basic questions are not just going unresolved, they are hardly being discussed.


Leslie S. Oliver, Student, to Wed
Frank G. Oliver of Naples, Fla., and Patricia D. Oliver of Hillsdale, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Leslie Susan Oliver to Joshua Frank Pollack, a son of Dr.
Irwin Pollack of Highland Park, N.J., and the late Mrs.
Pollack.
A July wedding is planned.
Ms.
Oliver, 27 years old, graduated from Northwestern University and is a graduate student of business administration at Columbia University.
Her father, who is retired, was the founder and president of Oliver &amp; Rozner Associates, an executive recruiting firm in New York.
Her mother is a consultant with Hillsdale Travel.


INSIDE
Fall of a Respected Man
A prominent citizen of Port Jefferson, L.I., was devout, active in the Republican Party and gave to charity.
Now the auto dealer has been accused in a huge fraud, and his neighbors don't know what to think.
Page 26.
More Talks in Afghanistan
With the capital surrounded by rebels, who captured another major city, the Government said it had agreed to hold more talks with a powerful rebel commander.
Page 3.
Shame and Vindication
When he was charged with receiving child pornography, Keith Jacobson felt that he had been entrapped.
But who would believe him?
Page 10.


With Finish Sorted Out, Marsh Ends Up a Winner
Mike Marsh, better known as a member of the relay team anchored by Carl Lewis than as a marquee sprinter in his own right, stepped momentarily out of his teammate's shadow today, beating Lewis and winning the 100 meters at the Mt.
San Antonio College Relays.
Marsh, whose previous personal best in the 100 was 10.07, ran in 9.93 seconds, the sixth-fastest time ever.
Lewis, the world-record holder in 9.86, was third in 10.12.


A LITTLE KNOWLEDGE
I wish all of us lived by Barthelme's definition of "sophistication." The world would be a better place.
JANE GOLDFLIES
Oxford, Ohio


Pasta Here, Pasta There
IN May 1985, Bahman Tehrani of Glen Cove opened the first Pasta's restaurant in Hicksville.
It had six tables.
A few weeks ago, he opened Pasta Primavera in Great Neck, his fifth restaurant on Long Island.
The three others are in Glen Cove, Woodbury and Manhasset.
He also has two in San Francisco, with a third opening soon.


Networking; Containing the Cost of Communicating
Local-area networks are often like large, rowdy families; too many people trying to use too few bathrooms.
In the case of modems, providing one for each person on the network is too expensive since, like bathrooms, modems sit idle most of the time.
The only viable option is to provide as many as possible and force people to share.
But sharing has its own complications.
One approach is to set up a communications server with multiple modems attached to it for access by anyone on the network.
Communications software is either loaded on each individual machine or on the server computer.
In either case, multiple copies must be purchased.
The other option, and the one most often used by small, medium or remote networks, is to attach a modem to just a few machines and ask users go to them.


Feed the Geese To the Homeless
John Meringolo's proposal to provide deer meat to the homeless on Long Island  [ "Long Island Journal," April 12 ]  will certainly evoke controversy.
Another idea of using an available resource as food for the destitue and homeless involves harvesting long Island's Canada geese which overpopulate our parks, lakes, ponds, marshes, fields and golf courses; and which are now considered pests and verminl.
Canada geese are normally migratory fowl that breed in the Arctic during the summer and live in the Southlands during the winter.
In the past, large migrating flocks would pause on Long Island for a few days to rest and to feed in our waterways and marshes before resuming their spring or fall journeys.
Nowadays, however, benevolent humans and a dearth of predators have encouraged the geese to take up permanent year-round residence on Long Island.
Their numbers have increased in recent years to the point where they have become environmental problems.


Tell Us, Governor, Just What You Would Do; La Guardia's Party
To the Editor:
A.
M.
Rosenthal's "New York and Clinton" (column, April 3) lists Fiorello H. La Guardia as a Democrat.
Mayor La Guardia was a Republican.
His famous 1922 statement on his brand of Republicanism is important in this era of cookie-cutter conservatives: "I stand for the Republicanism of Abraham Lincoln, and let me tell you the average Republican leader east of the Mississippi doesn't know anything more about Abraham Lincoln than Henry Ford knows about the Talmud." ADAM D. ELFENBEIN Arlington, Va., April 3, 1992


Mandates Force Schools To Hold Line On Programs
WITH the approval of the state budget this month, Long Island fared better than expected with state school aid.
Of $79 million in proposed cuts, $75 million was restored to Nassau and Suffolk districts.
But despite the initial relief over not losing the anticipated aid, most districts are still feeling the effects of last year's severe cutbacks.
Few districts have restored any of the eliminated programs or services in their budgets for next year.


The Rich Get Richer; And What to Do About It
On all sides, rich Americans are under attack.
Shareholders want revenge for huge compensation packages paid to corporate executives.
Congress wants to squeeze higher taxes out of millionaires.
The Democrat Bill Clinton incites voters with his favorite statistic: The richest 1 percent of families got 60 percent of the increase in average family income between 1977 and 1989.


Georgianna Shea Wed in Brooklyn
Georgianna Fox Shea, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael H. Shea of South Lake Tahoe, Calif., was married in Brooklyn last evening to John Anthony Levinson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert A. Levinson of New York.
Dr.
Melvin Hawthorne, a Baptist minister who is a chaplain at the United Nations, performed the nondenominational ceremony at the Brooklyn Botanic Garden.
Mrs.
Levinson, 29 years old, teaches physical fitness and operates fitness salons in New York and in Palo Alto and Los Altos, Calif.
She graduated from the University of Southern California.
Her father, who is retired, was a real-estate investor in South Lake Tahoe.


Arts Council Is Facing Dissension in the Ranks
WHITE PLAINS
IN the reception area at the Council for the Arts in Westchester, bright yellow, blue and green models of city skyscrapers created by an elementary school class in Scarsdale spill out into the room.
In contrast to its muted corporate-park surroundings, the display provides "evidence that we really are an arts council," said Joanne Mongelli, the manager of marketing.
"We want people to know that this is a place about the arts."


Kelly McArthur Plans Wedding
Mr. and Mrs.
John J. Gardella of East Norwalk, Conn., have announced the engagement of Mrs.
Gardella's daughter, Kelly Hartridge McArthur, to Leonard Loring Chappel, the son of Barry H. Chappel of East Norwalk and Linda S. Margold of Darien, Conn.
An August wedding is planned.
Miss McArthur, 26 years old, is also the daughter of Roy A. McArthur of Brewster, Mass.
She is a merchandising manager for Armani Jeans in New York.
She received an associate degree from the Fashion Institute of Technology.
Her father is a professional pianist in Boston.
Her stepfather, John J. Gardella, is the president of L. G. Gardella Transportation in Norwalk.


New York City Bill Would Limit Car Alarms
A New York City Council committee will consider a bill tomorrow to protect New Yorkers from the midnight whine of automobile alarms.
"We want to let people sleep at night," said Councilman Sheldon S. Leffler, a Queens Democrat who is a sponsor of the legislation.
"There are a lot of discontented people who are awakened in the middle of the night by car alarms and are grouchy and irritated the next day."
The bill would cut the permissible time for car alarms to ring, beep or shout from 10 to 3 minutes.
It would also outlaw the sale and use of the alarms, similar to motion detectors, that can be activated even if the vehicle is not touched.
Display of Phone Numbers
It would require that any vehicle with an audible alarm display the home and business telephone numbers of its owner or operator, or a number where that person could be reached should the alarm protest too much.
The new provisions would apply only to alarms that have already been installed.
The penalties for violations would be fines ranging from a minimum of $100 for a first offense to a maximum of $1,000 for a third and subsequent offenses.
The Police and Transportation Departments would have the authority to tow vehicles with alarms that sound for too long or are activated without the car's being touched.
In different incarnations, this bill had been under consideration by the City Council for several years, Mr.
Leffler said, but it was stalled by concerns over its enforceability.
The Dinkins administration has expressed fears that it may still be difficult to enforce, Mr.
Leffler said.
Jennifer Kimball, a spokeswoman for Mayor David N. Dinkins, said, "The Dinkins administration is very much committed to reducing noise pollution and very much committed to reducing auto theft, and we have given the bill to different agencies to review."
Hearings are scheduled for the bill before the Environmental Protection Committee of the City Council tomorrow.
No Effect Seen
Members of the auto alarm industry did not appear worried.
"I don't think it's going to cut into business at all," said Kenneth Fisher, manager of Autotech Sound Effects in midtown Manhattan.
"The alarms really don't run longer than three minutes. The new ones are a minute or a minute and a half."
Mr.
Fisher said that car owners can change the settings of some alarms, however.
"You can set it to run forever, but it will kill your battery," he said.
Some people also install two alarms to evade the current 120-decibel limit, he said.
The fines for owners of cars whose alarms ring excessively now range from $220 to $875, said Sgt.
Norris Hollomon, a police spokesman.
He said that 139,838 cars were reported stolen in New York City in 1991, down from 146,925 the year before.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Trump Sells at Kmart
IT HAS been a busy literary season at the Levittown Kmart.
First there was the book signing for the Honky Tonk Man, a professional wrestler.
"Incredible turnout," Richard Gee of Kmart said.
"We sold 700 books." The Honky Tonk Man wrote a book?
"Well not exactly," Mr.
Gee said.
"It was a pictorial history of wrestling."


Cricket Bach Is Affianced
Mr. and Mrs.
William Bach of New Canaan, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Kirstin Marin Bach to Thomas Francis Cush, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph T. Cush of Smithtown, L.I.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss Bach, 29 years old, is known as Cricket.
She is a retail advertising manager for Polo/Ralph Lauren in New York.
She graduated from Trinity College in Washington.
Her father is the chairman of the Town Council of New Canaan.
He and her mother, Lucy-Ann Bach, own the Melba Inn in New Canaan.


Bit of an English Pub Flavor in Bethel
HAPPILY, not just bad pennies keep turning up; good ones occasionally do, too.
Such is the case with MacKenzie's Old Ale House in Bethel.
Earlier MacKenzie's were in Darien, Stamford and, briefly, in New Canaan.
The current and only MacKenzie's enterprise is in a building formerly occupied by a French (La Plume) and then an Italian (Pappagallo) restaurant.
Fortunately, the premises -- an old frame house in Victorian Italianate style -- adapts well to the pub-like atmosphere of this MacKenzie's.
Two small, dark dining rooms (with a third upstairs) and a taproom (with tables for dining) and an adjoining bar all have a cozy feel enhanced by dark green walls, wainscoting, pine floors, gilt-frame English engravings and old Colonial brass chandeliers.
All that's needed is better background sound than the intrusively repetitive radio music that rattled on endlessly during our meals.


F.T.C. Accuses Phone Solicitors Of Deception
Several Daytona Beach, Fla., companies and their owners have been charged by the Federal Trade Commission with deceptively marketing travel packages to consumers nationwide through a network of telephone salesrooms.
The Florida Attorney General, Robert A. Butterworth, also has filed charges against the companies.
According to the F.T.C., people were told by postcard that they had won a vacation to Florida or the Bahamas.
To take the trip, however, the consumer had to purchase a package for about $400, spend "a substantial amount of money" beyond the package cost and comply with many conditions not disclosed by telephone salespeople.
The callers obtained consumers' credit card numbers, the trade commission says, by asserting that card numbers would be used only to verify credit standings.
In fact, the consumers' accounts were billed for the cost of the travel package.


Piano and String Trio
The Hsin-Chen-Long Trio will play Haydn's Trio in C, Brahms's Trio in C and Mendelssohn's Trio in D minor at 2 P.M. today at the Taipei Theater, 1230 Avenue of the Americas, at 49th Street.
The musicians are Ming-feng Hsin, a violinist; Chien-an Chen, a cellist, and Beatrice Long, a pianist.
Tickets are $8.
Information: (212) 373-1850.


Charity Boards Learn to Be Skeptical
In the genteel world of charity boards, skepticism has often seemed a bit uncouth.
Some polite questioning about an organization's strategy or its success in achieving its goals may be acceptable.
But skepticism about day-to-day management has been resisted.
But the United Way of America scandal may have changed that.


Dollar Strong Against the Yen
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
134.00
133.40
136.35
per Dollar
German Mark
1.6695
1.6365
1.7360
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.1823
1.1868
1.1551
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.7450
1.7655
1.7215
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$337.00
$340.65
$356.50
Republic National Bank
Currency: Thursday NY  Close


Slow Progress in Chicago


Wendy Wasserman to Marry in July
Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert Wasserman of Larchmont, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Wendy Beth Wasserman to R. Michael Schiffer, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert L. Schiffer of New York.
A July wedding is planned.
Ms.
Wasserman, 22 years old, is a legislative assistant to Representative Patricia Schroeder, Democrat of Colorado.
She graduated from Vassar College.
Her father is a real-estate and business consultant in Larchmont.
Her mother, Cecille Wasserman, is the executive director of the Turtle Bay Music School in New York.


Where Are the Parents Of the Keg Children?
I read "High School Students Flock to Keg Parties"  [ March 29 ]  with great interest, and I feel that it really brought an important subject to the attention of your readers.
As the father of two sons who are now grown, my wife and I went through the problems of bringing children up during that particular time.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo; A Modest Perot Bandwagon Could Upset Big Apple Carts
Ross Perot's flirtation with an independent bid for the White House has thrown a sudden wild card into the race that both President Bush and Gov.
Bill Clinton regard as a danger.
But neither side has yet figured out exactly how much damage the billionaire could do or precisely how to deal with him.
For now, the two campaigns have no real strategy beyond hoping that Mr.
Perot will prove too thin-skinned for the pressure of public scrutiny and that his popularity will diminish without much effort from either of the opposing camps.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Racial Politics; In South Carolina, a Tale of Campaign Trickery
Rod Shealy, a South Carolina Republican political consultant, will go on trial here on April 27 on campaign finance charges stemming from a bogus Congressional candidacy in 1990.
Mr.
Shealy recruited a black man facing felony charges to run for office with the intention of attracting a large white voter turnout.
The charge Mr.
Shealy faces is a misdemeanor carrying penalties comparable to those for littering.
But to many in the state, both Democrats and Republicans, the accusation speaks volumes about a style of South Carolina politics in which some people take peculiar pleasure in skulduggery and dirty tricks and shamelessly exploit racial differences and racism in the pursuit of victory.


Marchers for Choice
To the Editor:
Your April 6 coverage of the April 5 pro-choice rally in Washington missed the real story, namely that the overwhelming proportion of marchers were young adults.
College-age women and men far outnumbered the veteran activists of previous demonstrations, giving the lie to news reports of the death of feminism on American campuses.
The women's movement is alive and well in our colleges and universities, newly galvanized by the Webster and Rust decisions, as well as by the increase of attacks on women students.


Claire Gormley To Wed in May
Dr. and Mrs.
Eugene J. Gormley of Larchmont, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Claire Marie Gormley to William Joseph Collier 3d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
W.
J.
Collier Jr. of Stamford, Conn.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
Gormley, 29 years old, was until recently a banquet coordinator at the 21 Club in New York.
She graduated from Rosemont College.
Her father is a dentist in New Rochelle, N.Y.


June Wedding For Miss Ring
Monica Seton Ring and Richard Brison Cumming Tucker Jr. are engaged to be married in June.
Miss Ring, 29 years old, is a product director at McNeil Consumer Products, a pharmaceuticals company in Fort Washington, Pa.
She graduated from Georgetown University and has an M.B.A. degree from Northwestern University.
She is a daughter of Mrs.
Aloysius F. Ring Jr. of Colts Neck, N.J., and the late Mr.
Ring.
Her father was a controller at Johnson &amp; Johnson International in New Brunswick, N.J.


Katherine Clark and Rodney Dowell to Marry
Mr. and Mrs.
Harrison C. Clark of Woodbridge, Conn., have announced July wedding plans for their daughter, Katherine Marlea Clark, to Rodney Scott Dowell, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur A. Dowell Jr. of Silver City, N.M.
Ms.
Clark, 28 years old, is an Assistant Attorney General in Denver.
She graduated from St.
Lawrence University and received her J.D. from Cornell University.
Mr.
Dowell, 28, is an associate with the Denver law firm of Holland &amp; Hart.
He graduated from the University of Colorado and also received his J.D. from Cornell.


Little Rest for the Rangers
The Rangers, eager to begin their first-round Stanley Cup playoff series against the Devils on Sunday night at Madison Square Garden, skated at a last practice today and worried about getting their beauty rest.
"The whole playoffs, I have trouble sleeping," Adam Graves said.
"Tonight, I'll listen to some music, maybe try to sleep by 11 o'clock. But I don't know."


Major Markets Not So Dominant
To the Sports Editor:
In bemoaning the free-agent era, many baseball fans often point to the advantage that this big-spending era has supposedly given to wealthier, major-market franchises.
A more detailed review of the free-agent era shows just how mistaken this assumption is.


Anecdotes for the Road
I WAS driving over flat horizons of soybean fields one summer afternoon in South Carolina when the mystery of Mason Lee, who feared the occult and believed he would die at its hands, came to my attention.
The clues given were scant.


Painful Charges
France has not found it easy to confront a part of its history: collaboration by many of its citizens during the Nazi occupation.
In particular, French courts have been accused of reluctance to condemn French citizens for war crimes against Jews in the same way that they have condemned Germans.
Last week there was a fresh uproar when an appeals court found no case to support accusations that Paul Touvier, now 77 years old, committed a crime against humanity when he executed seven Jewish hostages in Lyons in June 1944.
At the time, he led a pro-Nazi militia in Lyons and worked alongside Klaus Barbie, a Gestapo chief jailed for life in France five years ago.
Mr.
Touvier was arrested in 1989 but left prison last year because he has cancer.
"If it's a Frenchman, he's untouchable, although one cannot differentiate between Barbie and Touvier," said Charles Libmann, lawyer for the families of victims who are accusing Mr.
Touvier.
They said they would appeal the decision.


Dominatrix From Bronxville
LOVE JUNKIE
By Robert Plunket. 264 pp. New York: HarperCollins Publishers. $20.


Highest Hotel
To the Editor: Marcia R. Lieberman has described superbly the Kulm hotel Gornergrat ("Switzerland's Highest Hotel," Jan. 26).
It evoked memories of a decade ago.
My wife and I hopped a train from Chamonix to Zermatt, and then went by horse- drawn cart to another hotel, not quite complete and not quite in town, but acceptable for those arriving without reservations, as we did.
Early the next morning, skiing off the lip of the Gornergrat toward the tunnel, we saw the Kulmhotel at about 10,000 feet.
Our minds were made up at once.
At the end of the day skiing on a glacier beside the Matterhorn, we gathered our luggage onto the train which also serves as a lift.
The conductor, amid skiers, skis and poles, fretfully pulled his watch from the vest of his uniform, fingering it anxiously to insure an on-time departure.
If you missed the last train you slept elsewhere that night.


Gleneagles Rate Includes Activities
Gleneagles, the celebrated resort in Scotland where the Scottish Open golf tournament is held, has introduced what it says is Britain's first all-inclusive resort rate -- one price for accommodations, all meals (in any of the resort's five restaurants or from room service), golf and other activities.
The resort occupies 830 acres in Auchterarder, in Perthshire, about an hour's drive from Edinburgh or Glasgow.
The inclusive rate is $465 a person a night, based on double occupancy, including 17.5 percent value-added tax and service, but not drinks.
Guests on this package may play all the golf they want.
Gleneagles has two 18-hole golf courses and a 9-hole course as well as riding stables, a target-shooting club, a gymnasium and health club.
Other activities are tennis, croquet, swimming, fishing, jogging and archery, and the rate includes lessons and classes.


Talking: Brokers; Gauging Range of Services
WHEN sellers select a real estate broker they often have scant knowledge of the services that can and should be provided.
Though a substantial commission is charged -- say, $12,000 on a $200,000 home -- an interview with a broker may be vague.


Liza Levine and Edward Zuckerman Engaged
Liza Levine, a freelance television producer, and Edward Zuckerman, an author, journalist and television writer, both in Los Angeles, are planning a June wedding.
Ms.
Levine, 33 years old, graduated from Smith College.
She has produced television documentary programs for TBS Productions Inc., a documentary unit of Turner Entertainment Network, and ABC News.
She is a daughter of Peter F. and Doris G. Levine of Atlanta.


Up From Hyde Park
ELEANOR ROOSEVELT
Volume One, 1884-1933.
By Blanche Wiesen Cook.
Illustrated. 587 pp.
New York: Viking. $27.50.


The Financial Hurdles on the Road to a Place for Escape
PEOPLE who yearn to own a place for escape -- whether on weekends or vacation, in the country or at the beach -- also have to consider how to pay for it.
For many prospective buyers, interest rates, down payment requirements and credit standards are similar to those for a primary residence. for buyers who already have a mortgage, it may be difficult to meet the standard for the maximum amount of mortgage debt, relative to income, that is acceptable to the lender.


SERBIAN GUERRILLAS POUNDING SARAJEVO IN DEFIANCE OF U.S.
Serbian guerrillas pounded central Sarajevo with mortar shells today as a high-ranking American official arrived with humanitarian aid for Bosnia and Herzegovina and support for its independence and territorial integrity.
Washington's confrontation with Serbia appeared to be heightening.
The Serbian Foreign Ministry delivered a formal protest to the United States Embassy, calling American policy one-sided and anti-Serbian.


Claudio Oliva to Wed Monica Dalton
Monica Gai Dalton, an executive of a New York stockbrokerage, and Claudio Roberto Oliva, an architect in Milan, Italy, and New York, are engaged to be married in June.
Ms.
Dalton is the vice president for real estate of the Stamford Company.
She graduated cum laude from Marymount Manhattan College.
She is a daughter of Maria Gai Kelly of Westbrook, Conn., and the late Eugene A. Kelly.
Her father was a reporter for The Washington Star and a Washington lobbyist.
Her mother was a White House correspondent for Newsweek magazine during the administrations of Harry S. Truman and Franklin D. Roosevelt.


Style Makers; Carolyn Jacobson, Birdhouse Builder
It isn't one of life's major problems, but fairly soon a number of men and women will be trying to select a useful and original gift for weekend hosts.
Carolyn Jacobson thinks that her "birdie barns and chalets" could be the answer, no matter where the host house is.
If it's in the country, there are certain to be birds that would love to alight in a place of their own.
Mrs.
Jacobson, who is in her early 5o's and lives in Manhattan, began her birdhouse business last year more or less by accident.
She was leafing through a crafts catalogue when she saw small boxes shaped like chalets and New England barns.
Her hands, which have always been occupied with things like painting and needlework, and her head, which was searching for something new to do, told her that this was it.
She ordered a few boxes and went to work, although at the time she didn't realize the scope of the work.
Among the things she learned was how to use a power drill.


Officer Shoots and Wounds Wife in Brooklyn
An off-duty police officer shot his wife in the head, seriously wounding her, during an argument in their Bedford-Stuyvesant apartment early yesterday, the police said.
The officer, Alfred Gonzales, 33 years old, of 57 Decatur Street, is a six-year member of the force assigned to the 77th Precinct in Crown Heights.
The officer's wife, Bonnie, 30, was listed in stable condition at Kings County Hospital with a bullet wound near the base of her skull.


Airfares Made Simple
A fundamental restructuring of airline fares was well under way last week as most major carriers followed the lead of American Airlines, making deep cuts in full fares and more modest cuts in discount fares.
And travelers began to respond.
All major carriers reported big jumps in the number of calls and bookings.
American, which initiated the move a week ago Thursday, said its bookings were up 48 percent and United saw its calls up by 50 percent, adding extra agents to handle the volume.
Save Now, Pay Later
Not everyone was pleased, however.


Perk Up Risotto and Other Dishes With Radicchio
RADICCHIO has been available in American markets for about 10 years, first imported from Italy and subsequently cultivated here.
Now it is hard to imagine salads without it.
The handsome, small burgundy and white heads of crisp, somewhat bitter leaves have proved a versatile and colorful addition to the menu.
Not only can radicchio be shredded, torn or chopped to add bite and color to a tossed salad, the cuplike leaves also make attractive and convenient containers on a plate for salad mixtures like shrimp salad or chicken salad.
The leaves can even be used to hold dips on a platter of crudites.


The Nets Battle Their Way Into the Playoffs; Knicks Keeping Title in Sight
After winning tonight, the Knicks must wait to learn their fate.
Keeping alive their hopes of winning the Atlantic Division, the Knicks (51-31) finished their regular season by holding off the Milwaukee Bucks, 114-103, at Bradley Center.
The victory put New York one-half game ahead of the Boston Celtics, pending the outcome of Boston's Sunday afternoon home game against the Miami Heat.


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ended April 4  MANHATTAN  East Midtown 2.2 million
785 Fifth Avenue (59th St.)  3-bedroom, 3-bath, 2,200-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, manned-elevator, maid's room, dining room, library, kitchen pantry, 2 terraces, Central Park view; maintenance $4,993, 43% tax-deductible (Broker: Key Ventures)  Greenwich Village 410,000
1 Fifth Avenue (8th St.)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,050-sq.-ft. co-op in a prewar landmark building; 24-hr. doorman, dining area, windowed kitchen, marble baths; maintenance $1,170, 40% tax-deductible (Brokers: Anne Weintraub- Kingman Associates)  SoHo 675,000
148 Greene Street  1-bedroom, 2-bath, 2,000-sq.-ft. loft-co-op; elevator, decorative columns, 2,000-sq.-ft. artist studio, 3 exposures; maintenance $750, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: Meisel Real Estate)  Upper East Side 800,000
1035 Park Avenue (86th St.)  3-bedroom, 3-bath, 2,200-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, 2 maid's rooms, dining room, fireplace; maintenance $2,015, 35% tax-deductible (Broker: David Day Realty)  Upper East Side 417,000
175 East 74th Street  2-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 1,200-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, windowed kitchen, terrace, 2 exposures; maintenance $1,287, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: Corcoran Group)  Upper West Side 106,000
392 Central Park West (100th St.)  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 800-sq.-ft. postwar condo; 24-hr. doorman, dining area, terrace, south exposure; common charge $124, taxes $1,464 (Broker: Eden Realty)  BRONX  Allerton Avenue Area 190,000
3818 Colden Avenue  2-family, detached, brick house; 2 bedrooms, 1 bath, dining room in each unit; semi-finished attic, full basement, 1-car garage, 50- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,500 (Broker: Cancro Realty)  Riverdale 275,500
6113 Spencer Avenue  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, single-family, detached, brick house; dining room, full basement, 1-car garage, 40- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $2,100 (Broker: Trebach Realty)  BROOKLYN  Brooklyn College Area 195,000
2671 Bedford Avenue  6-bedroom, 3-bath, single-family, detached Victorian; dining room, fireplace, 2-car garage, 70- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $2,000 (Broker: Helmar Brokerage Ltd.)  Park Slope 155,000
420 12th Street  (Ansonia Court)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,300-sq.-ft co-op in a prewar building; large living room, high-beamed ceilings, exposed-brick walls, common garden, maintenance $495, 65% tax-deductible (Broker: Warren Lewis Realty)  QUEENS  Elmhurst 80,000
94-30 1/2 46th Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, single-family, attached, frame house; dining room, windowed-kitchen, full basement, 15- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $750 (Broker: Veterans Realty)  Forest Hills Gardens 148,000
6 Burns Street  (Tennis View Apartments)  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 900-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; large living room, 11-ft. ceilings, new windows, 3 exposures; maintenance $463, 55% tax-deductible (Broker: Green-Ways Realty)  STATEN ISLAND  Castleton Corners 230,000
96 Stanford Place  5-bedroom, 1-bath, Center-Hall Colonial; dining room, den, pantry, finished attic, semi-finished basement, fireplace, 1-car garage, 50- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,620 (Rand Properties)  Travis 145,000
160-G Dinsmore Street  3-bedroom, 3-bath, single-family, attached, townhouse; dining room, family room, terrace, 1-car garage; 18- by 60-ft. lot; taxes $1,087 (Broker: Salmon Real Estate)


America: Love It or Leave It?
To the Editor:
Eugen Weber, who reviewed Gustave Courbet's letters (March 29), should know that the Duc de Morny was the half brother of Louis Napoleon, not an "influential cousin."  E. WARREN SMITH Brooklyn


Commercial Property: Lost in Space; Companies Finding That Getting Smaller Isn't Easy
THE Chemical Bank is working on a problem that would be the envy of most Manhattanites.
It finds itself with too much, rather than too little, space.
Last December, it merged with the Manufacturers Hanover Trust Company.
And like hundreds of other companies that have consolidated or retrenched during the current recession, the 7.5 million square feet in 20 buildings that the two banks occupied in and around New York City offered far too much space for the combined entity.


Quotation of the Day
"We've had all sorts of third-party and equivalent candidates in the past. But we've never had one where you combine such a tide of anti-incumbency and a man who has got two to three billion dollars. Put those together and nobody knows what will happen." -- HOWARD H. BAKER JR., the former Senator, on Ross Perot's campaign prospects.  [ 12:3. ]


Missing Cogs
To the Editor:
As a puppeteer and historian, I appreciated Mark Dery's article on the West Coast mechanical performance artists  [ "The Art of Crash, Hum and Hiss," March 15 ] .
However, I was taken aback by a gaping hole in Mr.
Dery's view of the history of these performing machines.


Review/Jazz; Finding the Similarities Across Geographical Boundaries
The guitarist John McLaughlin's set on Wednesday at the Blue Note picked up for a moment during the second song.
A duet between Mr.
McLaughlin and his percussionist, Trilok Gurtu, the tune mined the similarities in flamenco and elements of Indian music, with rapid flurries and carefully bent and slurred notes.
The piece was built around exchanges, and Mr.
McLaughlin, who had toned down the electronic effects he used for most of the set, and Mr.
Gurtu carried on a long conversation, full of puns and asides and digressions.
It was the last elevated moment of the set, and the last intimate one as well.
Mr.
McLaughlin has never been a warm improviser, but at this stage of his long and varied career he has exaggerated his distance from the audience by adding loads of electronic devices to his sound.
Playing an acoustic guitar, and backed by the bassist Dominique di Piazza and Mr.
Gurtu, he added enough echo to make the whole thing seem as if it were emanating from a cave somewhere north of the Arctic Circle.
Mr. di Piazza did the same; at times, synthesized keyboard sounds appropriate to an airport lounge added a kitsch humor the band probably didn't intend.


Last Buzzer
Twenty-four seasons later, a record of 526 wins and 200 losses, 18 national tournaments, and a Hall of Fame career, Lou Carnesecca is bowing out as head basketball coach at St.
John's University.
Not bad for someone who never played a varsity game.
Mr.
Carnesecca's decision was as unexpected as it was unpressured.
"The job was Lou's as long as he wanted it, in my book," said the Rev.
Donald J. Harrington, St.
John's president.
The coach will be inducted into the Basketball Hall of Fame May 11.
Mr.
Carnesecca, who will become assistant to the president for community relations, apparently cared more about his high-flying Redmen than about his salary, earning about $300,000, far below what other Big East coaches make.
Matt Brust, a former player, showed up at the news conference Monday.
"He taught me how to tie a knot in my tie," said Mr.
Brust, who is now an institutional trader on Wall Street.
"He helped us all grow up. He taught us one-fourth basketball and three-fourths life. He's a kind man, and I love him."


A Loser Who's a Winner
To the Editor:
I was disappointed that Janet Maslin, in her article "The (Real) Winners Are . . . the Losers"  [ March 29 ] , didn't mention an actress so esteemed during her 22-year career that she garnered five Oscar nominations (but never won): Irene Dunne.
Many of her vehicles are too sentimental for today's audiences.
Nevertheless, she was probably the most dazzling comedienne of all time, with a singing voice to match her many other talents.
DAVID JOHNSON Mill River, Mass.


This Week
Garden Sources
Start your salad garden this week.
You should be able to plant lettuce, radishes, spinach, chard, beets and carrots.
Chinese greens, mache (corn salad), arugula, curly cress and broccoli rape will do fine now, too.
Here are sources for the vegetable and flower varieties mentioned:


Paying for the Sand At the Shore
In his letter to the New Jersey editor on March 29 ("Why Buy Sand for Private Beaches?"), Raymond E. Williams complained about the state (taxpayer) funds spent on beach replenishment at the Jersey Shore.
He overlooked the fact that most of New Jersey's multibillion-dollar income from its third-largest industry -- travel and tourism -- comes from the Shore.
In other words, what we're talking about is giving a little back to maintain the golden goose.


Conner Blessed by Ill Winds
Dennis Conner and his Stars &amp; Stripes crew cashed in on their luck with weather when the opening race in the America's Cup defense finals was abandoned at a time when Stars &amp; Stripes was woefully behind.
The race was called because the wind died and neither Stars &amp; Stripes nor its opponent, Bill Koch's America3, were able to reach the third mark within 2 hours 13 minutes, the prescribed time limit.
America3 struggled within 100 feet of the buoy as the race was called.
Stars &amp; Stripes was at least 12 boat lengths behind.


CAMPUS LIFE: Stanford; Students Elected To Seats on Council Hoping to Abolish It
Taking anti-incumbency to an extreme, Stanford University students last week elected to their highest governing body, the four-member Council of Presidents, a slate of candidates who made only one campaign promise: to abolish the council.
The new council members, who call themselves the "I Prefer Not to Have a COP" slate, apparently benefited from a fake endorsement in The Stanford Daily, the campus newspaper.


Corrections
A map on April 5 with an article about Savannah, Ga., mislabeled Routes 80 and 17.
They are Federal routes, but not part of the Interstate System.


A July Bridal For Ms. Segalas
Mr. and Mrs.
Spiros Segalas of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter Christine Frances Segalas to Andrew Reid Shaw, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Reid Lonsdale Shaw of Niskayuna, N.Y.
A July wedding is planned.
Ms.
Segalas, 27 years old, owns Shayne Christy Communications, a graphics design company in Natick, Mass.
She graduated from Boston University.
Her father is a founding director and the chief investment officer of Jennison Associates, a money management company in New York.
Her mother, Diane H. Segalas, is the president of the Y.W.C.A. of New York City and a trustee of the Marymount School.


Tell Us, Governor, Just What You Would Do; La Guardia's Party
To the Editor:
A.
M.
Rosenthal's "New York and Clinton" (column, April 3) lists Fiorello H. La Guardia as a Democrat.
Mayor La Guardia was a Republican.
His famous 1922 statement on his brand of Republicanism is important in this era of cookie-cutter conservatives: "I stand for the Republicanism of Abraham Lincoln, and let me tell you the average Republican leader east of the Mississippi doesn't know anything more about Abraham Lincoln than Henry Ford knows about the Talmud." ADAM D. ELFENBEIN Arlington, Va., April 3, 1992


Abroad at Home; Hair on Their Chests
The American press prides itself on its courage, its selflessness, its influence.
But in the current political campaign those claims sound like a bad joke.
The press is distinguished by its cynicism and its self-regard.
Yes, it does have influence -- for the worse.
The notable example at hand is the press treatment of Bill Clinton.
Even serious newspapers have become parodies of attack-dog journalism, eager to find something -- anything -- nasty to print about Governor Clinton.


Feeling the Spirit
Over the past five years, Chester Higgins Jr.  has attended the New York services of the Apostolic Church, Ethiopian Hebrews and African-American Moslems.
He has visited black American groups who have transplanted the traditional religious services of the Akan-speaking people of Ghana and the Yoruba of Nigeria, as well as a group that worships according to its reconstruction of Nubian and ancient Egyptian religion.
"I'd step into the Holy Trinity Ethiopian Orthodox Church in the Bronx, see the priests' colorful vestments, their clanking, incense-filled sistrums and think I was back in Africa," Higgins says.
"Or I'd enter a Brooklyn brownstone and step through a portal to Brazil."


Wall Street; A Swiss Firm Makes Babies Its Bet
One of the beauties of Wall Street is that there is almost always money to be made by targetting a generally overlooked market.
An example of this is Ares-Serono S.A., a quirky but successful Swiss drug company that stands out as the only company aggressively addressing the needs of millions of people with fertility problems.
The company has some obvious flaws -- a chief one is succession -- but roughly $260 million, or 35 percent, of its 1991 revenues came from the sale of its six fertility-boosting drugs, making it the closest thing to a pure play on the baby business that exists.


Sunday Brunch; Would You Like a Little Atmosphere With Your Mimosa?
In the past two years, the options for Sunday brunch have expanded like omelet mix in a hot pan.
The economic slump has prompted more establishments to offer brunch, more for public relations than for profits.
Hence, brunch is unquestionably the best dining deal around, especially if you are a fan of mimosas.
Here are three good options.
Bridge Cafe
279 Water Street, at the South Street Seaport, (212) 227-3344 -- Mercifully unrestored, the dining room here looks as if no interior designer has ever sailed within 10 miles of it.


Concentrate and Count, Count, Count
EDGAR ALLAN POE wrote of "the tintinnabulation that so musically wells from the bells, bells, bells, bells." Bells, which have tolled for human events throughout history, are more popular today than ever as musical instruments.
When held and rung by handbell choirs, they lend a touch of exoticism to the usual concert-going experience.
The county has several handbell choirs connected to schools and churches, where bells have traditionally had religious use.
One of the oldest groups, founded 30 years ago, is the Bedford Bellringers, which practices and performs at the Bedford Presbyterian Church here.
The choir also presents several community concerts each year, like the one scheduled next Sunday at 4 P.M. at the church, which faces the Bedford Green.


Have a Seat
To find the right man for the soon to be vacant job of police chief, the City Fathers of Los Angeles had to leave town.
In Philadelphia, they found Willie L. Williams, 46 years old, chief of the Philly police -- and best qualified, according to the tests, of all candidates interviewed over several months.
He also happens to be black, but that is neither here nor there, the Angelinos said.
Last week it became official that Mr.
Williams had the job, but it it was not clear when he would start because it was not clear when his predecessor, Darryl Gates, would be leaving.
As the civil trial in the case that started it all chugged along -- a group of white police were surreptitiously videotaped clubbing a handcuffed black man last summer; now he's suing -- Mr.
Gates was quoted as saying A) he would be leaving in June or July, B) he had not thought about when to leave, and C) he would be glad to go. Mr. Williams, meanwhile, was rumored to have said he would be happy just to find some place to sit.


A July Wedding For Lisa Pope
July wedding plans have been announced for Lisa Anne Pope, the daughter of Margery Pope of Indianapolis and Dennis Pope of Columbus, Ohio, and Jeffrey Charles Girion, a son of Barbara and Heywood Jay Girion of Short Hills, N.J.
Ms.
Pope, 30 years old, is a reporter for The Los Angeles Daily News.
She graduated from Northwestern University.
Her father, who is retired, was a manager for the Emhart Corporation, a hardware and electronics concern in Indianapolis.
Her mother is a medical technologist at Community Hospital North in Indianapolis.


BEST SELLERS: April 19, 1992
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
6
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $22.50.) A woman law student seeks to discover the truth about the murder of two Supreme Court justices.
2
2
10
RISING SUN, by Michael Crichton. (Knopf, $22.) The mysterious death of a young woman leads to an investigation in which technology and the American-Japanese rivalry play major roles.
3
3
6
THE ELF QUEEN OF SHANNARA, by Terry Brooks. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $22.) The third volume in a series about a fantasy land.
4
6
17
DISNEY'S BEAUTY AND THE BEAST. (Gallery Books/Penguin USA, $6.98.) A retelling of the classic fairy tale in words and pictures.
5
4
8
THE ROAD TO OMAHA, by Robert Ludlum. (Random House, $23.95.) A retired general and a lawyer scheme to take possession of the state of Nebraska on behalf of an obscure Indian tribe.
6
5
9
VOX, by Nicholson Baker. (Random House, $15.) A man and a woman learn about each other through a telephone conversation on an "adult party line."
7
7
5
PROBE, by Margaret Wander Bonanno. (Pocket, $18.95.) The crew of "Star Trek" 's Enterprise confronts a force that threatens galactic peace.
8 *
8
3
ACTS OF FAITH, by Erich Segal. (Bantam, $23.) The stories of three Brooklyn natives, one of whom rises high in the Roman Catholic hierarchy, two who break with their traditional Jewish heritage.
9 *
10
28
SCARLETT, by Alexandra Ripley. (Warner, $24.95.) The sequel to "Gone With the Wind."
10
9
6
OUTERBRIDGE REACH, by Robert Stone. (Ticknor &amp; Fields, $21.95.) A man tries to relieve the frustrations of his lifetime by participating in a solo sailing race.
11
12
4
TRIAL BY FIRE, by Harold Coyle. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) The United States Army in a war against Mexico, a conflict marked by revolutionary forces, drug lords and bungled intelligence.
12
1
SILENT PREY, by John Sandford. (Putnam, $21.95.) A retired cop and a New York policewoman join hands to track down an escaped serial killer.
13
13
104
OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr. Seuss. (Random House, $12.95.) Verse and pictures.
14
7
GRIFFIN &amp; SABINE, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $16.95.) The romance of an artist and a secret admirer, told through illustrated cards and letters.
15
1
JAZZ, by Toni Morrison. (Knopf, $21.) A couple in the Harlem of the 1920's learn again and again that life does not keep its promises.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
12
REVOLUTION FROM WITHIN, by Gloria Steinem. (Little, Brown, $22.95.) The reflections of a feminist on the struggle to achieve self-esteem.
2
2
22
BACKLASH, by Susan Faludi. (Crown, $24.) A journalist contends that the media and political groups are staging a war against women's rights.
3 *
3
7
DOUBLE CROSS, by Sam Giancana and Chuck Giancana. (Warner, $22.95.) Two relatives of the late Sam Giancana recall his life in the Mafia.
4
4
5
ROGUE WARRIOR, by Richard Marcinko with John Weisman. (Pocket, $22.) The memoirs of the retired commander of a counterterrorist unit.
5
6
16
BROTHER EAGLE, SISTER SKY: A Message From Chief Seattle, illustrated by Susan Jeffers. (Dial, $14.95.) An environmental warning.
6
5
27
DEN OF THIEVES, by James B. Stewart. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) How four men plundered and created havoc on Wall Street.
7
14
3
THE DISUNITING OF AMERICA, by Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr. (Norton, $14.95.) A historian considers the effects that the current emphasis on ethnicity is having on our society.
8 *
12
2
REINVENTING GOVERNMENT, by David Osborne and Ted Gaebler. (Patrick/Addison-Wesley, $22.95.) How every level of government can be restructured to operate more efficiently.
9
13
8
UNTO THE SONS, by Gay Talese. (Knopf, $25.) A journalist traces his heritage through three generations, from Italy to Ocean City, N.J.
10 *
3
EARTH IN THE BALANCE, by Al Gore. (Houghton Mifflin, $22.95.) The Tennessee Senator discusses factors affecting the environment.
11
9
8
THE TEXAS CONNECTION, by Craig I. Zirbel. (Texas Connection/Ingram, $21.95.) An attorney says L.B.J. was involved in the death of J.F.K.
12
8
22
MOLLY IVINS CAN'T SAY THAT, CAN SHE? by Molly Ivins. (Random House, $23.) Essays about the current political and cultural scene.
13
23
TOUJOURS PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Knopf, $20.) The charms of rustic France, as savored by a London advertising man who moved there.
14 *
16
7
THE OVERWORKED AMERICAN, by Juliet B. Schor. (Basic, $21.) The diminishment of Americans' leisure time, and its consequences.
15
1
BARCELONA, by Robert Hughes. (Knopf, $27.50.) The story of the Spanish city through 15 centuries.
16 *
7
20
MEMORIES, by Ralph Emery with Tom Carter. (Macmillan, $19.95.) The autobiography of a country-music broadcaster.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
9
A RETURN TO LOVE, by Marianne Williamson. (HarperCollins, $20.) Inspirational advice about ways to replace feelings of fear with feelings of love in daily life.
2
2
20
MORE WEALTH WITHOUT RISK, by Charles J. Givens. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) An updated and expanded volume of financial advice.
3
1
THE JUICEMAN'S POWER OF JUICING, by Jay Kordich. (Morrow, $15.) A program for staying healthy and trim by consuming fresh fruit and vegetable juices.
4
3
15
AWAKEN THE GIANT WITHIN, by Anthony Robbins. (Summit, $20.) Ways to take control of your emotional, physical and financial destiny.
5
4
20
HOW TO SATISFY A WOMAN EVERY TIME, by Naura Hayden. (Bibli O'Phile/Dutton, $14.95.) Sexual advice for married couples.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,050 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
And Bear in Mind
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
THE CHAIRMAN.
John J. McCloy: The Making of the American Establishment, by Kai Bird. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) A life of the friend and adviser to nine Presidents, perhaps the most powerful American who was never really famous.
ORDINARY MEN: Reserve Police Battalion 101 and the Final Solution in Poland, by Christopher R. Browning. (Aaron Asher/ HarperCollins, $22.) A historian's meticulous account of some men -- mostly not even Nazis -- who killed about 83,000 Jews.
AT WEDDINGS AND WAKES, by Alice McDermott. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $19.) This lovely novel, the author's third in a decade, perceives events in a large but dwindling Brooklyn Irish family as the memories they later become.
OWEN LATTIMORE AND THE "LOSS" OF CHINA, by Robert P. Newman. (University of California, $30.) This landmark work on American politics at the end of World War II tells us how an obscure scholar was magnified into the Red Menace its very self.
STARDUST, 7-ELEVEN, ROUTE 57, A&amp;W, AND SO FORTH: Stories, by Patricia Lear. (Knopf, $19.) A nifty debut collection by yet another language-stoked Southerner, mixing syncopated syntax, down-home insight and far-out yet believable characters.
THE MAKING OF MIDDLEBROW CULTURE, by Joan Shelley Rubin. (University of North Carolina, cloth, $34.95; paper, $14.95.) An intelligent study of several 20th-century American efforts to sell culture to the plebs, which did much for some of the plebs.
ALIEN INK: The FBI's War on Freedom of Expression, by Natalie Robins. (Morrow, $27.50.) This admirable history of the F.B.I.'s dossier collection on intellectuals shows that the bureau's agents weren't really up to the task set for them by their crazed boss.


Political Talk
After-Budget Battle
Is the New York State Comptroller, Edward V. Regan, gearing up to run for Governor in 1994?
For that matter, is Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo doing the same thing?
And if not, just why are they jousting with each other?


Corrections
A sketch of Holmdel Township on April 5 with an article about the township omitted the artist's credit.
She was Peg McEowen of Holmdel.


A Stitch in Time
Knitting is my default switch; when nothing else demands my attention, my mind dwells on color combinations and stockinette and seed stitch and the fascinating texture that a little chenille can give.
My knitting is very basic: plenty of colors, but simple patterns, simple stitches.
And there's a reason for that: I knit at work.
I knit at conferences.
I need knitting that occupies my fingers, not knitting that requires counting stitches or following complex patterns.
But the fascination is still there, the rhythmic lacing of one long piece of wool into all those connected loops, spreading out of one dimension into two, into the thick intricate warm stuff that is the prize of hand-knitting.


Allison Hopkins To Wed in July
Allison Kellogg Hopkins, a teacher at St.
Francis of Assisi School in Medford, Mass., and Jeffrey David Arsenault, a director of catalogue marketing for Guilford Mills Inc., a textile company in New York, are engaged to be married in July.
Miss Hopkins, 27 years old, graduated from Ohio Wesleyan University.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Orne Hopkins of Snyder, N.Y.
Her father is president of United Educational Services, publishers of educational materials.


Spring Is Ideal Time For Shingle Inspection
BECAUSE of their durability and low cost, asphalt shingles are the most popular roofing material in the United States.
Like all roofing, shingles should be inspected at least once a year and, if damaged, repaired promptly to prevent roof leaks.
Spring is the best time for a roof inspection.
If major repairs are necessary, it is better to start them with warmer weather on the way than to be pressed to finish the job before fall begins.


Review/Dance; A Potpourri of Work by 5 Choreographers
Performance Mix, the program that the New Dance Alliance offered on Monday night at the Dia Center for the Arts in SoHo, proved a stimulating potpourri.
It was hard to resist the odd charm of Maxine Moerman's "Water: The Three Suzannahs." Dawn Saito, Marisa and Ms.
Moerman looked demure in long gowns and shyly dunked their hair and feet into pails of water.
A press release stated that "Water" was inspired by the biblical story of Suzannah and the Elders and was part of a work in progress based on the four elements.


STEVE ROSS DEFENDS HIS PAYCHECK
It seems to me that Ross created his own tangled web of unhappiness.
If he disliked journalists so much, why did he buy Time Inc.?
ADRIAN DEVORE
Newark


CRIME
Sheriff Spencer Arrowood, the gentle lawman in Sharyn McCrumb's elegiac mountain mystery THE HANGMAN'S BEAUTIFUL DAUGHTER (Scribners, $19), wonders "why the city people who decided such things thought that the Arizona desert was exotic but that Appalachia -- despite its ghosts and gold mines, Cherokees and Civil War legends . . . moonshine and white water -- was not." Those city slickers should go up to Hangman Rock and make the acquaintance of Nora Bonesteel.
An old Tennessee mountain woman with "the Sight," Nora stitches her visions onto quilts and pillows for her neighbors in Dark Hollow, who respectfully keep their distance.
"It would be like having Death as an upstairs boarder," they say in town.
Nora is truly exotic.
The other characters are only human, haunted not by ghosts but by the demons of civilization: poverty, loneliness and a creeping alienation from their own land and history that has made them forgetful of one another.
The things that happen to these people over one long winter are like biblical punishments: a trailer blaze that kills a mother and orphans a child, the murderous rampage of a teen-ager who shoots his family and himself, incidents of cancer and stillbirths attributed to a river polluted by industrial wastes.


Plants That Honor the Memory of People
WHAT spring would be complete without the bright yellow little bells of forsythia?
The shrub seems to be growing everywhere, a cheerful sight indeed, bringing graceful garlands of flowers to a landscape that is frequently still quite bare.
It is just about the easiest shrub to grow, and if it is kept in bounds, with judicious pruning right after coming into bloom, forsythia will be around to flower for many springs to come.
But how many gardeners realize that forsythia commemorates someone?
William Forsyth, gardener to George III of England, is credited with having built the first rock garden in England, with stones taken from the Tower of London and with lava brought from Iceland by Sir Joseph Banks, who was an explorer and naturalist.


Engagement Party
Gov.
Bill Clinton, searching for a new and different word to describe his foreign policy -- not isolationist, but not too interventionist -- floated out "a new strategy for American
engagement
." The choice, he told the Foreign Policy Association, was "whether we will
engage
or abstain."
Eyebrows shot up at the Heritage Foundation, a conservative think tank.
Kim R. Holmes, its foreign-policy chief, had only the week before circulated a speech centered on "Selective
Engagement
: A New Global Strategy."


The Whitney Continues Its Search . . . For Itself
When Tom Armstrong was fired two years ago as director of the Whitney Museum of American Art, the affair left the institution shaken, lacking both harmony and a sense of mission.
It needed a leader and a diplomat who could contend with the charges of faddishness and scholarly inadequacy that had been leveled at the museum under Mr.
Armstrong.
Such people are rare in the best of times.
But after the extended public struggle to oust its director, the Whitney was especially hard pressed to attract one.
The trustees eventually decided on David Ross, the 41-year-old director of the Institute of Contemporary Art in Boston, known for his interest in video and conceptual art.
He was not a scholar and had no experience running a place on the scale of the Whitney.


Spring Is Ideal Time For Shingle Inspection
BECAUSE of their durability and low cost, asphalt shingles are the most popular roofing material in the United States.
Like all roofing, shingles should be inspected at least once a year and, if damaged, repaired promptly to prevent roof leaks.
Spring is the best time for a roof inspection.
If major repairs are necessary, it is better to start them with warmer weather on the way than to be pressed to finish the job before fall begins.


STEVE ROSS DEFENDS HIS PAYCHECK
After reading the article about Steve Ross, I couldn't help but speculate how many of the 605 Time Warner employees who were laid off might also be battling cancer, as Ross is.
And I wonder how successfully they're doing it minus their paychecks and health insurance.
RONA K. MOYER
Port Washington, L.I.


Corrections
An article last Sunday about corporate management misstated terms of a pay cut taken by John F. Akers, chairman of the International Business Machines Corporation.
What was reduced by 40 percent was Mr.
Akers's total 1991 compensation, not his base salary.
The article also misstated circumstances leading to the cut, announced in February.
I.B.M. representatives did not meet until March with the California Public Employees Retirement System, which had complained about Mr.
Akers's pay, and he was not at that meeting.


CAMPUS LIFE: SUNY-Albany; Rumors of Rape Adding to Anxiety On Tense Campus
In an effort to pin down rumors and calm growing campus anxiety, administrators at the State University of New York at Albany last week asked students to divulge any information they have regarding a gang rape that purportedly took place on campus last month.
Mitchel Livingston, the vice president of student affairs, told about 150 student leaders on Thursday that thus far no one has reported the gang rape to either the campus police or the Albany police.
Mr.
Livingston urged anyone who has knowledge of the purported attack to tell the administration.


Domestic Issues in Romania Follow Envoy to Washington
Fresh off the plane to take up his duties here as the new Ambassador of Romania this month, Aurel Dragos Munteanu experienced the diplomatic equivalent of somebody stepping on his toes.
He was handed a copy of a day-old Congressional resolution on the most sensitive domestic issue in his country, the situation of Romania's large Hungarian minority.
The April 1 resolution accuses Bucharest of tolerating discrimination against Hungarians.


'Devil' Wins Wood; Is Derby His Due?
New York may have finally found a candidate for the Kentucky Derby yesterday when Devil His Due outran 11 other contenders and won the $500,000 Wood Memorial at Aqueduct.
It was only two weeks after Devil His Due had won a half-share of the Gotham Stakes by running a dead heat with Lure after a punishing speed duel.
But he came back smartly in the Wood, raced in second place for nearly a mile and then struck in the homestretch.
He snatched the lead from D. Wayne Lukas's Goldwater, and flashed home one length in front of John H. Peace's fast-closing West By West, with the British traveler Rokeby two lengths back in third.


For Sikhs, 15,000 Strong, Prosperity in A New Land
THE women will wear bright silk dresses, trimmed with gold.
The men, their beards and mustaches carefully combed, will be in suits and turbans.
They will park their cars in the comely suburb of Bridgewater and, 3,000 strong, enter the huge cream-colored building topped by domes.
Today in Bridgewater and at temples in Glen Rock and Deptford, as their neighbors celebrate Easter and Passover, the Sikhs will observe Vaisakhi, marking the day when Gobind Singh, the 10th and final prophet, established the discipline of Khalsa, through which the faithful can aspire to the ultimate state of purity.


Streetscapes: 117-119 West 74th Street; Rowhouses Shape Their Destiny
MOST buildings just sit around without complaint, letting their fates rest in the hands of owners and their architects.
But two little buildings on the West Side seem to have taken matters into their own hands.
In 1888, Joshua Jones built a row of houses at 103 to 131 West 74th Street.
He hired as architect Joseph M. Dunn, who had worked with James Renwick in the 1860's but who had been known since the early 1870's as the house architect for the city's Department of Charities and Correction.


Families and Other Works in Progress
BLUE GLASS
By Sandra Tyler. 293 pp. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. $19.95.


Plants That Honor the Memory of People
WHAT spring would be complete without the bright yellow little bells of forsythia?
The shrub seems to be growing everywhere, a cheerful sight indeed, bringing graceful garlands of flowers to a landscape that is frequently still quite bare.
It is just about the easiest shrub to grow, and if it is kept in bounds, with judicious pruning right after coming into bloom, forsythia will be around to flower for many springs to come.
But how many gardeners realize that forsythia commemorates someone?
William Forsyth, gardener to George III of England, is credited with having built the first rock garden in England, with stones taken from the Tower of London and with lava brought from Iceland by Sir Joseph Banks, who was an explorer and naturalist.


Military Language School Adjusts for a World Without a Cold War
With an ear to the future, the Pentagon is gearing up to teach military linguists the languages of the post-cold war world, from Azeri to Ukrainian.
The collapse of the Soviet Union and simmering political tensions in the Middle East are forcing the military to rethink its language needs.
For example, when Iraq invaded Kuwait in August 1990, the military could identify only 18 soldiers among the three million active-duty and reserve troops who were fluent in the Arabic dialect spoken in Iraq.
Now, the number of Arabic speakers at the Defense Department's huge language school here is expected to triple in the next few years.


The U.S. Takes a Serious Look at Ukraine
While attention was focused last week on President Boris N. Yeltsin's agreement with conservative legislators in Moscow over Western terms for aid to Russia, an equally important development was quietly unfolding in Kiev.
A high-level American team was laying the foundations of the first American foreign policy toward Ukraine.
After months of dealing with Ukraine as an afterthought to relations with Russia, the Bush Administration has concluded that it must have a Ukraine policy, as unique and tailored as policies toward France, Poland or Germany.
The mission to Kiev, led by Under Secretary of Defense Paul D. Wolfowitz, was prompted by an acknowledgement by American officials that the way they had been handling Ukraine was not working.
Washington had tended to deal with Ukraine primarily as an aspect of arms control problems between America and Russia.
Establishment of diplomatic relations with Ukraine was made conditional on President Leonid M. Kravchuk's agreeing to transfer all of the nuclear weapons on his territory to Russia and maintaining a "responsible security policy" that would not aggravate relations with Moscow or anyone else.
An Interest in Stability
To be sure, the United States has an overwhelming interest in focusing on Russia, since without stability and economic development there the whole Eurasian landmass would be shaky.
Moreover, collecting all former Soviet nuclear weapons under the single control of Moscow makes some sense in security terms.
Roman Szporluk, a professor of Ukrainian history at Harvard, said: "Empires like to deal with empires -- there is something neat about it. But to treat Ukraine as though it still belonged to the sphere of Russia was a mistake."


U.S. Action May Renew Abortion Debate
THE possibility, and many say the probability, that the United States Supreme Court this summer will weaken or revoke the constitutional right of a woman to have an abortion will have varying impact on the states.
With any weakening of Roe v.
Wade, Connecticut's two-year-old law that codified provisions of the landmark 1973 decision may become subject to revision.
As the Supreme Court begins hearing arguments this week in a Pennsylvania case, supporters and opponents of abortion rights are each aligning their lobbying efforts to what seems to be a perception that the debate is far from over in Connecticut.


New European Car-Rail Passes
A new pass allowing unlimited rail travel and a 3-day car rental within a 15-day period in both Britain and France is being offered by Rail Europe, the European railroads' booking agency.
The BritFrance Rail Drive Pass provides travelers with eight days of travel in the period.
The two components of the pass, which can be taken in either or both of the countries, are five days of train travel and three days of unlimited-mileage Avis rental, including local tax and drop-off within the country of rental.
The program also includes a round-trip Channel crossing on the Hovercraft or catamaran between Dover and Boulogne.
The package with first-class rail and a car costs $399 a person; with second-class rail it is $315 a person, both prices being based on two people traveling together.
A handling fee of $10 is added for each order.
Rail Europe sells more than 30 passes, including one for rail alone in Britain and France.
Rail Europe is also introducing a Greek Rail and Drive Pass, allowing visitors to pick up a rental car on some Aegean and other islands as well as travel by train on the mainland.
Two programs are offered.
One combines any five days of unlimited rail travel in first class with any three days of Hertz car rental with unlimited mileage, within a 15-day period.
The car may be economy, compact or intermediate, and the package costs from $129 to $169 a person, assuming two people are traveling together.
A third person sharing the car purchases only the rail portion of the program.


Serena Koven To Wed in June
Mr. and Mrs.
Theodore G. Koven of Mountainville, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Serena Van Rensselaer Koven to Michael John O'Connor, the son of Mrs.
Roderic L. O'Connor of Far Hills, N.J., and the late Mr.
O'Connor.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Koven, 29 years old, is a manager at the Lodge, a sportswear store in Princeton, N.J.
Her father is the president of L. O. Koven &amp; Brother, a steel fabricator in Dover, N.J.


Counting Costs At All-Inclusives
IN the Caribbean islands, an increasing number of resorts are selling packages that include the room, meals, drinks of all sorts, water sports and tennis -- everything the resort has available -- for a set price by the week or the day.
This sales technique, part of the plan at Sandals and similar resorts on Jamaica, really began with Club Med in 1950, but it has now spread to other islands, to Mexico and Florida.
Overall in the Caribbean, John Bell, excutive director of the Caribbean Hotel Association, estimates 35 or 40 hotels of his 800 members are operating on the basis of one price, with the center of concentration in Jamaica.
Counting total rooms in the Caribbean, experts estimate that 12 rooms are rented as rooms-only for every room rented on an all-inclusive basis.


In the Name of a Cause
APRIL 11 -- Duke University's Performance Arts Endowment Fund was the beneficiary of a pretheater reception for the university's trustees, graduates and guests.
The party, in the atrium of the Equitable Building, was followed by a performance of "Jake's Women" by Neil Simon at the Neil Simon Theater.
SUNDAY -- The aroma of Italian cooking wafted through the Metropolitan Opera House during a masked ball to benefit Citymeals-on-Wheels.
Thirty-three Italian restaurants set out buffets on the six levels of the lobby, allowing the elaborately masked guests to promenade up and down the grand stairway while eating their way through the culinary celebration.


An Economic Wedge Divides Czechoslovakia
The legend on the map dominating a wall of the office had been hastily altered to reflect new realities: paint obliterated the word "Socialist" and the first two syllables of the name of the country, leaving only an asymmetric "slovak Republic."
Not every Slovak is as prepared as Marian Tkac, Slovakia's Deputy Minister of Finance, to re-label the map of Czechoslovakia.
Many outsiders assume that Slovaks' yearnings to break away and establish an independent country will dissipate once the republic's citizens get down to the practical tasks of putting a VCR in every living room and a microwave in every kitchen.


U.S. Sues New York for Age Bias in Hiring
The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission has filed an age discrimination lawsuit against the New York State Parks Department over the department's refusal to hire anyone older than 29 as a park patrol officer.
The commission filed suit on Friday in Manhattan Federal court on behalf of 25 people -- all over 40 years old -- who were turned down by the Office of Parks, Recreation and Historic Preservation.


Traffic Alert
Fifth Avenue will be closed to traffic between 44th and 57th streets from 11 A.M. to 2:30 P.M. today for the Easter Promenade.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Pennsylvania; After Time Off, Clinton Finds Campaign Trail a Little Smoother
Bill Clinton laughed.
He waved a couple of bunches of broccoli, President Bush's most-hated vegetable.
He walked with the Mayor.
Then he flew from Philadelphia to Pittsburgh, put on a Pirates baseball jacket and blue jeans and did it all over again.
There is an art to walking down the street in a Presidential campaign.
When it is done right, Mr.
Clinton looks like a man of the people, offering snippets from his standard speech as he fields questions along the way.
But sometimes the unexpected happens, as it did today when he was greeted by jeering supporters of Gov.
Edmund G. Brown Jr., who were waiting at the corner of 21st Street and Penn Avenue.


Jersey Looks for Money To Restore the Shore
The storms that raked New Jersey's shores in October and January did more than damage sea walls, homes and businesses.
They laid bare the state's lack of commitment to the protection of its greatest natural resource -- its oceanfront.
After the storms left more than $100 million in damage, local officials, businessmen and property owners discovered that New Jersey hadn't a penny earmarked for protecting the 127-mile shore.
Over the years the Legislature has fought over who should pay for the sea walls, jetties and sand replacement, without resolution.
The issue pits developers, shore business owners and homeowners against environmentalists, and shore legislators against those from other parts of the state.
An important aspect of the debate is the impact on tourism, New Jersey's second largest industry, generating $15 billion in economic activity annually.


An Endangered Witness
THE FORGOTTEN
By Elie Wiesel. Translated by Stephen Becker. 237 pp. New York: Summit Books. $21.


Bridge
The world's largest bridge organization, the American Contract Bridge League, has had management problems during the past decade.
The league, which administers the tournaments in the United States, Canada, Bermuda and Mexico, has had five chief executives in eight years, and will have a sixth later this year.
It has almost 200,000 members, an annual budget of $6.6 million and 95 employees in its headquarters in Memphis, only 15 of whom play bridge.
A year ago, the league's board, an amateur body, ended the contract of William Gross, who had been appointed from within its own ranks.
Simultaneously and coincidentally, the president of the World Bridge Federation, Denis Howard of Australia, resigned his post following disagreements with the influential European Bridge League.


CAMPUS LIFE: Rutgers; Students Discover A Path to Power Through Lobbying
Though the popular image of student advocates might involve tie-dyed T-shirts and protest marches, a group of students at Rutgers University here spends a good deal of time wearing suits and lobbying state officials and legislators in Trenton.
"We've caught on to the sophistication of the game," said David Yosifon, a freshman from Vernon, N.J., majoring in philosophy.
"We wear ties, not tie-dyes."


A Boxing Revival Begins in the State
PROFESSIONAL boxing, nearly extinct in the state in the last decade, appears to be making a comeback, thanks in large part to the new and highly successful casino in Ledyard.
But unlike the gaming operation, boxing on the Mashantucket Pequot Indian reservation will produce revenue for the state, as will two other boxing events next month in Hartford and Southington.


Valerie Winter To Wed in June
Mr. and Mrs.
Martin Winter of Englewood Cliffs, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Valerie Joy Winter, to James Howard Stone, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Burton Stone of Hartsdale, N.Y.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Winter, 27 years old, is an account executive at Shalor Designs Inc., a clothing manufacturer in New York.
She graduated from George Washington University.
Her father is the president of the Gagio Corporation, a fashion consulting concern in New York.


The 1-Point Shot
To the Sports Editor:
Since the advent of the 3-point basket, it stands to reason that if distance shots are awarded an extra point then close shots should be awarded only 1 point.
This makes sense in view of the fact that a foul shot is only 1 point.
Certainly a "jam" should not be the same value as a 20-foot field goal.
I suggest that any basket scored from an inner circumference of the distance to the foul line be a 1-point shot.
This will improve the skills of the game and shorten its length at the same time.
WILLIAM K. KOPP Rego Park, Queens


Anne Touborg Plans to Wed
Dr.
Jens N. F. Touborg of Weston, Mass., and Margaret Bowers Touborg of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter Anne Monroe Touborg to Michael Charles Zimmer, a son of Charles F. Zimmer of Lynchburg, Va., and Judith H. Mitchell of Midlothian, Va.
An August wedding is planned.
Miss Touborg, 26 years old, is an English teacher at George Washington Middle School in Ridgewood, N.J.
She graduated from Princeton University and received a master's degree in education from Harvard University.
Her father practices medicine in Waltham, Mass.
Her mother is the president of the University of Cape Town Fund in New York.


Diana Degnan To Wed in May
Mr. and Mrs.
Donald E. Degnan of New York have announced May wedding plans for their daughter Diana Kris Degnan and Blake Roberts Thorson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert L. Thorson of New York.
Miss Degnan, 27 years old, graduated from Skidmore College.
She is a vice president of the Degnan Company, a television advertising agency in New York of which her father is founder and president.
Her mother, Conchita Degnan, who is retired, was the president of the Degnan Realty Company in New York.


For Young Designers, Keys to Survival
This seems to be a period when many young designers are making quiet clothes and are more interested in survival than in creating a splash.
Big shows with their daunting costs, from models to music to lighting, are out of reach for many small design houses.
And the extra orders generated by a large fashion show may swamp them with unrealistic production demands.


Mutual Funds; The Competing Money Markets
Until recently, when interest rates approached their lowest point in two decades, it was hard to go wrong in investing money that might be needed soon.
Now, with rates in the basement, variations among investments can loom large, and savers who do not want to tie up their money for a long time have poured $39.3 billion this year into money market funds.
Money market mutual funds -- diversified portfolios of Treasury bills and short-term securities issued by banks and corporations -- are offered by mutual fund companies and brokerage firms.
Bank money market deposit accounts, sold by banks or savings and loan associations, were authorized by Congress in 1982 to allow them to compete with money funds.


Finding Messages in African Textiles
IN Africa, textiles represent far more than the substance of clothing; they frequently convey messages.
One of the 40 fabrics on display at the Newark Museum includes a ceremonial embroidered raffia overskirt, made by the Kuba people of Zaire, that was proof that the wearer was a member of the royal family.
Only three people could wear the overskirts: the queen mother, the king's first wife and his first daughter.


Joseph B. Williams, Retired Judge and Lindsay Aide, Is Dead at 70
Joseph B. Williams, a retired judge, former head of New York City's Family and Criminal Courts and a top official in the Lindsay administration, died on Wednesday at Sentara Hampton General Hospital in Hampton, Va.
He was 70 years old and had moved to Hampton this year from Brooklyn.
He died of a heart attack after suffering a lung illness, his family said.


An Intimate Wedding Is Everything But
Honey, I know you're famous, but let's try to keep the wedding small and private, O.K.?
Sure, darling.
We'll just sneak down to your little hometown and nobody will know we're married until it's all over and we're back in Stockholm.
That was the plan ANNETTE OLSEN and STEFAN EDBERG agreed to in preparing for their wedding yesterday in Vaxjo, Sweden, 217 miles south of Stockholm.


C. R. Dutton and Ms. Wilson to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
George W. Wilson of Concord, N.H., have announced the engagement of their daughter Elizabeth Monk Wilson to Christopher Robert Dutton, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Richard S. Dutton of Winsted, Conn.
An August wedding is planned.
Ms.
Wilson, 24 years old, graduated from Middlebury College and is a second-grade teacher at the Springside School in Philadelphia.
Her father is the president of Newspapers of New England Inc. in Concord and a director of The Associated Press.


Tell Us, Governor, Just What You Would Do
To the Editor:
If memory serves, Fiorello La Guardia was elected to Congress seven times as a Republican (1917-21 and 1923-33) and was elected Mayor of New York City in 1933 on a Fusion ticket.
An unusual Republican -- who could imagine George Bush reading the funnies on radio? -- but never a Democrat.
ALBERT L. KRAUS Westfield, N.J., April 3, 1992


Gorbachev Finds Japan Still Reluctant on Aid
The face was familiar.
At least some of the message was familiar.
And as Mikhail S. Gorbachev returned to Japan this week and appealed once more for financial aid for the former Soviet Union, the polite but basically cool Japanese reaction was certainly familiar.
Showing that he retains much of his old stature in Japan, however, the former Soviet President has been accorded a welcome approaching that of a head of state since his arrival for a 12-day visit last Saturday.


A July Wedding For Ms. Zavod
Dr. and Mrs.
Robert Zavod of Haddam, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Abigail Zavod, to Seth Reuben Trotz, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Sam L. Trotz of Savannah, Ga.
A July wedding is planned.
Ms.
Zavod, 22 years old, graduated from Brown University.
She is a research asssistant at Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston and will begin studying for an M.D. and a master's in public health at Tufts University in the fall.
Her father is a radiologist in private practice in Middletown, Conn., and an associate clinical professor at Yale Medical School.


The Real Message Of the Graffito
I was pleased to see the plight of the waterworks buildings brought to the attention of Long Islanders in "Gatehouses of Old Waterworks Suffer Neglect and Worse"  [ April 5 ] .
I was disturbed, however, at one inaccuracy in the report.
The actual graffito painted on the inside of the building that was razed read, "Speak English or Die." The sentiment is truly disturbing and speaks volumes about the attitude of some suburban youths toward, one would suppose, recent immigrants.


Ms. Fabrick to Wed F. M. Gottbetter
Mr. and Mrs.
Howard D. Fabrick of Encino, Calif., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Tracy Lauren Fabrick, to Franklyn Marshall Gottbetter, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul B. Gottbetter of Hartsdale, N.Y.
A December wedding is planned.
Ms.
Fabrick, 25 years old, is the licensing administrator in the merchandising department of Sony Pictures Entertainment in Los Angeles.
She graduated from the University of California at Berkeley.
Her father is the partner in charge of the Los Angeles office of Proskauer Rose Goetz &amp; Mendelsohn, the New York-based law firm.
Her mother, Myrna Taylor Fabrick, is a lawyer in Los Angeles.


The Man Who Molded a Winner
There are name tags on the bulletin board behind his desk at Four Penn Plaza.
Each tag represents a different Ranger player, a different conundrum for Neil Smith.
John Ogrodnick seeks playing time.
Brian Leetch seeks $30 million.
Two headstrong starting goaltenders, John Vanbiesbrouck and Mike Richter.
Fifteen players who could become free agents over the summer.
Fifteen!
Shouldn't Smith, the general manager and caretaker of the Ranger roster, be doing something about this?


F.T.C. Accuses Phone Solicitors Of Deception
Several Daytona Beach, Fla., companies and their owners have been charged by the Federal Trade Commission with deceptively marketing travel packages to consumers nationwide through a network of telephone salesrooms.
The Florida Attorney General, Robert A. Butterworth, also has filed charges against the companies.
According to the F.T.C., people were told by postcard that they had won a vacation to Florida or the Bahamas.
To take the trip, however, the consumer had to purchase a package for about $400, spend "a substantial amount of money" beyond the package cost and comply with many conditions not disclosed by telephone salespeople.
The callers obtained consumers' credit card numbers, the trade commission says, by asserting that card numbers would be used only to verify credit standings.
In fact, the consumers' accounts were billed for the cost of the travel package.


Plants That Honor the Memory of People
WHAT spring would be complete without the bright yellow little bells of forsythia?
The shrub seems to be growing everywhere, a cheerful sight indeed, bringing graceful garlands of flowers to a landscape that is frequently still quite bare.
It is just about the easiest shrub to grow, and if it is kept in bounds, with judicious pruning right after coming into bloom, forsythia will be around to flower for many springs to come.
But how many gardeners realize that forsythia commemorates someone?
William Forsyth, gardener to George III of England, is credited with having built the first rock garden in England, with stones taken from the Tower of London and with lava brought from Iceland by Sir Joseph Banks, who was an explorer and naturalist.


In an Ancient Monastery, Family Fare
SOME special moments in travel are the gift of happenstance: being in the right place at the right moment to see the local saint's-day procession or an orchard in full blossom.
A meal at Gangivecchio is not one of these.
To eat at this restaurant run by the Tornabene family, you must make a reservation, depart from the usual round-the-island tour of Sicily and drive up into the mountains, persevere with faith in your directions and in a few small signposts, and arrive promptly at 1:30 for the single sitting.


Sports of The Times; Nets Prove The Playoffs Are Too Big
IT was interesting to hear Al Harazin and Frank Cashen, two baseball executives, recently volunteering how the Final Four of college basketball has become one of America's major sporting events.
One strength of the Final Four is that it is the nearly perfect Cockroach Motel.
Sixty-four hopeful, energetic teams enter; only one survives.


Renewal, Religious and Otherwise
If the world had been more tolerant, Jesus would not have been crucified nor Jews persecuted.
But as the Scriptures lamented, a world full of hate and bigotry and suspicion was unwilling to abide differences.
So humankind fomented torment, yet the torment led to such triumphs of faith as Easter's Resurrection and Passover's liberation from slavery.
Because of the calendrical coincidence of Easter and Passover, Americans this year celebrate those pains and joys at the same time -- in private or publicly, separately or collectively and, thanks to a system of tolerance, in relative peace.
Scripture spells out the laws of competing faiths, but another writing -- the Constitution -- safeguards the liberty of conscience that keeps the peace.


Yankees Erupt for 10 In 4th Inning
The Inning, it turns out, was just the Tonic the Yankees needed.
And oh, what an inning it was, the home fourth against the Cleveland Indians yesterday.
The Yankees, showing the kind of verve that started them off so well at the start of the season, shook off a somnambulant start against lanky left-hander Dave Otto, awakening with such a vengeance that before the shellshocked Indians could record an out, 11 Yankees had reached base, the first 10 scoring runs.


A Meeting Of the Minds On Purchase Of Jay Site
THIRTEEN years ago a developer purchased a 23-acre site in the city of Rye and drew up plans to build 39 town houses on it.
Her action, which seemed unremarkable at the time, reverberated far beyond the city's borders, involving legislators in White Plains and Albany and officials at the United States Department of the Interior.
Last week, the County Board of Legislators voted 16 to 1 for an agreement that could finally signal an end to the dispute, approving an arrangement in which the county will pay up to $11.5 million, including a $4 million contribution from the state, to buy the site, the birthplace of John Jay, the nation's first Chief Justice.


Room Service


A LITTLE KNOWLEDGE
If Barthelme's luncheon partner had really wanted to make an impression, he could have ordered "Sheep Dip" on the rocks, a delicious single malt that I recently discovered (I have enclosed the label, lest you think I'm having you on).
JOHN BILNEY
Toronto


Public Gardens Are Showing the Way to Nontoxic Pesticides
IN the greenhouse at Old Westbury Gardens, the supervisor, Lee Weidman, recently placed sticky blue and yellow 3-by-5 index cards on plants throughout the room.
Every day she checks the cards to see whether they have trapped thrips or white flies.
The cards monitor the pest population.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
HOLOCAUST REMEMBERED
Jacob C. Wallenberg will be the speaker at a Holocaust Remembrance on Friday at 8:30 P.M. in the Rye Community Synagogue.
Mr.
Wallenberg is vice chairman of the Raoul Wallenberg Committee of the United Nations and a second cousin of Raoul Wallenberg, a Swedish diplomat who vanished during World War II.


Time to Plant


A LITTLE KNOWLEDGE
I infer from the article that drinks were ordered before lunch.
The proper time to enjoy a single malt is after dining, and not before.
I learned this from an acquaintance in the U.K. some years ago.
JOSEPH L. JOHNSON
Newark, Del.


Will Brown Be the Next Bavaro?
In the National Football League draft next Sunday, the Giants will have the 14th pick, and the glamorous names will be gone.
There will be no Steve Emtman, no Desmond Howard, no Quentin Coryatt, no Vaughn Dunbar, no Troy Vincent.
But unless the Cleveland Browns beat the Giants to him, Derek Brown of Notre Dame, the best tight end in the draft, should be available.
And the Giants, who want a pass-rushing defensive end, an outside linebacker, a cornerback, a wide receiver and maybe a quarterback, as well as a tight end, could well grab him.


Networking; Containing the Cost of Communicating
Local-area networks are often like large, rowdy families; too many people trying to use too few bathrooms.
In the case of modems, providing one for each person on the network is too expensive since, like bathrooms, modems sit idle most of the time.
The only viable option is to provide as many as possible and force people to share.
But sharing has its own complications.
One approach is to set up a communications server with multiple modems attached to it for access by anyone on the network.
Communications software is either loaded on each individual machine or on the server computer.
In either case, multiple copies must be purchased.
The other option, and the one most often used by small, medium or remote networks, is to attach a modem to just a few machines and ask users go to them.


For Earth Day, Replace Burning With Recycling
Earth Day is upon us.
How can we better serve our planet than to stop poisoning our environment?
We must change over to full recycling.
We must close the horrible toxic-polluting incinerators as soon as we can.
Many of us are well aware that the vast majority of garbage that is going into the incinerator is garbage that can be recycled!
An incredible trick has been played on us.
We never wanted that incinerator.
Our son has asthma.
We also care about our own lungs and health, as well as the health of the whole world.


Seaport Museum Celebrates 25th
To celebrate its 25th anniversary, the South Street Seaport Museum, housed in a mix of restored 19th-century buildings and sailing ships in lower Manhattan, is mounting exhibitions, sailing events and festivals.
The centerpiece of the yearlong celebration is an exhibition of more than 500 items about the maritime world of New York City from the museum's collections, which starts April 28 and runs through December.
The history of the port will be represented in maps, models of ships, paintings, nautical fixtures, seamen's tools, printing equipment, scrimshaw and documents.
Visitors may board three of the museum's six ships, docked in the East River along South Street: the Peking, a 1911 four-masted bark that is the second largest sailing ship in the world; the Wavertree, an 1885 three-masted ship, and the Ambrose, a 1908 lightship.
On May 30, the museum will rechristen the Lettie G. Howard, a fishing schooner that is being restored to its 1893 launching condition, during a community picnic open to all.


Lisa Habernickel to Wed Jay Baney
Mr. and Mrs.
Duke Habernickel of Ridgewood, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Lisa Seton Habernickel to John Edward Baney Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Baney of Haverford, Pa.
A July wedding is planned.
Miss Habernickel, 31 years old, is a marketing manager in New York with Coopers &amp; Lybrand.
She graduated from Bucknell University and received a master's degree in international affairs from Columbia University.
Her father is the president of Haband, a mail-order clothing company in Paterson, N.J.


Broad Shoulders And Wet Feet
Until last Monday morning, the average Chicagoan probably never knew there were 60 miles of freight tunnel underneath the Loop, abandoned creaking passageways that used to carry coal to office buildings.
But for nearly a week, the city has been obsessed by them.
A rupture in the tunnel below the Chicago River sent 250 million gallons of water gushing through the old arteries and into downtown basements and boiler rooms, engulfing utility lines.


On the Street; No High Fashion, Just Ha! Fashion
Downtown, fashion accessories have a sense of humor.
It's almost as though everyone had decided to go to a Mad Hatter's Easter party.
Even Chanel's image is taken to extremes.
The woman below is covered in Chanel signature accessories, including five bags, necklaces, bracelets, initial boots, a quilted jacket, earrings and sunglasses.
Is enough too much?
Not if you're having fun.
Passers-by enjoyed watching one woman backing into a cab trying not to disturb the 14-inch crown of her hat, embellished with a yard-long ostrich plume, the work of Lola, a milliner on East 17th Street.
Talk about headaches.


Youths Involved in 4 Shootings; 15-Year-Old Dies in One of Them
Just hours after Mayor David N. Dinkins praised New York City's gun-amnesty program, shots fired by teen-agers rang out four times in six hours, serving as a stark reminder of the guns that remain on the streets.
In the six-hour stretch that ended early yesterday, four youths were shot -- one fatally -- in incidents that ranged from accidental firings to street disputes, the police said.


Perk Up Risotto and Other Dishes With Radicchio
RADICCHIO has been available in American markets for about 10 years, first imported from Italy and subsequently cultivated here.
Now it is hard to imagine salads without it.
The handsome, small burgundy and white heads of crisp, somewhat bitter leaves have proved a versatile and colorful addition to the menu.
Not only can radicchio be shredded, torn or chopped to add bite and color to a tossed salad, the cuplike leaves also make attractive and convenient containers on a plate for salad mixtures like shrimp salad or chicken salad.
The leaves can even be used to hold dips on a platter of crudites.


Living Rent-Free, in Return for Restoration
FOR YEARS, Stephen Wecker wanted to own a historic home that he could operate as a country inn.
He and his wife, Patti, traveled all over the country looking at places until he finally realized that they couldn't afford to both buy and maintain such a property.
Similarly, Agnes Bartlett had always planned to live out her retirement years in an 18th-century house.
She and her husband, Lawrence, looked at several but couldn't find a suitable one for sale.


Rafsanjani Sketches Vision of a Moderate, Modern Iran
Ali Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani would like to be seen as a thoroughly modern mullah.
The Iranian President studies economic issues at least two hours a day, gets CNN in his office and speaks English perhaps even better than his Berkeley-educated brother.
Although he holds the title of Hojatolislam -- one rank lower than Ayatollah -- he sprinkles his speeches and sermons with statistics, not quotations from the Koran.


Dr. Elgas to Marry
Mr. and Mrs.
Harold A. Elgas of Gaylord, Mich., have announced July wedding plans for their daughter Dr.
Laurie Jean Elgas and Mark Alan Young, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ronald A. Young of Virginia Beach, Va.
Dr.
Elgas is an optometrist in New York.
Mr.
Young is a vice president at State Street Bank and Trust in Boston.


Amtrak Expands Virginia Service
Amtrak has increased weekend service between New York and Washington and the Virginia Tidewater area.
Additional northbound trips operate Friday and Sunday from Newport News, Va., to New York, and one southbound trip runs Friday from Washington to Newport News.
Amtrak has introduced bus connections to Norfolk and Virginia Beach for all Tidewater area trains.


Recitals, Opera Light and Grand, Plus Superman
NEXT weekend is shaping up as one of the busiest of the season, with more concert enticements than can be described.
Among those of high promise though are two superstar recitals, light opera and a grand operatic doubleheader, more than half a dozen orchestral programs and Superman.
Flying in first is Superman since, at 8 P.M. on Wednesday, the Goodspeed Opera House in East Haddam is opening its 30th anniversary season with a revival of Charles Strouse and Lee Adams's "It's a Bird, It's a Plane, It's Superman." Kay McClelland, from the Broadway hit "City of Angels," plays Lois Lane, with Gary Jackson starring as the Man of Steel whose X-ray vision can no doubt see all the way through to the end of the run in early July.
For dates, times and reservations, call the box office at 873-8668.


Dr. Sarah F. Covert to Marry in June
Mr. and Mrs.
Roger A. Covert of Middletown, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Dr.
Sarah Frances Covert to Dr.
Patrick Joseph O'Connor, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John F. O'Connor of White Salmon, Wash.
A June wedding is planned.
Dr.
Covert, 27 years old, graduated magna cum laude from Dartmouth College and received a Ph.D. in bacteriology from the University of Wisconsin in Madison.
She is a research fellow in the plant pathology department at the University of Arizona.
Her father is the vice president of marketing in Saddlebrook, N.J., for International Nickel.


Bush Fires a Shot at Union Political Spending
In the multi-million-dollar business of Presidential politics, Republicans have for years outsmarted Democrats in the nuts-and-bolts tactics, from soliciting donations to building organizations to dreaming up hard-hitting advertising campaigns.
But Republicans could never compete with one major weapon of the Democrats, organized labor.
In general elections, unions pour millions of dollars into phone banks, registration drives, the lending of mailing lists and other efforts to encourage their members to vote Democratic.
Republicans have made similar, narrower, moves from time to time.


A Study in Gray and Gray


'Peter' Returns, With a Touch of Broadway Pizazz
Once upon a time, there was a little ballet called "Peter and the Wolf." It came into being 52 years ago, when a new American troupe called Ballet Theater asked a choreographer named Adolph Bolm to create a dance for children.
Four years earlier, the Russian composer Sergei Prokofiev had written an orchestral score that told the story of a young boy named Peter and how, despite his grandfather's warnings, he captured a wicked wolf with the help of his friends, a cat and a bird.
Each character in the hourlong ballet, introduced by a narrator, was associated with an instrument in the orchestra, and so the score and story were appropriately educational.
Children loved the ballet, though critics reserved praise, and "Peter and the Wolf" was one of Ballet Theater's most popular matinee works for nearly a decade.


America: Love It or Leave It?
To the Editor:
Morton Kondracke's review of "Anti-Americanism" and "Decline and Discontent" is curiously ambivalent.
The reviewer intimates that Paul Hollander's grasp of reality is seriously flawed.
He is skeptical of the author's belief that American public life is dominated by "adversarial" elites.


Wine Dinners Perking Up Restaurants
STEVEN JELLENIK called Pat Zummo, owner of Il Pozzo in Hauppauge, not too long ago with an apology.
Mr.
Jellenik, a lawyer in Smithtown, told Mr.
Zummo that although he and his wife had been to all 74 of Il Pozzo's wine-tasting meals over seven years, they could not go to No. 75.
A family wedding was set for the same time.
The two men discussed the situation much like superstitious ballplayers who did not want to break a hot streak.
Mr.
Jellenik suggested that he and his wife go to Il Pozzo the night before the tasting and have the same food and wine.


Boston University to Open an Unusual High School
Boston University plans to open a four-year private preparatory school on its campus where students will finish their freshman year of college while still in high school.
While several universities have affiliated high schools, the new Boston University Academy will be unique in requiring its students to take more than a year's worth of college-level courses, said John Silber, the university's president, who announced plans for the school last week.


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Livingston 154,000
53 Bennington Road  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 35-year-old Cape Cod; 1-car garage, dining room, basement rec room; taxes $3,329.
Maplewood 157,000
16 Manley Terrace  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 47-year-old colonial; fireplace, 1-car garage, porch; taxes $3,978.
Millburn 220,000
26 Haran Circle  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 36-year-old split level; 1-car garage, eat-in-kitchen, den; taxes $4,455.
Short Hills 257,500
262 Brookhaven Way  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 47-year-old ranch; c/a, 2-car garage, fireplace, dining room; taxes $4,977.
South Orange 165,000
626 Varsity Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 5 year-old colonial; 3-zone heat, c/a, patio, family room; taxes $5,016.
West Orange 220,000
15 Carter Road  4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 43-year-old colonial; 1-car garage, den, fireplace; taxes $5,176.
OTHER AREAS Waccabuc, N.Y. 355,000
Perch Bay Road
4-bedroom, 2-bath, 13-year-old contemporary; 2 fireplaces, family room, eat-in kitchen, den, exercise room, 3 acres; taxes $10,036.
Westbrook, Conn. 116,000
42 Grove Beach Road South  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 37-year-old ranch; sun porch, fireplace, walk to beach; 0.75 acre; taxes $1,211.
Sayville, L.I. 283,000
459 China Road  5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 4-year-old contemporary; dining room, eat-in kitchen, pool, 1 acre; taxes $7,800.


Deals and Discounts
SUMMER HOTEL RATES Inter-Continental Hotels offers discount programs in Europe, Asia and North America this summer.
In Europe, where the program runs June 19 to Sept. 7, there are 37 participating Inter-Continental and Forum hotels in 29 cities.
For example, the rate is $119 a night at the Athenaeum in Athens and the Inter-Continentals in Cologne and Helsinki, and $269 a night at the Metropol in Moscow.


If You're Thinking of Living in: Irvington
"THIS could be the last vestige of true early Americana left on the East Coast," said Mayor Robert Reisman, of the Village of Irvington.
While he might be a bit prejudiced, this Westchester County river community does seem almost provincial compared to its more commercialized neighbors in the populous Town of Greenburgh.


Data Update
*4*INDEXES OF HOUSING COSTS, N.Y.-Northeast N.J. area*
% change from
% change from
Mar. 92
Feb. 92
Mar. 91
Rents
182.1
+1.3
+4.6
Homeowner's costs
177.3
+1.6
+6.7
Fuel and utilities
104.5
-0.7
-0.9
*4*Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics
*4**Five counties of New York City plus Nassau, Suffolk, Westchester
*4*Rockland, Putnam, Bergen, Essex, Morris, Union, Hudson, Middlesex,
Somerset and Passaic.
Indexes: 1982-84=100
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
9.00
9.15
9.75
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.20
6.33
7.51
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
8.85
8.97
9.57
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.98
6.11
7.37
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
8.93
9.07
9.60
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.16
6.14
7.30
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
9.10
9.22
10.00
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.59
6.65
7.74
*4*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
4.25
4.50
6.26
National Mortgage Contract Rate
8.15
8.15
9.49
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes.  (Source: HSH Associates)


What's Ahead With the Hat?
Shed a tear for the Easter bonnet.
Thanks to today's penchant for the practical, the wearing of the flower-and-frills-laden Easter hat has now been reassigned to the realm of the quaint or the quirky.
Only a hat that's serviceable, straightforward and probably unisex has a fighting chance.
The beret answers all these requirements, which is probably why it is so popular today.
It was routed down the runway on both sides of the Atlantic at this fall's collections.
At Yves Saint Laurent in Paris, an animal-print beret was paired with a dress and a trench coat.
Todd Oldham and Marc Jacobs showed a hybrid in New York: an oversize beret-newscap.
As another point of legitimacy, Madonna and Kim Basinger were both spotted, demurely bereted, at recent shows.


Havel Seeks a Return Engagement on Czechoslovak Political Stage
President Vaclav Havel decided this week to seek re-election, a move that appears to make it likely that he will win a second term starting in June.
More than any other head of state in formerly Communist Eastern Europe, including President Lech Walesa of Poland, Mr.
Havel has succeeded in remaining above the political fray and retaining the confidence of a large part of the population.
Opinion polls have consistently showed him to be the most popular politician in the country.


Crews Itching for Return to Competition
It hasn't been hard to figure out what the two America's Cup challenger finalists consider to be their weak points, said Paul Cayard, skipper of the Italian yacht, Il Moro di Venezia.
One need only look at New Zealand and Il Moro di Venezia during their practice sails.
"We feel we need to get better boat speed downwind, so we're out there testing our downwind sails," Cayard said.
"As for the Kiwis, they're out there practicing their starts."


Trying to Set Mr. Fujita Straight . . . And Some Simple Disgust
To the Editor:
The first thing you need to know about Den Fujita is he's anti-Jewish and propagates the old myth about Jews exercising secret control over the world.
He joins fellow Japanese geniuses who tell Americans that Jews are financially manipulative rather than productive, and we are learning about insulting Japanese who are obviously making a lot of money using American ideas.
Hopefully, the McDonald's venture will bring lots of coronary artery disease to Tokyo and Mr.
Fujita will turn blond to further emulate his Aryan buddies.
The article on Den Fujita made me understand why President Bush regurgitated while visiting Japan.
SYLVIA RACKOW  New York, March 22


Legislation Is Aimed at Protecting Marine Animals From Balloons
SAVING the lives of harbor seals and sea turtles is far from being child's play, says Robert Schoelkopf, founder and director of the Marine Mammal Stranding Center here.
But a child's toy and delight is making his job even more difficult.
Foil and latex balloons accidentally or intentionally released into the atmosphere have been washing up on New Jersey's shoreline with ever greater frequency, he said.
Some coastal town officials and legislators see the problem as nothing more than a minor littering issue, but Mr.
Schoelkopf regards it as something more insidious.


The Labor Party Tries To Imagine a Future
Nearly 60 percent of the voters in Britain's general election 10 days ago did not choose Prime Minister John Major's Conservative Party, but still it won a 21-seat majority in the House of Commons, the Conservatives' fourth victory since 1979.
If the opposition Labor Party couldn't win in the worst recession since the 1930's, many of its supporters are now asking, when could it ever win?
As the party began its painful reappraisal last week, its leader, Neil Kinnock, announced that he would resign to make way for a successor to be elected July 18.
But the leadership question is not the most fundamental one.
Neither is the issue of whether the British electoral system is fair to smaller parties like the opposition Liberal Democrats.
The winner-take-all system gave them only the 20 seats in the House of Commons in the constituencies where they had come in first, 3 percent of the total, although nationwide they had won nearly 18 percent of the vote.
The broader question is whether there is a future for the traditional left at all, in a society transformed more than anyone realized by a decade of Thatcherism.


Open, Dead Sea Scrolls Stir Up New Disputes
Now that the complete Dead Sea Scrolls are widely available for study, for the first time since their discovery 45 years ago, a fresh wind is whipping through biblical scholarship, sweeping dust from corners of plodding research and rattling shutters with new findings.
There has been no end to controversy.
Scholars long denied access to unpublished scrolls are eagerly poring over the 2,000-year-old documents in search of revelations about the history of Judaism and the origin of Christianity.
Some of these former outsiders are raising a furor with reports of finding firmer evidence of Christian themes, such as messianism and resurrection, running through Judaism at the time of Jesus, possibly even before.


Marnie Dreifuss Plans to Marry
Marguerite Gabrielle Dreifuss, a stylist in home-furnishings design for R. H. Macy, and Peter Trustman Gelfman, an assistant United States attorney in Manhattan, have announced their engagement.
A September wedding is planned.
Ms.
Dreifuss, who is 27 years old and is known as Marnie, graduated from Cornell University.
She is a daughter of Helena L. Sokoloff of Scarsdale, N.Y., and Robert L. Dreifuss of New York.
Her mother is a freelance photographer.
Her stepfather, Stephen A. Sokoloff of Scarsdale, is a vice president of Wertheim Schroder &amp; Company, the securities brokerage, in New York.
Her father is the president of Dreifuss &amp; Company, a textiles trading concern in New York.


Budget Vise Squeezing Teachers On Wages
TEACHERS in Fairfield narrowly agreed to a wage rollback if the town would pass the school budget they endorsed.
But when the budget failed before the Finance Board, they withdrew their offer.
"We have been attacked in the newspapers, and the school board meetings have gotten pretty vicious," said Peggy M. Morris, president of the local teachers union, the 514-member Fairfield Education Association.
"I would advise teachers in other towns not to even consider givebacks. It has caused tremendous hard feelings. It's been a very ugly period."


Farmer Caught in Pornography Trap Feels Vindicated, but at a Cruel Cost
The news had swept through this little town like a twister on the Great Plains.
Keith Jacobson, a 56-year-old farmer, had been charged with receiving child pornography.
In his heart, Mr.
Jacobson said later, he believed that he had been framed.
But who would believe him?
Deeply ashamed, he secluded himself in his small gray farmhouse in the cornfields of central Nebraska.
When he needed groceries, he would drive to a town 40 miles away.
An uncle would pick up his mail at the post office.


Perk Up Risotto and Other Dishes With Radicchio
RADICCHIO has been available in American markets for about 10 years, first imported from Italy and subsequently cultivated here.
Now it is hard to imagine salads without it.
The handsome, small burgundy and white heads of crisp, somewhat bitter leaves have proved a versatile and colorful addition to the menu.
Not only can radicchio be shredded, torn or chopped to add bite and color to a tossed salad, the cuplike leaves also make attractive and convenient containers on a plate for salad mixtures like shrimp salad or chicken salad.
The leaves can even be used to hold dips on a platter of crudites.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
ROGUE WARRIOR By Richard Marcinko with John Weisman. Pocket Books, $22.


Paperback Best Sellers: April 19, 1992
Fiction
Weeks
On
List
1
12
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
2
12
FRIED GREEN TOMATOES AT THE WHISTLE STOP CAFE, by Fannie Flagg. (McGraw-Hill, $6.95.) Life in rural Alabama.
3
50
THE PRINCE OF TIDES, by Pat Conroy. (Bantam, $5.99.) Complex family relationships in South Carolina's low country and New York City.
4
4
LONGSHOT, by Dick Francis. (Fawcett, $5.99.) An author of survival guides studies horse racing.
5
9
LOVES MUSIC, LOVES TO DANCE, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Pocket, $5.99.) Two women get caught in the snare of a serial killer.
6
1
THE SECRET, by Julie Garwood. (Pocket, $5.99.) A 12th-century English belle finds romance while visiting her father in the Scottish Highlands.
7
3
BODY OF EVIDENCE, by Patricia D. Cornwell. (Avon, $5.99.) A medical examiner probes the grisly death of a reclusive woman writer.
8
3
PASTIME, by Robert B. Parker. (Berkley, $5.99.) Rescuing a woman from her shady boyfriend.
9
5
THE SHERBROOKE BRIDE, by Catherine Coulter. (Jove, $5.99.) A tangled romance in which a man marries the sister of his intended bride.
10
9
HEARTBEAT, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $6.50.) A chance meeting of a successful man and woman.
11
22
JURASSIC PARK, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A biotechnician clones dinosaurs for use in a theme park.
12
1
"H" IS FOR HOMICIDE, by Sue Grafton. (Fawcett, $5.99.) The private eye Kinsey Millhone on the trail of perpetrators of an insurance scam.
13
1
HOW TO MAKE AN AMERICAN QUILT, by Whitney Otto. (Ballantine, $5.99.) The reminiscences of eight women, members of a quilting circle in a small California town.
14
1
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Wynwood, $9.95.) Racial tensions surface during the trial of a man charged with murder in rural Mississippi.
15
7
DAMAGE, by Josephine Hart. (Ivy, $5.99.) A man is mesmerized when he meets his son's fiancee.
16 *
48
THE SILENCE OF THE LAMBS, by Thomas Harris. (St. Martin's, $5.99.) An F.B.I. man and woman track a serial killer.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,050 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
Nonfiction
Weeks
On
List
1
5
IF YOU REALLY LOVED ME, by Ann Rule. (Pocket, $5.99.) The bizarre family relationships behind the murder of the wife of a California entrepreneur.
2
6
YOU'LL NEVER EAT LUNCH IN THIS TOWN AGAIN, by Julia Phillips. (Signet, $6.99.) Life in Hollywood as experienced by an Academy Award-winning producer.
3
48
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak and how the sexes can understand each other better.
4
1
JFK: Conspiracy of Silence, by Charles A. Crenshaw with Jens Hansen and J. Gary Shaw. (Signet, $4.99.) A Dallas surgeon tells what he observed while treating the dying John F. Kennedy and Lee Harvey Oswald.
5 *
127
LOVE, MEDICINE, AND MIRACLES, by Bernie S. Siegel. (Harper Perennial, $8.95.) The importance of the patient's mind and emotions in treating serious illness.
6
9
IRON JOHN, by Robert Bly. (Vintage, $11.) The passage of the male from boyhood into manhood, as practiced in various cultures.
7 *
441
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist. (LP)
8
40
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France, as described by an Englishman.
9
125
ALL I REALLY NEED TO KNOW I LEARNED IN KINDERGARTEN, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspirational essays.
10
1
FIRE IN THE BELLY, by Sam Keen. (Bantam, $12.50.) The changing role of the male in today's society.
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
5
ATTACK OF THE DERANGED MUTANT KILLER MONSTER SNOW GOONS, by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $8.95.) "Calvin and Hobbes" cartoons.
2
36
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
3
84
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.50.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
4
65
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles for success.
5
33
THE T-FACTOR DIET, by Martin Katahn. (Bantam, $4.95.) A regimen for weight loss.


Plants That Honor the Memory of People
WHAT spring would be complete without the bright yellow little bells of forsythia?
The shrub seems to be growing everywhere, a cheerful sight indeed, bringing graceful garlands of flowers to a landscape that is frequently still quite bare.
It is just about the easiest shrub to grow, and if it is kept in bounds, with judicious pruning right after coming into bloom, forsythia will be around to flower for many springs to come.
But how many gardeners realize that forsythia commemorates someone?
William Forsyth, gardener to George III of England, is credited with having built the first rock garden in England, with stones taken from the Tower of London and with lava brought from Iceland by Sir Joseph Banks, who was an explorer and naturalist.


Review/Theater; Strikes, Spares and Other Tenpin Metaphors for Life
A fondness for bowling and a high threshold for whimsy are requirements for enjoying Steven Dietz's "More Fun Than Bowling." In this play, the author looks at the sport as a metaphor for life, death, love and anything else that wanders into his lane of vision.
The centerpin of the heavily metaphorical landscape is the middle-aged proprietor of the Dust Bowl in the slow-moving town of Turtle Rapids.
He has lost three wives -- the first by divorce, the two others through sudden death -- and he is dubious about his romantic prospects.
As we are told in one of the play's surfeit of images about bowling: "Love is like being too drunk to go bowling. It doesn't happen very often." In all other respects, "More Fun Than Bowling" is terminally upbeat.


An Upbeat Chanteuse With a New Cabaret Act
UPON her emergence as a prominent cabaret performer in the early 1980's, Karen Akers projected the aura of an aloof, analytical chanteuse.
But not lately.
Her cool image is now complemented by a sense of release.
Even though her selections remain smartly chosen and sophisticated, the manner is open, the emphasis is upbeat and the finesse is undiminished.


Megan Wiesen To Wed in Fall
Mr. and Mrs.
Donald G. Wiesen of Greenwich, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Megan Victoria Wiesen to Mark Michael Dowley, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael F. Dowley 3d of Birmingham, Mich.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Wiesen, 26 years old, is a broadcast associate at CBS-TV in New York.
She graduated from the College of Wooster, as did her fiance.
Her father, who is retired, was the vice chairman and chief financial officer of Chesebrough-Ponds Inc., the consumer products company in Greenwich.


Sunday Menu; A Flavorful Yogurt Sauce Enhances Simple Fish Dish
Fans of Indian food will find much to admire in this simple method for cooking fish.
Because the fish is enrobed in the sauce, it soaks up the intensity of the flavors.
The spiciness of the dish depends on how much hot pepper is used.


Camera
The world that Susan McCartney sees is more exciting than the one the rest of us see.
She is not just a photographer but a world traveler who logs as much mileage some years as an airline pilot does.
"True travelers are probably born, not made," she says, "and if you're anything like me, travel is a necessity, not a luxury."
For Ms.
McCartney, who is also a teacher and a writer, travel photography is serious business, and she is convinced most people do not understand what it is about.
The place, she believes, is far less important than the photographer's imagination and spirit.


Business Diary/April 12-17
COMPANIES An Uneasy Labor Peace Descends on Caterpillar


Soviet Jews Are Now Caught in Between
To the Editor:
For decades the United States has been pressing for the freedom of Soviet Jews, many of whom risked their lives to pass valuable intelligence as part of the cold-war showdown in hopes that one day they or their children might be repaid with civilized treatment.
Politicians from Israel and the United States, however, are handling their fate with incredible cynicism.


Pastas, Breads and Salads Lead the Way
LA Veranda in Stony Brook is a restaurant of perplexing contrasts.
Belying its elegance, it stands shoulder to shoulder with a travel agency, pizza parlor and real-estate office in a small strip shopping center.
Inside, the dining rooms sparkle with white napery, lanterns, etched glass, skylights, green plants and a cart of alluring antipasto.


Ever Stone-Faced
To the Editor:
Janet Maslin includes Buster Keaton among directors who never won an Oscar.
While Keaton was never honored for direction, he did receive a special Oscar in 1960 "for making pictures which will be played as long as movies are shown." The award, presented 32 years after his last feature, failed to bring even a wisp of a smile to Keaton's face.
He said thank you and returned to his seat.
MARION MEADE New York


Corrections
A picture caption on Feb. 16 misidentified a beach in the Baja California region of Mexico.
A recent letter from a reader pointed out the error, and further research determined that the beach shown was Playa Armenta.


In Defense of His Father
To the Editor:
At the risk of sounding naively self-serving, I take strong exception to your review of "Uncertainty," David C. Cassidy's biography of my father, Werner Heisenberg (March 8).
While, by necessity, a review can capture only a fraction of what the book itself represents, in this particular review, I think, the reviewer was bent on oversimplifying in order to reaffirm the very notions that have plagued an interpretation of my father's life and motives.
Drawing inferences and presenting them as facts are favorite methods of distortion.


Heather Marcellis and Gavin Bannat to Marry
Mr. and Mrs.
Alphonso W. Marcellis of Lake Intervale, N.J., have announced June 1993 wedding plans for their daughter Heather Alessandra Marcellis and Gavin Douglass Bannat, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John Bannat of Lake Hopatcong, N.J.


Public Television; The Solution? Commercials
To the Editor:
In his essay, "Pull the Plug on PBS?"  [ March 22 ] , Walter Goodman says: "Like news professionals elsewhere, the producers of PBS documentaries tend to be politically on the left, and unlike more restrained journalists, they have shown little compunction about pushing their opinions."


Evolution Between the Ears
BRIGHT AIR, BRILLIANT FIRE
On the Matter of the Mind.
By Gerald M. Edelman.
Illustrated. 280 pp.
New York: Basic Books. $25.


Spring Is Ideal Time For Shingle Inspection
BECAUSE of their durability and low cost, asphalt shingles are the most popular roofing material in the United States.
Like all roofing, shingles should be inspected at least once a year and, if damaged, repaired promptly to prevent roof leaks.
Spring is the best time for a roof inspection.
If major repairs are necessary, it is better to start them with warmer weather on the way than to be pressed to finish the job before fall begins.


Miss Matthews Plans Wedding
Mr. and Mrs.
James Matthews of Binghamton, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Theresa Marie Matthews, to Thomas Ranger Sommerfield, a son of Barrie Sommerfield of Greenwich, Conn., and Mrs.
Robert A. Bernhard of New York.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss Matthews, 27 years old, is a systems analyst with the Bank of Boston in Boston.
She graduated from Clarkson University.
Her father is the chief executive and the president of the Matco Group, an electronics conglomerate in Binghamton.


CAMPUS LIFE: Florida; University Plans To Take Control Of Research Park
A joint venture between the academic and business communities for the last nine years will end soon when the University of Florida Foundation pays $9.2 million for sole ownership of a technical research center.
The president of the University of Florida, John Lombardi, said the foundation would acquire control of Progress Center Research Park, in a neighboring town, Alachua (pronounced ah-LATCH-u-way), because it plays a vital role in research.


A LITTLE KNOWLEDGE
Steven Barthelme's About Men column "A Little Knowledge" (March 15) is excellent.
It contains, however, a hypothesis that, if tested, would be disproved.
This is that the usual results of blindfold tests apply to Scotch whiskies.
If an experienced drinker, or even an inexperienced one, had four glasses of different kinds of Scotch to sip from, he could easily pick out the single malt.
It's the one that tastes bad.


No More Tears, Raise a Cheer for the Banks
Is this the golden era of American banking?
Those who are laughing at that question may not have pondered the latest profit reports from America's banks.
They show profit margins heading ever upward, with a diminishing number of bad loans.


Q and A
European Grand Prix Races
Q.
I will be traveling through Europe from early June to October and would like to see grand prix Formula One auto races.
Can you give information on cities, dates and tickets? -- J. McGee, New Vernon, N.J.


Nancy Lynn Fisher to Marry in June
Dr. and Mrs.
William H. Fisher of Woodbury, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Nancy Lynn Fisher to Dr.
David Leland Muller, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank Muller of Pelham, N.Y.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Fisher, 29 years old, is a case manager for the Visiting Nurse Association in Burlington, Vt.
She graduated from Georgetown University and is studying for a master of science degree in administration at St.
Michael's College.
Her father is an orthopedic surgeon in Waterbury, Conn.


NOT!
It is my thought that the use of
Not!
at the end of a sentence is the verbal equivalent of the international symbol for "no" that you see on so many signs.
It seems to be an interesting example of the post-literate realm crossing over into the literate one.
ELIZABETH B. PERRY
Philadelphia


World Markets; A Lot of Fish From Little Ponds
For Smith Barney's International Equity Portfolio, a $97.1 million mutual fund, small is beautiful.
The fund had a banner year in 1991 -- up 37.8 percent -- and is faring well this year, with large portions of the portfolio in small but volatile markets like Mexico and Hong Kong, the two top performing countries this year.
The fund has more money invested in Argentina than in Germany.
And it has very little in the world's largest overseas stock market, Japan, which is at six-year lows.


No Strangers To Upheaval
The national game in Afghanistan, buzkashi, is sometimes evoked as a metaphor for the country's politics.
In the game, dozens or even hundreds of horsemen compete to pick up the carcass of a goat, carry it around a pole and deposit the body in a goal while a frenzied melee of the other players try to take it away.
Nominally, there are two teams, but it is really every man for himself.
Time after time in Afghan history, the fierce mountain tribesmen have pulled together to defeat outsiders -- foreigners and infidels.
The task accomplished, they have quickly fallen to killing each other.


A Subpoena for Ziegler
He may be a busy man and a man of some importance, but if the National Hockey League president, JOHN ZIEGLER, thinks he can high-hat Federal Judge GERALD ROSEN, Judge Rosen has a message for him, a subpoena, in fact.
"This man is an American citizen," the judge said in court in Detroit on Friday.
"I know he's a busy man. But his rights are no greater than any other."


POSTINGS: House Tours; . . . Architects in Hartford
Two Hartford architects, Edward T. Hapgood and Melvin H. Hapgood, have probably not received so much attention since the late 19th century, when the cousins were at the height of their practice.
They designed stately homes in the city's West End, and Edward's commissions included the Rossia Insurance Company Building and (with Donn Barber) the original Travelers Insurance Company Buildings and the State Library and Supreme Court Building.
Next Saturday, at 4 P.M., David F. Ransom, an architectural historian, is to deliver a lecture on the Hapgoods at the Stowe-Day Foundation, 77 Forest Street, at Farmington Avenue, in Hartford.
His talk is to inaugurate an exhibition of photographs and drawings of the architects' works around Connecticut, drawn from the foundation library.
This will be on view at 77 Forest Street, seven days a week, 9:30 A.M. to 4 P.M., through Sept. 7.
Both the lecture and show are free.


Kenya Advisory
To the Editor: As the president of the tour operator Abercrombie &amp; Kent International, I am concerned that the travel advisories issued by the State Department often do not put the situation in proper perspective.
In addition, advisories are issued as a rapid response to incidents, but then remain in existence long after they are relevant.
An advisory has recently been issued on Kenya but nothing on travel to London.
The advisory in Kenya was caused by incidents of robbery of some tourists in the Masai Mara.
Meanwhile, a string of I.R.A. bombings have been set off in London, causing considerably greater damage and bodily harm.
This leaves one to wonder if there is not some political motivation in the advisories, which still consistently apply to the third world countries, whose political clout is the weakest and yet whose need for foreign exchange is the greatest.


Ms. MacCallum Plans Wedding
Mr. and Mrs.
Douglas C. MacCallum Jr. of Wyckoff, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Martha Bowes MacCallum to Daniel John Gregory, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward R. Gregory of Upper Montclair, N.J.
An August wedding is planned.
Ms.
MacCallum is an associate in the corporate relations department at Dow Jones in New York.
She graduated from St.
Lawrence University.
Her father is the manager of corporate industry relations for I.B.M. in Franklin Lakes, N.J.


R. T. Siegel to Wed Maren Handler
May wedding plans have been announced for Maren Andree Handler, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Harold Handler of New York, and Randolph Todd Siegel, the son of Drs.
Roslyn and Lloyd Siegel of New York.
Ms.
Handler, 27 years old, is a clinical social worker at Oak Hill Youth Center, a juvenile detention center in Laurel, Md.
She graduated and received her master's in social work from Boston University.
Her father is a senior partner in the law firm of Simpson Thatcher &amp; Bartlett in New York.
Her mother is a freelance film editor in New York.


Cuba, Long Forbidden, Wins Major Attention Abroad
A growing number of American companies, lured by the prospect of approaching change in Cuba as the island tries to ward off economic collapse, are following their foreign counterparts in showing interest in the island.
Located at the United States' doorstep, endowed with resources ranging from strategic metals to rich croplands and pristine beaches, and inhabited by an industrious, well-educated population, Cuba is seen by many corporate executives and academics as a country in need of almost wholesale economic reconstruction but also as a land of potentially bright opportunity.


Making a Difference; An Adviser Who Knows Adversity
When Robert S. Miller Jr. stepped up to the podium last Monday at the Sheraton Center Hotel here, there could be little doubt about his intentions.
As the chief financial adviser to the embattled Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd., he needed to project confidence about the ability of the huge commercial real estate company to put its financial house in order.
And there is little doubt that he succeeded, at least partially, in calming fears of investors and representatives of the nearly 100 banks attending the session.
Bank stocks, which had been falling on rumors that banks would have to take large losses, suddenly reversed course.


'Fiendish' Was Not Too Strong a Word
SOLDIERS OF THE SUN
The Rise and Fall of the Imperial Japanese Army.
By Meirion Harries and Susie Harries.
Illustrated. 582 pp.
New York: Random House. $30.


Ailing, Without Benefits, And Awaiting Suit's Relief
From 1983 to 1988, Robert A. Lesperance Jr. repeatedly applied for Social Security disability benefits, only to be told that his heart condition was not serious enough for him to qualify.
In 1989, at the age of 24, Mr.
Lesperance died of the heart condition.
His mother, Marilyn R. LaFlair-Streeter of Ogdensburg, in upstate New York, said she is still angry about her son's treatment by the Government.


A Determined Salieri Vows to Ruin Mozart
A SOCIAL moron who happens to be a great musical genius and a cultured dignified man who is a mediocre composer are the characters in conflict in "Amadeus."
Peter Shaffer's drama about the final years in Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart's short life was a major hit on Broadway.
It was made into a compelling movie, and it is now being revived at Theater Three in Port Jefferson.


Ms. Glines to Marry
Mr. and Mrs.
Carl R. Glines of Haddonfield, N.J., have announced August wedding plans for their daughter Elizabeth Gray Glines and Thomas Paul DiEmedio, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph DiEmedio of Wilmington, Del.
Ms.
Glines, 35 years old, is an analyst with Shearson Lehman Brothers in Wilmington.
Mr.
DiEmedio, 37, is a Wilmington firefighter.


Topics of The Times; Dappled Elegance in the Park
Before the leaves get thick enough to confuse everything, go to Central Park to see a stunning show of tree bark.
Walk north from 72d Street just inside the western edge, past the yellow-flowered benzoin bushes, to a small grove of trees with piebald trunks -- patches of brown bark over large sections of light gray.
These are London plane trees, which are all over the park.
This little grove stands apart like an improvised outdoor sculpture.
The dappled bark shows clear and unshadowed, its gray surface tinged with hints of yellow and green, as smooth and subtle as a piece of ancient pottery.
This grove is relatively young.
When plane trees get older, the bark gets coarse and knobby, interesting but not so beautiful.
The London plane is almost indistinguishable from its close American cousin, the sycamore, but adapts better to city life and is widely used in street planting.
In the fall, both trees bear balls of tightly packed seeds that look like large round buttons and give the sycamore its popular name, the buttonwood tree.


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
Bellport 142,000
80 Bieselin Road  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 25-year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, finished basement, deck, 1-car garage; taxes $3,100.
Bluepoint 116,150
46 Belle Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 40-year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen; taxes $2,200.
Great River 235,000
23 Woodhollow Road  5-bedroom, 3-bath, 31-year-old farm ranch; family room, finished basement, Florida room, 2-car garage; taxes $7,000.
Islip Terrace 150,000
128 Seacliff Street  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 3-year-old high ranch; eat-in kitchen, den, deck, 1-car garage; taxes $4,300.
Medford 127,000
22 Matsupage Drive  5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 19-year-old colonial; dining room, den, deck, 2-car garage; taxes $4,400.
Sayville 283,000
459 China Road  5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 4-year-old contemporary; dining room, eat-in kitchen, pool, 1 acre; taxes $7,800.
OTHER AREAS Waccabuc, N.Y. 355,000
Perch Bay Road
4-bedroom, 2-bath, 13-year-old contemporary; 2 fireplaces, family room, den, exercise room, 3 acres; taxes $10,036.
Westbrook, Conn. 116,000
42 Grove Beach Road South  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 37-year-old ranch; sun porch, fireplace, walk to beach; 0.75 acre; taxes $1,211.
Millburn, N.J. 220,000
26 Haran Circle  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 36-year-old split level; 1-car garage, eat-in-kitchen, den; taxes $4,455.


Public &amp; Private; Ms. President
Donna Karan, the only fashion designer who seems to recognize the existence of hips in her clientele, perhaps because she owns a pair herself, recently ran an arresting series of magazine advertisements.
In one, the woman in the pin-striped suit is standing behind a bunting-draped lectern.
In another, she is sitting on the back of a convertible amid grim guys with headsets, confetti dappling her hair.
In a third, she is raising her right hand, a handsome man at her side, while a judge holds the Bible.
Congratulations, Ms.
President.


All About/Equipment Leasing; Persuading People to Rent More Than Just Videos
Equipment rental companies, whose crazy-quilt inventories often range from industrial air compressors to lawn mowers to fine china, have long dreamed of weaning consumers from their traditional preference for buying goods.
But for years, the business was dominated by mom and pop outfits that failed to forcefully market themselves as an option for people who needed tools for repairs or silverware for parties.
In the last decade, though, the industry has consolidated and bigger companies with extensive operations are now aggressively preaching the gospel of renting, employing advertising campaigns and sales techniques adopted from retailers.


The Cure Finds A Hint of Cheer Amid the Gloom
Longtime cure fans should brace themselves for what happens midway through the band's new album, "Wish": There are two cheerful songs in a row.
Over folky guitar strumming, "Doing the Unstuck" advises "Kick out the gloom" and "Let's get happy!" Next, "Friday I'm in Love" uses the major chords and jingle-jangle guitars of British Invasion folk-pop to praise "the wonderful surprise/ To see your shoes and your spirits rise."
It doesn't last.
In other songs on "Wish," the English rockers' ninth album of new material, the singer drinks himself into a self-hating stupor at a party, agonizes over a former girlfriend, pushes away those who would offer comfort, sees the inevitability of a breakup and realizes that his only love doesn't trust him.
Even "Friday I'm in Love" makes the other days of the week less than lighthearted: "I don't care if Monday's black/ Tuesday Wednesday heart attack." But Robert Smith, the Cure's singer and lyricist, hasn't allowed his melancholy to lift for two consecutive songs since the band coalesced in 1978.


The Nets Battle Their Way Into the Playoffs; First-Round Foe Is the Cavaliers
The Nets are in the playoffs.
After a week of turmoil and unexpected events, the only thing to reasonably expect tonight in New Jersey's season finale against the Orlando Magic at the Byrne Meadowlands Arena was the unexpected.
That is exactly what happened.


Tell Us, Governor, Just What You Would Do; Letting Bush Off
To the Editor:
I was distressed by "Get the Candidates" (editorial, March 31).
You do not seem to grasp that your frequently tabloidized treatment of the campaign is helping throw the election to George Bush.


America: Love It or Leave It?
To the Editor:
Morton Kondracke has correctly identified some of the major themes of my books.
There are, however, certain aspects of the books of which your readers may wish to be more fully informed.


They Volunteer to Protect and Serve
They walk the streets of Chinatown two or three abreast in their crisp blue uniforms, their faces mirroring those of the people who live and work in the neighborhood.
To the untrained civilian eye, these men and women in the Fifth Precinct look like New York City police officers.
As they peer down the darkened streets, wave at merchants or stop by a housing project, they have the posture down, and even the police officer's gait.


G.M. Official Testified in Suspect's Extortion Trial
John M. McNamara, the Long Island car dealer who last week was accused of defrauding General Motors of $436 million in a scheme that lasted more than a decade, was indicted in 1973 on a Federal extortion charge involving the construction of his dealership.
The 1973 charges against Mr.
McNamara, one of six defendants, were eventually dropped and his father's conviction in the case was overturned on appeal.
But records of the 1973 case raise new questions about General Motors' vigilance over Mr.
McNamara.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
MUSICAL REVUE
Long Wharf Theater in New Haven has produced its first musical revue, opening Tuesday and running through May 17 on Stage II.
It's called "I'll Be Seeing You: The Music of Sammy Fain" and it represents a new policy in which all fully staged plays and workshop productions will be presented on the Newton Schenck Stage (formerly Main Stage).
Stage II, where workshop productions were held, will be reserved for musical revues, performance art, readings and touring shows.


Harvard Proves Hot on Brisk Day at the Races
The first crews to race on this frigid, gray morning pulled away from their starting stake boats at 6:45 A.M., and a multiple regatta of 25 events began to unfold here on the Charles River's basin.
By 1 P.M., 64 crews from 10 colleges had rowed the 2,000-meter upriver course and proved once again that young men and women with oars are hardy, indefatigable, oblivious.


Possibly Fatal, Not Necessarily Bad
When hundreds of billions of taxpayer's dollars started going down the S. &amp;L. drain in 1990, two members of the House of Representatives lost their jobs.
Not a penny of taxpayer's money went to cover overdrafts at the House bank, but this year's casualty list is eight and counting, with one primary defeat and at least seven retirements attributable to this simpler scandal.
And the election isn't until November.


Trying to Set Mr. Fujita Straight . . .
To the Editor:
James Sterngold rendered a service with "Den Fujita, Japan's Mr. Joint-Venture" (March 22), by laying bare the anti-Semitic stereotypes that seem to guide Mr.
Fujita.


Why Audiences Hunger for 'Fried Green Tomatoes'
I saw the coming attractions for "Fried Green Tomatoes" four times during an orgy of Christmas-week moviegoing -- and I could tell even before it opened that it was going to be a hit.
The trailer, in which the middle-aged, upholstered Evelyn Couch gets her own back from two "younger and faster" women by savaging their car in a parking lot drew such satisfied laughter that it came as no surprise when the inexpensive little movie became a top-10 box-office draw and remained so for months. (It is now No. 12.) The book upon which it based, Fannie Flagg's 1987 novel "Fried Green Tomatoes at the Whistle Stop Cafe," is also basking in the film's success as a paperback best seller.


Braves Outfield Pleasantly Crowded
Any resemblance between this Deion Sanders and the one who played parts of the previous three seasons in the major leagues is purely coincidental.
And this year's Deion Sanders, the one with the .435 batting average and .783 slugging percentage entering last night's game, threatens to create a crowd in the Atlanta Braves' outfield.
Sanders's fast start -- he had at least one hit in the Braves' first 11 games and 2 hits in 7 of them -- leaves the Braves with a decision to make once they regain Otis Nixon and Dave Justice.
Nixon, another speedy outfielder who was the Braves' big surprise last season, will be eligible to return from his drug suspension Friday.
He is serving the final 18 days of a 60-day penalty incurred last Sept. 16.
Sanders had been expected to fill in only until Nixon returned.
Now the Braves have to find room in their outfield for both.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF Love Leads Heritage Davis Love 3d, the defending champion, birdied four of the last six holes yesterday to take a three-stroke lead after three rounds in the Heritage Classic in Hilton Head Island, S.C.
Love, who is trying to become the first golfer to win the Heritage three times and the second to capture back-to-back titles, shot his third straight four-under-par 67 for a 54-hole total of 12-under 201. (AP) Famers Flounder: Two-thirds of a Hall of Fame threesome floundered, opening the gate to a new set of challengers to Lee Trevino in the final round of the PGA Seniors Championship in Palm Beach Gardens, Fla.
While Trevino was fighting his way to a third-round 71, good enough to retain a three-shot lead, Jack Nicklaus and Gary Player drifted back into the pack, all but taking themselves out of title contention.
Mike Hill, Dave Stockton and Chi Chi Rodriguez are tied for second at 210. (AP)


She Lives! She Dies! Let the Audience Decide.
Stand aside, Elaine May.
Move over William Goldman.
Derrick Jackson, a 25-year-old suburban Los Angeles letter carrier, is now one of Hollywood's hottest script doctors.
In the last two years alone, America's major studios have asked Mr.
Jackson for his help with six of their biggest releases: "Alien 3" (due out May 22), "Pretty Woman" and "Misery" (both released in 1990), and last year's "Soapdish," "The Long Walk Home" and "A Kiss Before Dying."
Mr.
Jackson is not alone.
Recruited from among the demographically correct denizens of suburban shopping malls and college campuses, largely in Los Angeles, thousands like him quietly help shape Hollywood movies.
Lured by free admission and the chance to attend a sneak preview, these amateur critics are coaxed into sharing their gut reactions: Was the ending good for you?
Which characters were too distasteful?
Did any scenes offend?
Did the music click?
Would you recommend this film to a friend?


Co-op Bankruptcy
To the Editor:
I read with interest your "Co-op Bankruptcy" article on Feb. 9 about the bankruptcy of Duncraggen Realty Corporation, the co-op entity at 867 West 181st Street.
The article indicates that this may be the first such bankruptcy in New York City.


Fall Wedding For Ms. Weiler
Barbara Ann Weiler, a public relations consultant in Boston, and Frank Eli Litwin, an associate at the Boston law firm of Goulston &amp; Storrs, have announced their engagement.
A November wedding is planned.
Ms.
Weiler, 29 years old, graduated from the University of Pennsylvania, as did her fiance, who was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She is a daughter of Helene Selinger of New York and Alan Weiler of Scarsdale, N.Y.
Her father is a principal in the New York real-estate management company of Swig, Weiler &amp; Arnow.


Yanks and Perez
To the Sports Editor:
Pascual Perez had a contract with the New York Yankees for 1992 that was to pay him $1.9 million.
He was known to behave erratically at times.
He had a sore arm history.
He also had had a cocaine problem.


Airfare Cuts Weaken the Industry. . . And Mislead the Flying Public
THE old shell game isn't only used at carnivals.
It is alive and well in the airline industry, and consumers are bearing the burden.
On April 13, led by American Airlines, most of the major domestic airlines implemented several important pricing reforms.
But the new fares only look good when compared with the unbridled rapacity of what they have replaced.


Corrections
A map on April 5 with an article about the Arab world's relationship with the West indicated the ethnic makeup of the Sudan incorrectly.
As a country in which Arab influence predominates, the Sudan should have been shown in white; non-Arab nations were shaded.


Cuttings; Small-Plot Salad Days That Just Won't Quit
On a recent trip to the Rodale Institute Research Center in Kutztown, Pa., I was reminded how much food and pleasure can be reaped from a very small space.
Last year, from April to late fall, Eileen Weinsteiger, one of Rodale's staff horticulturists, grew more than 100 pounds of salad in 50 square feet.
Late spring brought feasts of early lettuce, spinach and radishes.
Summer ripened the tomatoes, cucumbers, chard, carrots and peppers.
There were always greens in the garden, because Ms.
Weinsteiger planted heat-resistant varieties, like Bronze Arrow lettuce, or basella spinach, which is a vine that can be trained up a post and grown all summer long.


A Little House on the Prairie Goes to a Museum
The only existing prototype of Buckminster Fuller's Dymaxion House, which has served as a family residence in Wichita, Kan., since 1948, will be moved next month to the Henry Ford Museum and Greenfield Village, a national museum of American history and technology in Dearborn, Mich.
The museum is planning to restore it to its original form at least by 1995, in time for the centenary of Fuller's birth.
For the first time in almost 50 years, the public (and this critic) will be able to visit the house that might have revolutionized the American house-building industry.
The Dymaxion House looked like a flying saucer, but it was an affordable flying saucer, and the public loved it.
Media coverage was intense.
During the seven months after October 1945, when the first prototype was built, there were more than 37,000 unsolicited orders; the factory was prepared to produce 60,000 houses a year; Fortune magazine predicted that the "dwelling machine" would produce greater social consequences than the introduction of the automobile and estimated that as many as 250,000 houses might eventually be sold annually; and the publicly traded stock of Fuller Houses doubled in value.
Buckminster Fuller, who had been, until then, best known as an unsuccessful automobile designer, seemed destined to enter history as the man who put America, if not on wheels, then into them.


A Melting Pot of Traditions And a Mix of Mediums
MULTICULTURALISM is a cause celebre at the Craftsman's Gallery here this spring.
Collected under the title "The Melting Pot," more than 100 works in fiber, clay, metal, wood and glass call attention to the diverse geographical origins of the 24 artists who made them.
Representing five continents and a dozen different languages, the exhibitors have immigrated to the United States from as far away as New Zealand and as close as Canada.


PANAMA QUESTIONS U.S. BASE CLOSURE
With less than eight years to go until the United States is due to end nearly a century of military presence in Panama, many Panamanians are beginning to doubt the wisdom of letting the 10 remaining bases close and the troops depart.
In today's rapidly changing world, they say, they are no longer as nationalistic as they once were and the United States is no longer as colonialistic.
That has removed the tensions that led to killings, angry demonstrations and flag burnings in the United States-occupied area bordering the Panama Canal in the 1950's and 60's.


Making a Difference; A Really, Really Big Store
John V. Roach, who has been struggling to improve the profitability of the Tandy Corporation, has come up with a plan for a really big consumer electronics store.
How big?
The 100,000-square-foot outlets will carry everything "from 40,000 audio and video software titles to every computer game to 300 television models and 90 VCR's and everything that it takes to accessorize and support that," said Mr.
Roach, Tandy's chairman and chief executive.
Two are scheduled to open this fall: one near Portland, Ore., and the other in Arlington, Tex.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Signed Tim Layana, pitcher, to a contract with Rochester of the International League.
Horse racing SPORTSMAN'S PARK -- Suspended trainer Wayne Catalano for 15 days for violating a state medication rule.


Chess
It took an egotistical genius like Grandmaster Jose Raul Capablanca of Cuba to say, "Nothing is so healthy as a thrashing at the proper time." Of course, Capablanca, who was the world champion from 1921 to 1927, uttered this believing that he was virtually loss-proof.
Nevertheless, he was right: Losing does send some players back into the fray renewed.
That seems to be the case with Maya Chiburdanidze of the former Soviet Republic of Georgia.
Her play had become somewhat lackluster until she lost her women's world title to Xie Jun of China in October after a 13-year dominance.
Then, in her first competition afterward, the Jugometal International Women's Tournament in Belgrade in early March, she won the $2,700 first prize with a high 9-2 score.


Working Off the Croissants in Paris
WHILE Paris is known for its monuments, museums, cafes and elegantly dressed inhabitants, it has never been considered a fitness mecca.
Indeed, Parisians seem more inclined to spend their lunch hours sitting in a cafe than taking an aerobics class.
There is, however, a burgeoning fitness movement in Paris and these days American visitors need not despair about being able to continue their exercise regimens.
Several gyms and clubs in Paris offer short-term, even one-day memberships; facilities vary from large, elaborate health clubs that approximate most of those to be found in the United States to small, less well-equipped places.
There are also plenty of modest neighborhood gyms, some with pools.
At several clubs, especially the smaller ones, English is not spoken and visitors may have to get by, as I did, on high school French.
However, many of the names of classes are likely to be taken directly from their English-language equivalents, for example, low-impact aerobics.


Sunday Menu; A Flavorful Yogurt Sauce Enhances Simple Fish Dish
Fans of Indian food will find much to admire in this simple method for cooking fish.
Because the fish is enrobed in the sauce, it soaks up the intensity of the flavors.
The spiciness of the dish depends on how much hot pepper is used.


Cuba Gets Closer To Tourism Role
Cuba, which enjoys a busy tourist trade from Canada, Germany and other countries -- but not from the United States, whose citizens are prohibited from traveling there -- has moved a step closer in its quest to become a member of the Caribbean Tourism Organization.
The organization, which represents 28 islands plus Venezuela and Belize, said that Cuba's application for membership, which has been on file for several years, would be considered at the next board meeting, to be held on the island of Curacao June 27.
The application has been blocked in past years by an objection from Grenada.
But at a board meeting in New York last month organization members were surprised by an announcement by Joan Purcell, Grenada's Minister of Tourism, that since Cuba had formally recognized the Grenada Government, Grenada no longer objected to Cuba's application.
An official of the C.T.O. emphasized that at the Curacao meeting there is more likely to be a discussion on the subject than a decision.


Whitney de Hosson Plans to Wed
Dr. and Mrs.
Bernard S. de Hosson of Chatham, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Whitney Gail de Hosson, to Michael Arthur Marriott, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Vincent J. Marriott Jr. of Atlanta.
An August wedding is planned.
Miss de Hosson, 27 years old, is a vice president of County NatWest Securities in New York.
She graduated from Northwestern University and received an M.B.A. from New York University.
Her father, who is retired, practiced dentistry in Chatham.


Melissa Feld to Wed
Arnold Feld of New York and Dale Anderson of Palm Beach, Fla., have announced June wedding plans for their daughter, Melissa Lynn Feld, and Stefan Peter Mykytiuk, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald Mykytiuk of Haverford, Pa.


No Jacket Required: A Blouse Fills the Bill
Blouses were once considered just another accessory to enhance a jacket.
But with emphasis on fabrics, collars and necklines, the blouse can make a statement on its own.
For Cassandra Bromfield, a Brooklyn designer, white blouses are important.
The more the merrier, she says.
"When you wear them too often, they get worn out," Ms.
Bromfield said.
"But they look their best when they are fresh." And so she makes a special group of them every season.


Hold That Final Result!
As if this strike-torn hockey season hasn't had enough controversy, try to imagine this scene in Game 7 of the Stanley Cup finals:
The Rangers and the Los Angeles Kings are tied, 3-3, in triple overtime at Madison Square Garden.
Wayne Gretzky of the Kings fires a shot at the Ranger net.
Although it eludes the goalie's glove, the puck seems to hit the crossbar and bounces back.


Plants That Honor the Memory of People
WHAT spring would be complete without the bright yellow little bells of forsythia?
The shrub seems to be growing everywhere, a cheerful sight indeed, bringing graceful garlands of flowers to a landscape that is frequently still quite bare.
It is just about the easiest shrub to grow, and if it is kept in bounds, with judicious pruning right after coming into bloom, forsythia will be around to flower for many springs to come.
But how many gardeners realize that forsythia commemorates someone?
William Forsyth, gardener to George III of England, is credited with having built the first rock garden in England, with stones taken from the Tower of London and with lava brought from Iceland by Sir Joseph Banks, who was an explorer and naturalist.


Skipping Raises: A special report; Blue-Collar Compromises in Pursuit of Job Security
On the edge of this prosperous rural town, rolling cornfields give way to neat ranch-style homes, well-groomed parks and unobtrusive, one-story factories.
Here, Rubbermaid Inc., the town's biggest employer, boasts no layoffs since 1973.
Still, there is tension in Wooster as workers have traded raises for job security -- pressured to do so not only by Rubbermaid but by neighbors who fear the company might otherwise pull out.


Bingo Among the Beautiful
FASHION SHOW
Or, The Adventures of Bingo Marsh.
By James Brady. 272 pp.
Boston: Little, Brown. $19.95.


CAMPUS LIFE: Wisconsin; Ride Service To Avoid Rape Is Ruled Biased
A rape prevention ride service offered to women in the city of Madison and on the University of Wisconsin campus here may lose its university financing because it discriminates against men.
The Women's Transit Authority, a student organization that quickly became a community group, has been providing free nighttime rides to local women for 19 years.
And while it allows men to volunteer for fund-raising, the service does not allow men to drive vehicles or ride in them.


Correction
An article on April 5 about the actor Alec Baldwin misidentified a cast member in the movie version of "A Streetcar Named Desire." The role of Stella was played by Kim Hunter.


Antony Tudor's Contribution
To the Editor:
In her review of my book, "Shadowplay: The Life of Antony Tudor" (In Short, Jan. 26), Hanna Rubin mistakenly ascribes to me an "aim . . . to reverse the rankings" of the ballet choreographers George Balanchine, Sir Frederick Ashton and Tudor.
Rankings, however, are the province of sports and politics and commerce.
The arts, as far as I am aware, provoke qualitative rather than quantitative inquiry.
Or have things changed?
Perhaps my notion that Antony Tudor deserved at last a biography strictly on his own merit and contribution was misguided.
DONNA PERLMUTTER Los Angeles


It All Began With a Singer's Collection
THE place is the Stedman Art Gallery here, at Rutgers University; the show, "African-American Artists, 1880 to 1987," a group of about 65 paintings, collages and works on paper.
They come from the Evans-Tibbs Collection, which started modestly during the 1920's in the Washington residence of Lillian Evans Tibbs.
She was an opera singer known as Madame Lillian Evanti, and in the exhibition is a P. H. Polk photograph of her, looking very much the 1930's fashion plate, complete with borzoi on leash.


VETERANS TO HELP MINE-FIELD VICTIMS
While the United States Government considers how much it can afford to contribute to the rebuilding of Cambodia, a Vietnam veterans' organization is already moving into the devastated country with a people-to-people aid project that is designed to restore mobility and productivity to some of the most tragic victims of war, the amputees.
The organization, the Vietnam Veterans of America Foundation, hopes to raise the money by selling T-shirts and greeting cards decorated with reproductions of paintings and graphics by Indochinese artists whose work has not been seen in the United States.
The foundation calls the effort the Indochina Project.


Archeologists Vs. Collectors
To the Editor:
I read the article by Rita Reif, "East European Antiquities Shed Light on a Hidden World"  [ March 15 ] , with the same sinking feeling that my colleagues who conduct archeological research in the southwestern United States, Mesoamerica and Peru have probably felt for years as they witnessed the looting of those regions' archeological record.


CAMPUS LIFE: Missouri; Parts of Dead Sea Scrolls To Be in Literary Review
For five years, the Missouri Review has published previously undiscovered works by authors as august as Mark Twain and William Faulkner but no "found text" has been so lost as that which will appear in its next issue: excerpts from one of the Dead Sea Scrolls.
In a decision unprecedented among literary reviews, the University of Missouri's literary magazine will publish translated passages from the Book of Jubilees, a retelling of the stories of Genesis and Exodus, early next month.


Inspiration From Ashe
ARTHUR ASHE has AIDS.
And when the news reached his friends at the Easter Bowl Junior Tennis Championships, they wanted to do something to help.
So they decided to pass the hat to raise money for whatever AIDS organizations he may decide to endorse.
Ashe, the honorary chairman in absentia of the 1992 championships in Miami, turned the tournament players and their parents into a brigade in the war against AIDS simply by being himself.


Circling Sicily With the Ancients
HOURS after I'd made final arrangements to go to Sicily with my husband, our two sons and my mother, I turned on the evening news and watched Mount Etna exploding.
In fact, the volcano had been erupting for months.
But not until I had our plane tickets firmly (and nonrefundably) in hand did the network decide to enliven its account of a mostly slow day with dramatic footage of a natural wonder.
Alarmed, excited, I stared at showering orange sparks against black sky, the ooze of molten red lava inching inexorably toward the town of Zafferana -- and, of course, toward any tourist reckless enough to be headed that way.
In the weeks before departure, nervous jokes about Pompeii alternated with visions of the white almond blossoms that, I'd heard, cover Sicily in February.
Guidebook references to cataclysmic earthquakes and the three separate occasions on which Etna had leveled the city of Catania -- where our plane from Rome would be landing -- drove me to soothing descriptions of Greek temples and Roman mosaics.
Ballooning fantasies of orange and lemon groves and of pasta con le sarde (pasta with fennel and sardines) were punctured by friends' (not unfounded) warnings about suicidal Sicilian drivers and street crime in Palermo.


Stamps
U.S., Italy and Columbus
The tide of new stamps to mark the quincentenary of the first voyage of Columbus to the Americas rises further this week with a joint United States-Italy issue of a block of four designs.
Both the Italian and the United States stamps will be available by mail, individually or on first-day covers, from the United States Postal Service.


Data Bank/April 19, 1992


Tell Us, Governor, Just What You Would Do; A Question of Ethics
To the Editor:
Your March 27 front-page article on Gov.
Bill Clinton and his role in enacting ethics legislation for Arkansas was very misleading.
It was also a disservice to the public which relies on reputable publications like yours to focus on the important issues of this campaign.


POSTINGS: House Tours; Flatbush Movie Sets . . .
When it comes to famous New York City movie locations, Brooklyn's Flatbush section probably does not spring to mind.
But filmmakers have been using the neighborhood's Victorian homes and picturesque residential streets for decades.
Next Sunday, movie buffs will have a chance to see some of the Flatbush locations from past and future films and television productions on a house tour sponsored by the Flatbush Development Corporation.
Among the stops on the tour, "Filmmaking in Flatbush: From Mary Pickford to Spike Lee," will be the residence that served as the boarding house, in "Sophie's Choice"; the house where scenes from the fact-based drama about Claus von Bulow's murder trial, "Reversal of Fortune," were filmed, and residences featured in two upcoming movies, Spike Lee's "Malcolm X" and "Glengarry Glenross."


State Is a Testing Ground for Broadway
"FEEDING FRENZY" is how the executive producer of Lincoln Center Theater, Bernard Gersten, described the sustained flow of plays and musicals from Connecticut's nonprofit theaters to the New York marketplace.
Some producers insist that such transfers are essential to the survival of all theaters in hard times, and spokesmen for the state's regional theaters concur -- on their own terms.
Still, the "interdependence -- like marriage," as Mr.
Gersten puts it, between two disparate types of theater, may be turning Connecticut's nonprofit playhouses, which were conceived as alternatives to the commercial theater, into tryout centers for New York.
A survey of the season so far indicates that 11 New York presentations emanated from Connecticut.


Arthur Stern, 83, Pioneer in Effort to Set Controls on Air Pollution
Arthur C. Stern, a scientist and government official who pioneered in identifying air pollution as a major threat and in mobilizing efforts to combat it, died Friday at the Carolina Meadows Retirement Center in Chapel Hill, N.C.
He was 83 years old.
Mr. Stern died of a heart attack, his family said.


At Work; Alcohol, Still the Drug of Choice
For most employees, these are familiar office characters: fellow workers who stumble to their desks on Monday, haggard from a weekend of relaxing-by-partying.
Or a colleague who disappears regularly for long lunches and returns looking dazed and smelling of alcohol.
Despite all the attention paid in recent years to the abuse of controlled substances like cocaine and marijuana, alcohol -- friendly, familiar, legal old alcohol -- remains the drug of choice for most Americans.
For most Americans, it is not a problem.
Hazelden, the rehabilitation and educational program in Center City, Minn., estimates that some 80 percent of the population either abstains or uses alcohol moderately.


Privatizing Museums? No Way
To the Editor:
Russell C. Pomeranz suggests that privatization of the museum industry is the answer to museums' financial woes (Forum, April 5).
In fact, it would weaken their financial position further and undermine the premise on which museums were founded.


Bedeviled by Snivelers
GIVE WAR A CHANCE
Eyewitness Accounts of Mankind's Struggle Against Tyranny, Injustice and Alcohol-Free Beer.
By P. J. O'Rourke. 233 pp.
New York: The Atlantic Monthly Press.


'Frankenstein' Has Message for Feminists
To the Editor:
"Coeducation, Then and Now" (Topics of the Times, April 1) is right to celebrate Mary Wollstonecraft's "Vindication of the Rights of Woman," but wrong to characterize her daughter's harrowing "Frankenstein" as "not particularly a milestone for feminism."


The Possible Dream


Stockbrokers Are Catering To First-Time Investors
AS Wall Street rejoices over what has turned out to be a better-than-expected first quarter, so do stockbrokers in Westchester.
Like their parent firms in Manhattan, branch offices in the county are enjoying what many are calling a boom.
To cash in on the good times and remain competitive with their city counterparts, local brokerage houses are offering a special dividend these days: face-to-face contact between the broker and the client -- what some describe as relationship-selling and others say is hand-holding in a time of economic uncertainty.


The Business Dealings of the President's Relatives: What the Record Shows
While the Bush campaign gathers and files information for possible use against Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas in the fall campaign, the White House is also preparing for the likelihood of attacks from Democrats over business dealings that have involved several of President Bush's relatives.
In the last few weeks columnists and politicians of both the left and the right have been examining a number of deals and apparent ethical conflicts by some of Mr.
Bush's relatives.
Although some discern efforts on the part of the President's relatives to exploit the relationship, no one has implicated the President in the dealings or any wrongdoing.


Carol Levy to Marry
Dr. and Mrs.
Marshall S. Levy of Pittsburgh have announced September wedding plans for their daughter Carol Ellen Levy and D. Christopher Lipman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William Lipman of the Riverdale section of the Bronx.
Ms.
Levy, 34 years old, is a real-estate broker in New York.
Mr.
Lipman, 34, is a partner in Chroma Copy in New York, which operates a chain of photographic laboratories.
He graduated from Cooper Union.


Livery-Cab Driver Shot at the Wheel in the Bronx
Donald Reid sometimes had to sneak out of his house in Astoria at night to earn his living driving his livery cab in the Bronx.
His girlfriend worried about his safety working late at night and would try to stop him.
But he was from the Bronx and was not afraid.
Early yesterday morning, not long after he went out again, as he had so many times for more than a dozen years, Mr.
Reid was shot to death, apparently during a robbery attempt, the police said.
Mr.
Reid, who was 44 years old, died almost instantly after he was shot in the right cheek at point-blank range at 1:15 A.M. as he drove along Clay Avenue between East 168th and East 169th Streets in Melrose, Capt.
Eugene Murphy of the Bronx Detective Bureau said at a news conference last night.
As Mr.
Reid slumped behind the wheel, the livery cab crashed into a parked car and a van on the deserted residential street lined with tenement apartment buildings.
He had $18 in his wallet, but it was not clear if he had been robbed, Captain Murphy said.
There have been a number of robberies and shootings of livery cab drivers in the 44th Precinct, where the shooting took place, and investigators are looking into the possibility this one is linked to the others.
"Everybody thought he was just relaxing, waiting for somebody," said Tommy Vega, 16, who lives across the street from the scene and was awakened by a car alarm set off by the crash.
"You couldn't notice that he was dead until you got up close."
The car was still in drive when he and his friends looked in and saw Mr.
Reid and the bloodied seat, Mr.
Vega said.
The first thing the detectives did when they arrived was put it into park.
In Mr.
Reid's quiet middle-class neighborhood in Astoria, where he lived in a red-brick house beneath the imposing Hellgate Bridge, his family and neighbors said he was a devoted, hard-working man.
"He was probably out to make a couple extra bucks for the holidays," the husband of one of his girlfriend's children, Charles Calviello, said.
Mr.
Reid's girlfriend, Maura Dowd, with whom he had lived for seven years, said he was like a father to her nine children.
She worried about his driving late at night, she said, but he loved and trusted people.
"He believed everyone needed a chance," she said last night, crying as she spoke.
"He would be there, never turned anyone away."
Mr.
Reid and Ms.
Dowd were in a bowling league on Monday nights.
They were in third place, and with four weeks to go in the season, he had set his sights on first place, Ms.
Dowd said, adding, "He never wanted to lose."
Mr.
Reid, born and raised in New York, had driven a livery cab for more than 12 years, first for an Astoria livery service and then for himself.
He often worked late into the night.
'He liked the people of Harlem and the Bronx," said Detective John McCarthy of the 44th Detective Squad, "and that's why he was willing to drive there much of the time."
Investigators spent the day canvassing the neighborhood around the shooting, but could find no eyewitnesses.
They said that is why they took the unusual step of calling a press conference in the case.
"We don't have a lot of information," Captain Murphy said.
The police have set up a confidential telephone line for anyone to call with information: (212) 583-0144.


A Determined Salieri Vows to Ruin Mozart
A SOCIAL moron who happens to be a great musical genius and a cultured dignified man who is a mediocre composer are the characters in conflict in "Amadeus."
Peter Shaffer's drama about the final years in Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart's short life was a major hit on Broadway.
It was made into a compelling movie, and it is now being revived at Theater Three in Port Jefferson.


Perk Up Risotto and Other Dishes With Radicchio
RADICCHIO has been available in American markets for about 10 years, first imported from Italy and subsequently cultivated here.
Now it is hard to imagine salads without it.
The handsome, small burgundy and white heads of crisp, somewhat bitter leaves have proved a versatile and colorful addition to the menu.
Not only can radicchio be shredded, torn or chopped to add bite and color to a tossed salad, the cuplike leaves also make attractive and convenient containers on a plate for salad mixtures like shrimp salad or chicken salad.
The leaves can even be used to hold dips on a platter of crudites.


Q and A
Rejection of an Heir Question: My son recently inherited an unencumbered co-op apartment from his godmother.
He will graduate from college in May and had planned to move into the apartment.
But the co-op board has denied him the ownership.
They are requiring that the apartment be sold and that he pay maintenance until then.
He has the money to pay maintenance until he finds employment.
The co-op board's decision seems unfair.
Does he have any recourse? . . .
Gerald Davenport, Manhattan Answer: Maybe.
But according to Stuart Saft, a lawyer and a vice president of the Council of New York Cooperatives, assuming there is no discrimination involved, the law gives the board the power to block the transfer of shares to your son just as it has the right to reject a purchaser.
The exception, Mr.
Saft said, would be if the proprietary lease permits an automatic transfer to an heir.


Dr. Randi E. Isaacs to Wed in June
Robert M. Isaacs of Branford, Conn., and Sandra E. Isaacs of Stratford, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Dr.
Randi Ellen Isaacs to Michael James Zaidel, a son of Leonard Zaidel of Oak Creek, Wis., and the late Margaret Zaidel.
A June wedding is planned.
Dr.
Isaacs, 36 years old, is an assistant professor of medicine at the State University Health Science Center in Brooklyn.
She graduated from Wellesley College and received her M.D. from Dartmouth College.
Her father is a professor of English at Housatonic Community College in Bridgeport, Conn.
Her mother is a print broker in Stratford.


Keeper of Democratic Flame Applies Heat as Necessary
Perhaps they would be the perfect match: the smooth party chairman and the smooth party nominee.
In 1989, when Ronald H. Brown began his term as chairman of the Democratic National Committee, some party leaders were deeply suspicious of the man who had moved to center stage in part by helping Jesse Jackson dominate and nearly disrupt the 1988 nominating convention.


A Catch With Short-Term Bonds
Short-term bond funds became a staple after the stock market crash of 1987, as safer alternatives to stocks and long-term bonds.
Now they seem to be attracting investors who are unhappy with today's low rates on money market funds and certificates of deposit.
But while share prices of the short-term bond funds fluctuate less than prices of bond funds that own longer-term issues, this does not mean that share prices cannot fall.


The F. B. I.'s Latest Idea: Make Wiretapping Easier
Civil libertarians reacted quickly last month when the Federal Bureau of Investigation proposed new wiretapping legislation to cope with advanced telephone equipment now being installed nationwide.
The F. B. I., which has drafted a set of guidelines but has as yet no sponsor in Congress, said the latest digital equipment was so complicated it would hinder the agency's pursuit of mobsters, terrorists and other criminals.
But civil liberties groups like the American Civil Liberties Union, joined by several major telephone companies like American Telephone and Telegraph Company, described the proposal as unclear, open to abuse and possibly retarding the pace of technological innovation.


Yes, They've Met Before But Now It's Different
Hockey aficionados think the playoffs are a new season and all the records and statistics from the regular season mean nothing.
But in the case of the Rangers-Devils series that begins tonight at Madison Square Garden the numbers so overwhelmingly favor the Rangers that it's difficult to disregard the regular season.
The two teams played seven games this season, with the Rangers winning four and the Devils three.
The Rangers outscored the Devils, 30 goals to 21, taking 216 shots to the Devils' 207.
But perhaps the biggest advantage for the Rangers came on the special teams; the Rangers had 12 power-play goals in 36 chances, while the Devils had only 1 in 28 attempts.


U.S. TO RECONSIDER DENIAL OF BENEFITS TO MANY DISABLED
Reversing one of the most widely criticized policies of the Reagan Administration, Federal officials have agreed to reopen tens of thousands of cases in which the Government denied benefits to people who said they could not work because of mental or physical disabilities.
People who prove they were wrongly denied benefits could receive substantial lump sums that would represent up to four and a half years' worth of missed payments.
During the 11 years covered by the settlement, benefits ranged from $3,000 to more than $6,000 a year.


Man Brandishing Knife Robs A Collection Box at Mosque
A man brandishing a knife broke into a collection box at the Islamic Cultural Center in Manhattan yesterday and fled with $785 in contributions, the police said.
The robbery took place about 5:30 P.M. in the newly completed mosque on Third Avenue at 96th Street.
A man walking a few blocks away from the mosque was identified by a minister from the mosque, and Officers William Higgins and Christopher Pia arrested him.


The Artistry That African Women Put Into Pottery
Before the introduction of the potter's wheel, women in Central Africa hand-shaped virtually all the area's clay vessels.
In the regions now known as Zaire, the Republic of the Congo, Rwanda and Angola, artisans pummeled, twirled and pinched coils and wads of wet clay into dynamic shapes.
Then, using technologies as old as pottery itself, the women finished their unglazed bowls and jars by burnishing them with a pebble, incising them with a blade or marking them with a comb or reeds.
Some pots were decorated by applying a contrasting color in a thinner clay, called slip.
Sixty-two such household utensils, made mostly before World War II, are on view in "Purpose and Perfection: Pottery as a Woman's Art in Central Africa," a new permanent exhibition at the Smithsonian Institution's National Museum of African Art.


Public &amp; Private; Ms. President
Donna Karan, the only fashion designer who seems to recognize the existence of hips in her clientele, perhaps because she owns a pair herself, recently ran an arresting series of magazine advertisements.
In one, the woman in the pin-striped suit is standing behind a bunting-draped lectern.
In another, she is sitting on the back of a convertible amid grim guys with headsets, confetti dappling her hair.
In a third, she is raising her right hand, a handsome man at her side, while a judge holds the Bible.
Congratulations, Ms.
President.


In the Region: Westchester and Connecticut; Recent Sales
Mamaroneck, N.Y. 425,000
645 Shore Acres Drive  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 43-year-old ranch; fireplace, Florida room, Jacuzzi, marble family room, wine cellar; taxes $8,444.
New Rochelle, N.Y. 400,000
17 Longue Vue Avenue  7-bedroom, 4 1/2-bath, 68-year-old Norman Tudor; sun room, enclosed porch, 4,475 square feet; taxes $10,466.
Waccabuc, N.Y. 355,000
Perch Bay Road
4-bedroom, 2-bath, 13-year-old contemporary; 2 fireplaces, family room, den, exercise room, 3 acres; taxes $10,036.
Clinton, Conn. 150,000
17 Heritage Circle  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 26-year-old raisd ranch; family room, enclosed porch, 2-car garage, 0.75 acre; taxes $2,134.
Colchester, Conn. 266,000
349 Shailor Hill Road  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 4-year-old contemporary; skylights, center chimney, barn, 1.6 acres; taxes $3,674.
Westbrook, Conn. 116,000
42 Grove Beach Road South  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 37-year-old ranch; sun porch, fireplace, walk to beach; 0.75 acre; taxes $1,211.
OTHER AREAS Medford, L.I. 127,000
22 Matsupage Drive  5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 19-year-old colonial; dining room, den, deck, 2-car garage; taxes $4,400.
Sayville.L.I. 283,000
459 China Road  5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 4-year-old contemporary; dining room, eat-in kitchen, pool, 1 acre; taxes $7,800.
Maplewood, N.J. 157,000
16 Manley Terrace  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 47-year-old colonial; fireplace, 1-car garage, porch; taxes $3,978.


Working Off the Croissants in Paris
WHILE Paris is known for its monuments, museums, cafes and elegantly dressed inhabitants, it has never been considered a fitness mecca.
Indeed, Parisians seem more inclined to spend their lunch hours sitting in a cafe than taking an aerobics class.
There is, however, a burgeoning fitness movement in Paris and these days American visitors need not despair about being able to continue their exercise regimens.
Several gyms and clubs in Paris offer short-term, even one-day memberships; facilities vary from large, elaborate health clubs that approximate most of those to be found in the United States to small, less well-equipped places.
There are also plenty of modest neighborhood gyms, some with pools.
At several clubs, especially the smaller ones, English is not spoken and visitors may have to get by, as I did, on high school French.
However, many of the names of classes are likely to be taken directly from their English-language equivalents, for example, low-impact aerobics.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-9  SERBS POUND BOSNIAN CAPITAL
Serbian guerrillas pounded central Sarajevo with mortar shells as a high-ranking American official arrived on a mission to bring humanitarian aid and to back Bosnia's independence from Yugoslavia.  1  IRAN'S MASTER BUILDER
If the late Ayatollah Khomeini was the austere revolutionary determined to smash the old regime, President Rafsanjani is the state builder, just as determined to create institutions that will restore Iran to a position of power in the region.
In fact, he would like to be seen as a throughly modern mullah.  1  COURTING A TOP AFGHAN REBEL
Surrounded by rebels and weakened by the capture of a western city, Afghanistan's new Government in Kabul agreed to continue talks with one of the most powerful guerrilla military leaders.  3  SIGNS OF REBELLION IN EUROPE
Just four months after the European Community signed a treaty on economic and political unity, the organization is being shaken by challenges to the pact and new uncertainty over the region's future.
Many Europeans are less enthusiastic over the treaty than are their leaders.  8  President Havel has decided to seek re-election in Czechoslovakia.  8  GORBACHEV'S PITCH TO JAPAN
Showing that he retains much of his old stature in Japan, Mikhail Gorbachev has been accorded a welcome approaching that of a head of state since his arrival a week ago.
But his appeal for aid for ex-Soviet lands has received a cool response.  9  PANAMA WAVERS OVER PULLOUT
With less than eight years to go before the United States ends nearly a century of military presence in Panama, many Panamanians are beginning to doubt the wisdom of letting the 10 remaining bases close and the troops depart.  7  National 10-25  VAST REVIEW OF DIABILITY CASES
Reversing one of the most widely criticized policies of the Reagan Administration, Federal officials have agreed to reopen tens of thousands of cases in which the Government denied benefits to people who said they could not work because of mental or physical disabilities.  1  Some whose cases were denied, and who may now gain.  20  NOVEMBER'S WILD CARD
Political Memo: The Bush and Clinton campaigns both regard Ross Perot's flirtation with a Presidential race as a danger.
But neither of them yet has a strategy for dealing with it.  1  Some of Bush's relatives could prove Democratic targets.  14  Buchanan renewed his attacks on the President.  13  For Clinton, a smooth week's return to the campaign trail.  12  LESSONS OF THE WORKPLACE
In Wooster, Ohio, the biggest employer is Rubbermaid, which has not laid off a worker there since 1973.
Yet tension prevails.
Workers have traded raises for job security, pressured to do so by management, and by neighbors who fear that the company might otherwise pull out.  1  ENTRAPMENT AND VINDICATION
Five years after being charged with receiving child pornography, and just days after the Supreme Court ruled that he had been entrapped, Keith Jacobson feels this way: "I knew I wasn't a child pornographer. But when the Government charges you with something like that, what are people going to think?" 10  San Quentin Journal: After 25 years, an execution is at hand.  10  Minnesota is adopting a vast overhaul of health care.  15  Regional 26-32  A QUIET NEW YORK HOLIDAY
After a flurry of activity, much of New York City seemed to slip into a quiet, meditative state this weekend, as residents celebrated Passover and Easter.  1  PORT JEFFERSON'S MYSTERY MAN
Most residents of the quaint waterfront village never exchanged a word with him or caught more than a quick glance as he strode by in one of his sober business suits.
But he was thought of as the very incarnation of success.
Now he is charged with a vast fraud scheme, and residents don't know what to think.  26  THE OTHER COP ON THE BEAT
They walk the streets in crisp blue uniforms, their faces mirroring those of the people in the neighborhood.
They look like New York City police officers, but in fact they are auxiliary police: volunteers who patrol the streets out of a sense of do-goodism, part Kiwanis Club and part would-be detective.  27  Obituaries 30
Joseph B. Williams, an ex-New York State Supreme Court justice.
Arts/Reviews 45-46  Fashion 40-41  Weddings 42-44


Review/Theater; 2 Adversarial Pioneers Of Women's Suffrage
"This One Thing I Do," a new play by Claire Braz-Valentine in collaboration with Michael Griggs, is nothing if not ambitious; it tries to evoke the turbulence and passion of the lives of Susan B. Anthony and Elizabeth Cady Stanton over 67 years, and to celebrate their achievements.
The performance at the Village Theater, under the direction of Gigi Rivkin, is certainly celebratory and, in a few scenes depicting Anthony's confrontations with mobs and with the law, nearly riotous.


Beth Lopez, Student, to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Otto Belisario Lopez of New York have announced the engagement of Mr.
Lopez's daughter, Karen Elizabeth Lopez, to Thomas Francis Roche, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas J. Roche of Collingdale, Pa.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Lopez, who is 25 years old and is known as Beth, graduated from Connecticut College and attends Brooklyn Law School.
Until recently, her father was a senior vice president of Shearson Lehman Brothers in New York.
Her stepmother, Jo Willa Lopez, is a vice president and senior counsel at Merrill Lynch &amp; Company in New York.
The prospective bride's mother, Karen Redus, is an agent at Century 21 Seatrek Realty in Vero Beach, Fla.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
I PUT A SPELL ON YOU The Autobiography of Nina Simone.
By Nina Simone with Stephen Cleary.
Pantheon, $22.


A Second Chance to Catch a Favorite
THE recession would not seem an ideal time for new cultural endeavors, but the revival of the Chappaqua Chamber Orchestra last January "was greeted by an eager audience," said Mary Rohde, the publicity director.
"Many who wanted to come were disappointed when all seats were sold out early."
The music director, James Sadewhite, generated special enthusiasm among the musicians in the chamber-size orchestra and among the listeners in the intimate theater at the Chappaqua Library.


Review/Music; Rattle Concludes U.S. Series
Throughout Simon Rattle's final New York concert leading the City of Birmingham Symphony Orchestra in music from 1911 to 1913 on Thursday night, I wanted to admire the playing more than I actually did.
This was, after all, the conclusion of a three-concert series in Carnegie Hall called "The Revolution of Expression," a welcome attempt at thematic programming.
Mr.
Rattle has also established a strong reputation for musical insight and for idiomatic interpretations of 20th-century music.
And the orchestra, far from being a provincial group, has developed a large following through its EMI recordings and is acclaimed in its native England.
But instead I found myself less than fully engaged.
There was, of course, much to respect.
The orchestra has an enviable relationship with Mr.
Rattle, who became its principal conductor in 1980 and was just made its music director.
The players seem comfortable both with him and with one another, a phenomenon not to be taken for granted.
It may not be an ensemble of virtuoso soloists, but it has a distinctive sound, if a bit wiry and emphatic and tending to accent the openings of phrases.


Plants That Honor the Memory of People
WHAT spring would be complete without the bright yellow little bells of forsythia?
The shrub seems to be growing everywhere, a cheerful sight indeed, bringing graceful garlands of flowers to a landscape that is frequently still quite bare.
It is just about the easiest shrub to grow, and if it is kept in bounds, with judicious pruning right after coming into bloom, forsythia will be around to flower for many springs to come.
But how many gardeners realize that forsythia commemorates someone?
William Forsyth, gardener to George III of England, is credited with having built the first rock garden in England, with stones taken from the Tower of London and with lava brought from Iceland by Sir Joseph Banks, who was an explorer and naturalist.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
ROGUE WARRIOR By Richard Marcinko with John Weisman. Pocket Books, $22.


Sunday Outing; In New Jersey's Appalachian Foothills
"We do things that adults are interested in, but geared to a level children can understand," said Rosemary Knapp.
Ms.
Knapp is a naturalist at the Trailside Nature and Science Center in Mountainside, N.J., where many topics of nature, science, and conservation are explored through family-oriented activities.


America: Love It or Leave It?
To the Editor:
Morton Kondracke's review of two books by Paul Hollander (March 15) accepts without qualification Mr.
Hollander's term "anti-American" to describe the writings of left-wing thinkers, as if such an epithet could do justice to the work of serious critics.
Mr.
Kondracke also writes as if there were little or no difference between critics of American foreign policy like Noam Chomsky and Irving Howe, or between feminist intellectuals like Jean Elshtain and Andrea Dworkin.
At least Mr.
Hollander in his books provides substantiation for his charges.
Mr.
Kondracke's smug journalistic summary has no interest in elementary distinctions or qualifications.


Sports of The Times; 'The Babe,' a Movie, Hits a Double
HE HAS ENDURED as unquestionably the best baseball player in history, not only a slugger with 714 home runs but a left-handed pitcher with 94 major league victories that included 23-12 and 24-13 seasons.
To anyone who has visited the Hall of Fame in Cooperstown, N.Y., it's as if Babe Ruth were the greeter.
As you walk in, the first thing you see is a lifesize wooden statue of him in a Yankee uniform.


Janet McGlynn Plans to Marry
Mr. and Mrs.
Roger H. McGlynn of Mendham, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Janet McGlynn to Christopher E. Myer, a son of Frances T. Myer of East Hampton, L.I., and Robert B. Myer of Fort Lauderdale, Fla.
An August wedding is planned.
Miss McGlynn, 25 years old, is a stockbroker at Ladenburg Thalmann in New York.
She graduated from Mount St.
Mary's College in Emmitsburg, Md.
Her father, a lawyer, is a former director of the Prudential Insurance Company of America in Newark.


Health and Tax Tips for Newcomers
Ralph Cindrich, a sports lawyer in Pittsburgh and a former National Football League player, thinks players coming into the league, and the people who work with them, should be more informed about health and taxes.
Cindrich drew this conclusion from a survey he commissioned that took a peak inside the head of draft-eligible college players.
The results showed that the aspiring pros don't really know very much about finances and they're concerned about H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS.


Spring at Macy's, Right on Schedule
Spring may be a little late this year, but Macy's annual flower show is right on time.
The Broadway windows are ablaze with rhododendrons, tulips, jonquils, azaleas, roses and pansies that seem to grow amid garden gates and birdhouses.
Behind 13-foot-high wrought- iron gates at the entrance, the main floor is a riot of 6,000 plants and cut flowers, including 22 ficus trees lining the main aisle, a cactus garden on the Origins counter, a jungle of tropical blooms in the men's fragrance area, topiary trees and topiary animals.


Mets Turn Defensive, But Their Gloves Don't
The state of denial has consumed the clubhouse, from the manager's office to each corner of lockers.
"Defense? I think we'll be O.K.," said Jeff Torborg, the manager of the Mets.


New Yorkers, etc.
It's one thing to be asked a personal question and slither around avoiding a direct answer.
It's quite another to slither around when asked for a favor or for information that isn't personal -- or to come right out and say "no."
In the first instance, the men and women who have sufficient gall to ask about such things as age, salary or apartment cost aren't really put out when they don't get an answer.
Some part of their mind knows that their curiosity isn't going to be satisfied.
Stonewalling, with or without an accompanying flip remark, is generally accepted with good grace.


Booming Polish Market: Blond, Blue-Eyed Babies
Poland's opening to Western market forces has brought an unexpected side effect: a booming traffic in the country's blond, blue-eyed babies.
Since the fall of Communism two years ago, Western embassies in Warsaw have reported a striking rise in the number of residence visas and passports granted to Polish infants and toddlers.


Ricki Pollack to Wed E. G. Frayman
The engagement of Ricki Caryn Pollack to Evan Glenn Frayman, the son of Rene and Susan Frayman of Peekskill, N.Y., has been announced by her parents, Drs.
James and Ronnie Pollack of Clearwater, Fla.
A July wedding is planned.
Ms.
Pollack, 21 years old, is to graduate from Smith College in May.
Her father is a surgeon and her mother is a radiologist, both at Palms of Pasadena Hospital in St.
Petersburg, Fla.


CORRECTION
An article last Sunday about the quest for a new zoning resolution for New York City misidentified the date of the current one.
It took effect in 1961.


College Tickets Offered
Season-ticket packages for college football games at Giants Stadium this season will go on sale tomorrow, the New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority announced Friday.
Single-game information will be announced shortly.
Five-game packages will cost $119.
Four-game packages, which exclude the Whitney M. Young Jr.
Memorial Classic, will cost $99.
Information can be obtained by calling (201) 935-3900.
The schedule begins with the Kickoff Classic between Iowa and North Carolina State on Aug. 29 (9 P.M.) and is followed by Grambling and Virginia Union on Sept. 12 (6:45 P.M.) in a rematch of last year's Whitney M. Young Jr.
Classic.


Baffled Saberhagen Is Just Not Amused
Bret Saberhagen had it all working, the electric fastball, the lawless curve, the cruel changeup.
A shame it was the fifth inning.
Saberhagen, firing off the pitches that at last allowed him to look the rest of the Mets in the eyes, still had to stare inning after inning at the scoreboard that showed the Expos having scored five runs in the third.


Review/Film; Shields As Intrepid Reporter
There were more than 13 stars in the flag when "Brenda Starr" was filmed (actually in 1986, but audiences may find that hard to believe).
This would-be comic romp is badly dated in several conspicuous ways.
Its cold war villains are embarrassingly outre (even allowing for the film's 1940's look, in keeping with the peak popularity of Brenda Starr as a comic strip heroine).
And its narrow view of the comic strip's screen possibilities, in the wake of such visually ambitious projects as "Batman" and "Dick Tracy," is similarly outmoded.
Most dated of all is Brenda herself (Brooke Shields), the "girl reporter" who worries chiefly about not running her stockings or breaking her high heels and who in one scene actually uses a black patent leather handbag as a secret weapon.
"I'm having a terrible time with some of these purses you're having me wear," she complains to Mike Randall (Tony Peck), the artist who draws her and who winds up as part of the film's fantasy action.
"They're just too small!" (Dale Messick, who created Brenda Starr, is mentioned separately, but the use of the Mike Randall character is more confusing than helpful.)


French Cabaret Evening
Yvonne Constant, a French cabaret singer, will offer an evening of songs associated with Yves Montand, tomorrow at 8:45 P.M. at Florence Gould Hall, 55 East 59th Street in Manhattan.
She will be backed by a five-man band.
Miss Constant appeared on Broadway in the revue "La Plume de Ma Tante" and in the Richard Rodgers musical "No Strings," and has appeared in supper clubs in the United States and France.
The $20 admission includes a pre-show champagne reception at 7:45.
The show is part of a monthlong Montand tribute, which includes 10 films and 4 video screenings, sponsored by the French Institute/Alliance Francaise.
Information: (212) 355-6160.


Riffing in Context With a Jazzman
A dozen dancers were on the Virginia Theater's stage, flinging their arms out, high-kicking and strut-stepping through a song called "Dr. Jazz" from "Jelly's Last Jam," the Broadway musical about Jelly Roll Morton that opens next Sunday.
Meanwhile, George C. Wolfe, the show's writer and director, had commandeered the standees' space at the back of the theater.
His arms in motion, his forehead creased with concentration, Mr.
Wolfe was fine-tuning the gestures of the Hunnies, three jiving Muses or Furies.
They were working on "Somethin' More," a number that traces Morton's exploits across the South as pool hustler, piano player and ladies' man.
"You do that queeny thing, and then that floozy thing, and this is a girl-group turn," Mr.
Wolfe said.
The Hunnies were swaggering, pointing their fingers and shaking their hips, as they sang in three-part harmony.


Competition Surges in Summer Job Market
APRIL is the time when young people's thoughts turn to finding summer jobs.
But this year, employment advisers say, there are more people competing for fewer jobs.
Many of those job seekers aren't high school or college students but adults with long work histories, victims of layoffs and cutbacks in the work place, said Susan Welling, the administrator of the county's summer employment program.


Paying for the Sand At the Shore
In his letter to the New Jersey editor, Raymond E. Williams asked why he should pay for sand for "private beaches." I live at 142 Ocean Avenue in Monmouth Beach.
Directly across the street, I own a parcel of land that is beachfront.
I purchased this parcel along with my home in 1977 and have maintained taxes and insurance on it.
My neighbors and I pay for and maintain steps that go to "my beach."


Baden
To the Editor: I enjoyed Paul Hofmann's article on Baden ("The Soothing Style of Baden," Feb. 23) especially the mention of the "thermal complex." Its true name is Strandbad, meaning a swimming pool with some sand around it, a strand, or beach.
I was present at the opening in 1926 and I have a photo of the mayor and myself taken at this event.
My uncle's sister, Frieda Kohn, opened the festivities by diving from the top platform.
When I revisited the Strandbad a few years ago, it appeared to me to be exactly the same.


POSTINGS: Peekskill Single-Families; A Hovnanian First in Westchester
Hovnanian Enterprises, of Red Bank, N.J., best known for its low-priced town houses and garden-style apartments for first-time buyers, will open its first community of detached one-family homes in Westchester County in June.
The company's president, Ara Hovnanian, said the development of the community, Forest View in Peekskill, N.Y., was spurred by consumer research and changing demographics.


Dedicated Taxes: Good Policy or Bad Planning?
Not so long ago, New York City officials promoted their plan for a property tax increase by arguing that the cost for a typical homeowner would equal the price of a movie and ice cream for four.
These days, they skip the soft soap and just promise in writing to hire more police.
Facing voters tired of record tax increases and grappling with growing civic needs, New York's leaders, like others around the nation, have moved increasingly to earmark new taxes or fees for particular programs, on the theory that people will be more willing to pay if their money is dedicated to programs they want or need.


Topics of The Times; Picking Up United Way's Pieces
Credit the United Way of America's trustees for speed and candor in trying to clean up their organization's scandal.
They have now adopted a full list of recommendations for tighter control, following a report by investigators that the excesses of the ousted president, William Aramony, were even more outrageous than previously known.
United Way of America provides services for two-thirds of the 2,100 local United Ways.
It helps them raise and distribute funds, recruit volunteers, set up community programs and hold down expenses.
Local United Ways underwrite these services by sending the national organization 1 percent of the funds they raise.


Jane LeBeau Plans to Marry
Mr. and Mrs.
H.
A.
LeBeau of Wilton, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Jane Marie LeBeau to Gerard Edward Raho, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph C. Raho of Glen Ridge, N.J.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss LeBeau, 30 years old, is the associate beauty editor of Parents Magazine in New York.
She graduated from Wittenberg University.
Her father is the president of the Marcon Group, a management consulting concern in Wilton.


Tech Notes; Smog-Free Pump for Liquids
As regulators increasingly home in on everyday sources of pollution, tighter restrictions on the emission of smog-forming volatile organic chemicals can be expected on household products like hair spray.
Many of these liquids can be delivered by means of hand-operated pumps, like the familiar glass cleaner variety.
But daily users -- hair stylists, for instance -- are likely to grow weary of the constant pumping.
So a Swedish company, Inter Airspray A.B., has developed Eurospray, an alternate to conventional aerosols and pumps.
It is a refillable bottle pressurized with ordinary air.
A pump is in the base of the bottle.
A user removes the screw-off top, pours in the desired liquid, replaces the top and, grasping the top in one hand and the bottom in the other, pumps in a push-pull stroke.


NOT!
Thank you for clearing up the mystery of the word
Not!
appearing at the end of a statement (On Language: "Not!" by William Safire, March 8).
My husband and I couldn't figure out where our 8-year-old daughter picked this up.
We're reassured to know that it's a generational phenomenon and will soon "disappear into Hula-Hoop land." Not!
Well, maybe.
WENDY H. HASHMALL
New York, N.Y.


Seaport Museum Celebrates 25th
To celebrate its 25th anniversary, the South Street Seaport Museum, housed in a mix of restored 19th-century buildings and sailing ships in lower Manhattan, is mounting exhibitions, sailing events and festivals.
The centerpiece of the yearlong celebration is an exhibition of more than 500 items about the maritime world of New York City from the museum's collections, which starts April 28 and runs through December.
The history of the port will be represented in maps, models of ships, paintings, nautical fixtures, seamen's tools, printing equipment, scrimshaw and documents.
Visitors may board three of the museum's six ships, docked in the East River along South Street: the Peking, a 1911 four-masted bark that is the second largest sailing ship in the world; the Wavertree, an 1885 three-masted ship, and the Ambrose, a 1908 lightship.
On May 30, the museum will rechristen the Lettie G. Howard, a fishing schooner that is being restored to its 1893 launching condition, during a community picnic open to all.


Bourbon Street Parade


Making a Difference; A Stunning Triumph for a Tough Negotiator
In the most stunning triumph of his two years as director of the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service, Bernard E. DeLury accomplished this week in two days what skirmishing between the United Auto Workers and Caterpillar Inc. had been unable to achieve in five months: a truce that ended a bitter strike.
After calling together Caterpillar's chairman, Donald V. Fites, and the U.A.W.'s president, Owen Bieber, a week ago, Mr.
DeLury set the stage for two days of intense discussion between representatives of both sides that will put 12,000 workers back to work at the world's largest maker of construction machinery.


STEVE ROSS DEFENDS HIS PAYCHECK
The article on Steve Ross states that "the $78.2 million he received in 1990 alone . . . included a one-time payment of $74.9 million for Ross's interests in Warner."


Shostakovich Finds Many Advocates, No Great Champion
Ten years ago, the music of Dmitri Shostakovich occupied a modest place in the repertory of big-time Western orchestras, akin to that of Mahler in the early 1960's.
By the late 60's, Mahler had became a mainstream composer, and Shostakovich has become one now.
The major difference is that whereas Mahler won acceptance through the pioneering work of several devoted conductors (Bruno Walter, Otto Klemperer, Jascha Horenstein, Dimitri Mitropoulos) and finally the overwhelming advocacy of Leonard Bernstein, Shostakovich became a staple more or less on his own, without any one dominant champion.
Yevgeny Mravinsky was certainly his most persuasive exponent in Russia but lacked impact outside it at the height of the Cold War; Mstislav Rostropovich probably comes closest to being a champion in the West.


Making a Difference; Revising the Phone System
At a time of rapid change in communications, the Federal Communications Commission has named a new top regulator to overhaul rules for the $150 billion telephone industry.
The regulator, Cheryl A. Tritt, will take over on May 1 as chief of the F.C.C.'s common carrier bureau.
She is replacing Richard Firestone, who is joining a Washington law firm, and she is expected to try to push through an ambitious agenda to deregulate telecommunications and promote greater competition.


STEVE ROSS DEFENDS HIS PAYCHECK
Whenever I see an article on someone like Steve Ross, I read it with an eye to discovering the secrets of his success ("Steve Ross Defends His Paycheck" by Roger Cohen, March 22).
Forget the management books -- $78 million is real world!
I found two clues: (1) "Ross never had much time for conventional management and an aversion to administrative detail." And, more importantly, (2) "By granting autonomy and implementing an incentive-based compensation system, he commanded loyalty in a fickle industry." This makes a nice combination of employee empowerment and pay-for-performance, two of the key elements in modern management.
Thank you, Professor Times.
Now, on to the next article, in search of more clues.
LOUIS R. MORRELL
Winter Park, Fla.


'Frankenstein' Has Message for Feminists; Don't Call Him Doctor
To the Editor:
"Coeducation, Then and Now" (Topics, April 1) calls Frankenstein's maker "Dr. Frankenstein."


Tell Us, Governor, Just What You Would Do
To the Editor:
Now that the Democratic Party's Presidential nomination of Gov.
Bill Clinton has become presumptive, perhaps the so-called character issue might be more constructively focused as a question of leadership, to direct public attention to issues of concern to voters of both parties.


Victoria Beers To Wed in June
Mr. and Mrs.
George W. Beers of Sanford, Fla., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Victoria Alana Beers, to Northrup Rand Knox Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Knox of Buffalo.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Beers is a founder and a partner in JVB Management, a Boston real-estate concern.
She graduated from Stetson University.
Her father is a field service representative in Sanford for Martin Marietta, the military contractor.


Corrections
Because of a production error, columns of an article on page 23 of the Arts and Leisure section today about the American Ballet Theater are truncated in some copies.
Readers wishing copies of the corrected page may write to Production Quality Control, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.


A June Wedding For Ms. Polikoff
Benet Polikoff Jr. and Mrs.
Raymond Troubh, both of New York, have announced the engagement of their daughter Elisabeth Polikoff to Peter James Doyle, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen Doyle of the Bronx.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Polikoff, 30 years old, is a therapist at the Child Development Center in New York.
She graduated from the University of Vermont and received a master's degree in social work from Columbia University.
Her father is of counsel to the New York law firm of Rosenman Colin.
Her mother is a trustee of the City Parks Foundation in New York.


This Week's Numbers
Consensus
Last Period
Estimates*
Tuesday
Treasury budget, billions
-$48.8
$51.5
Thursday
Durable goods orders, percent change
-0.1
1.3
Unemployment claims, thousands
415
425
Automobile sales, annual rate, millions
5.8
5.8
Tuesday: President Bush and European Community head Jacques Delors meet *
French industrial production *
Canadian retail sales  Wednesday: Two-year Treasury auction *
Yasushi Mieno, chairman of the Bank of Japan, holds press conference *
Australian Treasury-bill auction  Thursday: Five-year Treasury auction *
German central bank meeting *
Producer prices, Australia *
Canadian Treasury auction  Friday: British retail sales *
France merchandise trade *
Japan household spending (Source: I.D.E.A. Inc.)


Miss Birdsong To Wed in June
Mr. and Mrs.
William M. Birdsong Jr. of Franklin, Va., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Christine Brothers Birdsong, to Wyndham Robertson White 4th, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
White 3d of Bronxville, N.Y.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Birdsong, 24 years old, graduated from the University of Virginia, from which she also received a master's degree in special education.
She is an elementary-school teacher in Richmond.
Her father is a vice president of Birdsong Peanuts in Franklin.


New &amp; Noteworthy
WITNESSES FROM THE GRAVE: The Stories Bones Tell, by Christopher Joyce and Eric Stover. (Ballantine, $4.99.) "They never lie and they never forget," says Clyde Collins Snow, a forensic anthropologist.
The authors explain how bones have helped Mr.
Snow and his colleagues identify human remains, ranging from Josef Mengele's to those of the victims of totalitarian regimes.
Last year our reviewer, Malcolm W. Browne, called this a "fascinating and deeply moving book."
THE FIREMAN'S FAIR, by Josephine Humphreys. (Penguin, $9.) Ms.
Humphreys, the author of the novels "Rich in Love" and the PEN/Hemingway Award-winning "Dreams of Sleep," again explores the geographic and emotional territory of her own South Carolina.
The scene is the Isle of Palms, a barrier island off Charleston, where Hurricane Hugo has just swept through and the residents are trying to put their homes and lives back together.
Here Rob Wyatt, an attorney and volunteer fireman, meets Billie Poe, a 19-year-old escaping her bad marriage.
"Lots of people are going to love this book," Frank Conroy said here last year.
"It is entertaining, nicely sprinkled with intelligent apercus, warm and comfortable in its tone."


On Patrol Along the 'Chinese Wall'
The negotiations late last year over the Trump Plaza casino-hotel's debts were a cliff-hanger.
The financially troubled Trump organization hoped to lower its interest costs by persuading the casino-hotel's creditors to swap $250 million in bonds and other debts for new bonds at a lower interest rate, with some preferred stock thrown in.
But the negotiations were contentious.
The swap deadline came and went.
New deadlines were set.
The haggling stretched through December, and then into the new year.


The Executive Computer; Weighing a New Operating System? Call a Timeout
WINDOWS.
OS/2.
Windows.
OS/2.
The promotional cannons are firing salvos over the newest versions of these two personal computer operating systems, and shell-shocked customers are asking, "Which side do I choose?"
The best answer may be both, or neither.


Second-Home Market Gets a Nudge
THE catchphrase "buyer's market" may be heard almost everywhere in the real estate world these days, but there are few places where it is more applicable than in the second-home market.
In the wake of the 1987 stock market plunge, the subsequent recession and changes in the Federal tax code that have made owning a second home less attractive, sales of condominiums, beach houses and country homes have contracted sharply, sending prices plummeting by as much as 30 percent in some areas.
Those price drops, along with generally lower interest rates, open windows of opportunity for city dwellers who have longed for a country place but found it too costly


Cynthia Savage, Lawyer, to Wed
Cynthia Jean Savage, a lawyer with Haythe &amp; Curley, and David Nelson Brockett, a lawyer in private practice, both in New York, are engaged to be married in June.
Miss Savage, 42 years old, graduated from the University of Washington and Columbia Law School.
She is a daughter of Mrs.
Calvin J. Savage of Tacoma, Wash., and the late Mr.
Savage.
Mr.
Brockett, 37, graduated from Kent State University and received a J.D. from Ohio State University.
He is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard D. Brockett of Nelson, Ohio.


Ms. McCaffrey To Wed in June
Mr. and Mrs.
Timothy T. McCaffrey of Westport, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Katherine Temple McCaffrey, to Howard Andrew Fischer, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gerald D. Fischer of Teaneck, N.J.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
McCaffrey, 25 years old, graduated cum laude from Tufts University and is a candidate for a Ph.D. degree in cultural anthropology at the City University of New York.
Her father is an executive vice president of the National Reinsurance Company in Stamford, Conn.
Her mother, Jane R. McCaffrey, is an accountant at Dylewsky &amp; Goldberg in Stamford.


Burning Up Strips at 300 M.P.H.
So imagine you're driving down Fifth Avenue, and have stopped to wait for the light to change at 59th Street.
Grand Army Plaza is to your right, and the Plaza Hotel is just beyond it.
When the light turns green, if you accelerate fairly briskly and don't get stuck behind a cab, you'll hit a few more lights in succession, passing Trump Tower along the way, and go through the 54th Street intersection in about 30 seconds, doing about 35 miles per hour.
Fuel consumption? Your gas gauge hasn't even shuddered.


With Budget in Hand, Albany Shifts Its Focus to Other Issues
For the first time in years, the Legislature will have time on its hands when it returns to Albany on Tuesday after a two-week recess.
That may sound like a dangerous proposition to some, but it could make the next 10 weeks one of the most productive periods in the Legislature's recent history.
Before leaving town on April 2, lawmakers passed a budget that was virtually on schedule; the first time that has happened since 1984.
Last year, the budget was not settled until July 4, the last day of the session.


How Health Insurers Get Away With Fraud; For National Reform
To the Editor:
You report that Federal court rulings have given employers that act as their own insurers wide leeway to cut medical insurance benefits (front page, March 29).
You thus create the impression that we can cure the ills of our health care system if we replace the Federal law that regulates employer-provided health plans with state-by-state regulation of health care benefits.
Nothing could be further from reality.
Health-care coverage is a national issue, and reform of our health care system requires national solutions.
If we abandon Federal laws like the Employee Retirement Income Security Act, also called Erisa, for a patchwork of state-by-state regulation, employers will be forced to spend scarce dollars complying with a dizzying array of state mandates and on expensive litigation that too often reflects the influence of special interests.
Employers will have to cut back on the breadth of -- or even altogether drop -- their health-care coverage.
Needless to say, state mandates and financial incentives to sue will chill any inclination to provide coverage by those employers who do not now do so.


Austrian Panel Tied Waldheim to Nazis
To the Editor:
In denying Kurt Waldheim's Nazi past Friedrich Hoess, the Austrian Ambassador (letter, April 13), rejects the findings of a commission of inquiry that his own government established.
The international commission of historians impaneled by Austria concluded in its report released on Feb. 8, 1988, that Mr.
Waldheim was "unquestionably" a member of the Nazi S.A. -- the Brown Shirts.
That commission also cited documents that "prove Kurt Waldheim's membership in the Nazi student federation," noting that his membership resulted from his "personal initiative." The commission also found that Mr.
Waldheim had personally facilitated Nazi war crimes.
It stated that he "repeatedly assisted in connection with illegal actions and thereby facilitated their execution."


West Point Cadets Help Make a Collar
Last Wednesday, the United States Military Academy's lacrosse team had lunched in Hellertown, Pa., and the players were remounting their bus to travel to Lehigh's nearby athletic fields for a game when they saw a man leave a store furtively.
"The guy looked suspicious," said ED JACKMAN, a student strength coach.
"His hand was tucked inside his jacket as he went past us."


Rare Drought Withers Life in an English Pond
It rained the first week of April, a brief but steady shower that turned the meadows thick and spongy, and made Eunice Rees smile.
Any rain is better than no rain, she always says, even though she knows it will take more than one good downpour to fill the empty streams and drying ponds of Essex.
The people who live in this rural crossroads, like those in towns and villages throughout England, have had something on their minds this spring besides the recent elections.
There is talk of drought, of the longest and driest period in Britain in more than 200 years, and the unhappy prospect of one more summer of wilted gardens and strict water rationing.


CHRONICLE
Usually they work anonymously in a network of safe houses and apartments and an office with an unpublished address.
But this afternoon, some 100 volunteers of the New York Asian Women's Center will step out of the shadows to receive recognition from the state and city.
In a ceremony at City Hall to celebrate the 10th anniversary of the Asian women's organization, the volunteers will be presented with various awards and proclamations.
Among them is a legislative resolution adopted by the State Senate on March 31, honoring the director PATRICIA ENG and the volunteers "who devote their time to fulfilling the crucial mission of the center."


Pro Set Names Bayer Bess
Pro Set Inc., Dallas, the country's third-largest marketer of trading cards, has named Bayer Bess Vanderwarker in Chicago to handle its advertising account.
Billings were estimated at $6 million to $9 million.
Other contenders for the account were Ackerman McQueen Inc. in Dallas; Barry Huey Bullock &amp; Cook in Birmingham, Ala.; Bozell Inc. in Dallas; Griffin Bacal Inc. in New York; Messner Vetere Berger Carey Schmetterer in New York; the Richards Group in Dallas; Hal Riney &amp; Partners Inc. in Chicago; Tracy-Locke in Dallas, and Weiss, Whitten, Carroll, Stagliano in New York.


Wife of Jailed China Dissident Is Left Homeless by Eviction
The wife of one of China's most prominent dissidents says the authorities have evicted her and her sick daughter from the family home, leaving her nowhere to live.
The woman, Zhang Fengying, wife of Ren Wanding, a 48-year-old accountant who is serving a seven-year sentence for his role in the 1989 Tiananmen Square democracy movement, said she returned home on Wednesday to find her apartment door nailed shut.
She had been away since January trying to seek medical treatment for her teen-age daughter.


Treasury to Auction 2- and 5-Year Notes
Treasury financings this week include today's regular weekly auction of three- and six-months bills, Wednesday's auction of two-year notes and Thursday's auction of five-year notes.
By late in the day last Thursday -- the markets were closed on Good Friday -- the rate on three-month bills was 3.64 percent, while six-month bills were at 3.76 percent.
The yield of outstanding two-year notes was at 5.81 percent; five-year notes were at 6.74 percent.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11  DEADLOCK ON AFGHANISTAN
With guerrilla forces massed around the capital, rebel leaders meeting in Pakistan were stalemated in their attempts to negotiate Afghanistan's future.
A1
A city held by Afghan rebels becomes a new center of power.
A8  DID U.S.
KNOW OF IRAQI PLANS?
Government experts and congressional investigators say that warnings of Iraq's effort to build a nuclear weapon were silenced by the Federal bureaucracy nearly two years before the Persian Gulf war.
A1  FIGHTING GOES ON IN BOSNIA
Serbian guerrillas seized more territory in Bosnia and Herzegovina as the United States Air Force ended a two-day airlift of humanitarian aid to the capital.
A3  PLEA FOR PEACE IN SOUTH AFRICA
President de Klerk and the nation's two most powerful black leaders, Nelson Mandela and Mangosuthu Buthelezi, spoke to hundreds of thousands of blacks at an Easter celebration.
But they exchanged veiled recriminations and came no closer to agreeing on a solution to end the violence in black townships.
A10  A CHALLENGE TO PERU'S LEADER
The First Vice President of Peru returned to Lima from Miami and vowed to form a rival government to oppose President Fujimori, who seized near-dictatorial powers two weeks ago.
A3  SHEVARDNADZE'S NEW CHALLENGE
The former Soviet Foreign Minister is back home in Georgia, trying to lead his country through the aftermath of a civil war.
A6
Disagreements hinder financial aid for former Soviet republics.
A6  A DISSIDENT'S FAMILY SUFFERS
The wife of one of China's most prominent dissidents said the authorities had evicted her and her sick daughter from their home, leaving her nowhere to live.
A7  A VOW FROM I.R.A.
POLITICIAN
Surrounded by cheering Roman Catholic supporters and British soldiers with rifles at the ready, the head of the political wing of the Irish Republican Army said his defeat in the British parliamentary election would not weaken his party's position in Northern Ireland.
A11  IN THE LAND OF RAIN, DROUGHT
The longest drought in 200 years is drying up ponds and streams throughout England.
The prospect is for another summer of wilted gardens and strict water rationing.
A7  Santo Domingo Journal: Prostitution a booming export.
A4  National A12-15, B11-12  BIG CHECKS, BIG PROBLEMS
Some experts on corporate governance think seven-figure executive paychecks are not a real issue but a symptom of deeper ills at companies.
More important, they say, is whether directors hire the right people and dismiss them when when they need to.
A1  JUSTICES FACE ABORTION, AGAIN
A Pennsylvania anti-abortion law goes before the Supreme Court this week, and advocates on both sides of the issue are hoping for an unambiguous ruling that will spur their campaigns in voting booths and legislative chambers.
A1
Militants in the abortion debate descended on Buffalo.
B11  WAYWARD HEARTS IN WASHINGTON
Romeo and Juliet on the Potomac?
An epidemic of cross-party dating in the nation's capital is alarming Republicans and Democrats alike.
Oddly, 9 times out of 10, it is a Democratic man involved with a Republican woman.
A1  ASSESSING THE HOUSE'S INJURIES
The House bank scandal is sure to shake some members out of their seats come election time, but political experts do not know whether it will substantially change the House's roster, which is usually determined on local issues.
A15
The President spent the weekend relaxing, vigorously.  A14  BATTERED MEN SPEAK UP
Men who say they have been battered by their wives are challenging the dogma that all violent spouses are male and lobbying for changes in counseling, shelters and, above all, public perceptions.
A12  CHOLESTEROL AND THE ELDERLY
A study has found that the kinds and amounts of cholesterol in blood remain important to health and longevity even for people in their 70's and 80's, findings that challenge traditional medical treatment of the elderly.
B12  THE SMELL OF PROGRESS
West Grove Journal: This hamlet in Pennsylvania has evolved from a collection of sleepy farms into malodorous compost factories that operate seven days a week to produce tons of one crop: mushrooms.
A12  Chicago plugged its leak and moved on to puzzle of draining.
A12  Metropolitan Digest, B1 EVALUATING FOSTER CARE
New York City has strict rules to protect the 50,000 children it has placed in foster care.
But critics say there is no way to know whether those rules are followed, because the city's Human Resources Administration has cut its system of evaluating foster-care programs.
A1  DINKINS RESTORES LIBRARY FUNDS
Mayor David N. Dinkins proposed a $23.4 million increase in spending for the city's libraries over the next two years to restore five-day-a-week service at all 205 branches of the New York, Queens Borough and Brooklyn Public Libraries.
A1  Business Digest, D1  Sports C1-8  Baseball: Johnson lifts Mets over Expos.
C8  Yankees stop Indians.
C8  Basketball: Knicks have playoff date with Pistons.
C1  Questions, and some answers, about the playoff-bound Nets.
C1  Celtics capture Atlantic Division.
C3  Columns: Anderson on Messier.
C4  Golf: Trevino is a true winner.
C5  Hockey: Rangers slip past Devils.
C1  Horse Racing: The New-York-to-Kentucky ticket.
C2  Track and Field: Kenya runners going the distance.
C2  Yachting: America3 outsails Stars &amp; Stripes.
C3  Obituaries B13  Arthur C. Stern, pioneer in fight against air pollution  Arts/Entertainment C11-18  Exhibition on blacks and Jews.
C11  Big contract for Madonna.
C11  TV and reality programming.
C11  Talk of Hollywood.
C11  Music: AIDS benefit concert.
C13  The Sugarcubes.
C13  Word and Image: "Great First Lines" and "First Paragraphs." C18  Editorials/Op-Ed A16-17  Editorials A16  Roe: Still good law.
Japan's better example.
Hold the fire on PBS.
Letters A16  Leslie H. Gelb: Rebels, be good.
A17  William Safire: Bandarbush.
A17  Paul H. Nitze: Why is Bush reviving the Soviet threat?
A17  Georgette Mosbacher: The backlash myth.
A17  Morley Safer: Blood money.
A17


Lower Rates Prompt Refinancings
To the dismay of investors and the delight of corporate treasurers, the steady slide in interest rates over the last three years has prompted a rising number of companies to redeem billions in outstanding debt issued when rates were much higher.
Through April 15, 362 issues totaling more than $33 billion have already been called or will soon be called, according to Fitch Investors Service Inc., a bond rating concern.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Notebook; For President Bush, Little Rest on a Busy Weekend


Tips Not Needed if Born in Log Cabin
"I THINK," President Bush deadpanned the other day, "people want change."
Geraldine A. Ferraro, according to her spokesman, boasts of having been a homemaker longer than she has been a political figure.


Expressions of Easter


Kuwait Seeks to Raise Oil Output
Kuwait s preparing to begin lobbying for a much large oil production quota when OPEC's oil ministers meet on Friday in Vienna.
It is a little more than a year after retreating Iraqi soldiers set fire to Kuwait's oil wells, and the emirate's oil output is now on the verge of a million barrels a day, compared with its assigned share of OPEC production of 812,000 barrels a day.


Abortion Protesters Gather As a Fight Builds in Buffalo
Members of Operation Rescue began gathering here this weekend for an anti-abortion campaign modeled on the group's 46-day protest in Kansas last summer.
The demonstrations, which have drawn extremists from both sides of the abortion debate, will start this week as the United States Supreme Court prepares to hear arguments on Wednesday over abortion restrictions in Pennsylvania.


Dance in Review
School of Hard Knocks
La Mama E.T.C.
Yoshiko Chuma's 10-year-old modern-dance company is called the School of Hard Knocks, a name that usually seems to refer to the kind of all-out, sometimes explosive dancing that is her choreographic style.
But Ms.
Chuma's movement style, fragmented and arbitrary in an iron-willed way, can be rough on the viewer's mind and concentration.
But in her "Jo Ha Kyu," a work in progress presented on Thursday night, music takes precedence over dance.


Credit Card Issuers Seeking New Ways to Keep Business
As competition heats up in the credit card business and big banks announce lower interest rates, bankers are still looking for new features -- like the customer's picture printed on the card -- to set themselves apart.
Citibank, the country's leading issuer of credit cards, plans to announce today an offer to print, without charge, a stamp-size photograph of the customer on the back of its credit cards.
The bank says the pictures will help fight fraudulent use of the cards, which costs the industry about $1 billion a year.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The early reports of first-quarter earnings may support the contention of many executives that American businesses may be far healthier than the public believes.
Many of the companies that have reported so far have shown results far exceeding what Wall Street analysts expected.  [ Page D1. ]
Multimillion-dollar pay packages for executives have aroused a furor, but many experts think they may be beside the point.
They say it is more important that corporate boards hire strong managers and fire weak ones when necessary.
Economic Watch.  [ A1. ]


A Stay of Execution for Murderer As Protest Continues at San Quentin


Goal Eluding Bailout Agency
The Federal agency that is disposing of failed savings and loan institutions announced last week that it would fall $15 billion short of its target for asset sales by the end of September.
Albert V. Casey, president and chief executive of the Resolution Trust Corporation, blamed Congress for the delay.
The agency's authority expired on April 1 for using Federal money for selling or closing failed institutions.
The House voted down a measure on April 1 that would have allowed continued spending.


Stocks Fall in Tokyo
Stock prices fell in Tokyo today.
At the close of trading, the Nikkei index of 225 issues was down 509.33 points, or 2.90 percent, to 17,071.36.
On Friday, the index lost 379.09 points.


Books of The Times; It Wasn't Always a Dark and Stormy Night, Ishmael
Great First Lines  Edited by Celina Spiegel and Peter Kupfer  224 pages.
Fawcett Columbine.
Paper, $6.
First Paragraphs  Inspired Openings for Writers and Readers  By Donald Newlove  171 pages.
St.
Martin's Press. $14.95.
Do memorable opening sentences reflect the quality of the novels that follow?
"Great First Lines," a collection of 200 beginnings edited by Celina Spiegel and Peter Kupfer, makes you wonder.
Two of the most instantly recognizable first sentences here are "What can you say about a 25-year-old girl who died?" and "Last night I dreamt I went to Manderley again," which open two books, Erich Segal's "Love Story" and Daphne du Maurier's "Rebecca," that no one would confuse with great literature.


Review/Rock; Out-and-Out Weirdness, But You Can Dance to It
The Sugarcubes are such a spacey group, one would almost expect the members in concert to start orbiting like UFO's.
On record, this sextet from Reykjavik, Iceland, explores the outer limits of pop: jagged rhythms, jiving guitar, sci-fi keyboards and the singularly bizarre vocals of the two lead singers, Bjork Gudmundsdottir and Einar Orn.
Ms.
Gudmundsdottir has the voice of a sopranic flake, her whoops and flights following the sharp curves of a sine wave; Mr.
Orn bark-chants like a cartoon air commander issuing orders.
Together, the two offer contrasting perspectives on such topics as sex, Chihuahuas and plastic.
The Sugarcubes aren't frequently deep, but they can be wondrous to behold in their weirdness.
They play dance music for fractured minds, like a post-fallout version of the B-52's.
Performing at Roseland on Friday night, the band was a letdown more in terms of tameness than efficiency.
Certainly there were moments of oddity: Ms.
Gudmundsdottir made a grand entrance in a black vinyl mini-dress, with her dark hair pulled to either side in the shape of Mickey Mouse ears.
During one of his rants, Mr.
Orn's charade of anger took an exquisitely theatrical turn when he yelled at the attentive audience, "Why don't you leave me alone? I'm trying to sing a song!"


Both Sides in Abortion Argument Look Past Court to Political Battle
The Supreme Court argument this Wednesday in an abortion case from Pennsylvania shifts the abortion spotlight from Congress, the states and the streets back to the Court -- but only temporarily.
Despite the dozens of briefs attacking and defending Pennsylvania's Abortion Control Act, despite the effort expended to renew or revise familiar arguments, advocates on both sides are, to a striking degree, talking past the Court this time.
They may share little else but the conviction that the future of abortion rights will be determined not at the Court but in voting booths and legislative chambers.


I.M.F. Official Is Optimistic
A senior International Monetary Fund official brushed aside worries about a world recession and forecast faster global growth next year.
"Even if we see downward risk here and there, our expectation is for a global recovery," he said at a briefing ahead of the I.M.F.'s semiannual meeting here later this month.


Music Notes; A New-Music Magazine's Struggle to Stay Alive
Ear, a contemporary music journal that has been an important forum for composers and a guide for new-music fans since 1975, has been struggling to stay afloat the last few months.
But David Laskin, the magazine's editor, said the other day that although he and Ear's board intended to keep fighting, the prospects looked bleak.
The magazine, which normally publishes 10 issues a year, has not appeared since May.
Its June 1991 issue has been gathering dust in a printer's warehouse because the magazine, asked to pay the full printing bill in advance for the first time, was unable to raise the money.
Other suppliers withdrew credit, too, and on March 20, Ear, which has offices on Varick Street, was served with an eviction notice, which it is appealing.


Yankees Keep Saying It's Only April
Mel Hall wanted to pull the ball to move the runners over.
Danny Tartabull wanted to hit to the opposite field to bring them home.
Both succeeded, and the Yankees, measuring success by as little as one base and no more than one victory at a time, made another deposit into their growth savings account of triumphs.
The two-run rally in the bottom of the sixth inning, after Yankee starter Jeff Johnson had just coughed up a couple of runs and a 1-0 lead to the Cleveland Indians, held no symbolic meaning, Don Mattingly said, reciting the Yankees' early-season mantra.
Like the other positives outweighing the negatives of the season's two opening weeks, it was merely a flash of light across the vast and mysterious sky.


South African Rivals Call for Halt to the Violence
Meeting under a scorching African sun, President F. W. de Klerk and South Africa's two most powerful black leaders came together today to plead for an end to the violence afflicting the country's black townships.
But the leaders used the joint appearance to exchange veiled recriminations and came no closer to agreeing on a solution to the violence.


His Fortunes Fading? Conner a Relative Slowpoke
Bill Koch has complained for days about Dennis Conner's luck in the America's Cup defense trials.
But Conner watched luck vanish today as Stars &amp; Stripes lost to America3 by 2 minutes 9 seconds in the opening match of the defense finals.
On the cup challengers' course, New Zealand lived up to its reputation as the favorite in the Louis Vuitton Cup finals by defeating Italy's Il Moro di Venezia by 1 minute 32 seconds.
It was their first match in the five-of-nine-race series.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Notebook; Bush Uses Power Walk To Skip Out of Chores
Husbands in television situation comedies feign a bad back to escape chores.
The cartoon character Dagwood Bumstead snores conspicuously on the couch.
The President of the United States took the Secret Service, his golf pro and a small group of reporters on a power walk down a chilly Maine beach.
"Trying to avoid Barbara Bush's first strike zone," said President Bush, whose wife was back at Walker's Point straightening up the family estate, which was severely damaged by a strong storm in October.


Foreign Affairs; Rebels, Be Good
"Please do not have violence." So the State Department spokeswoman Margaret Tutwiler implored "our" Afghan rebels as they circled Kabul last week for the final kill of the "Soviet" Government.
The plea sounded distant and lame.
With the withdrawal of Soviet forces from that country three years ago and the collapse of the Soviet Union, the U.S. is long past really caring about Afghanistan.
And with U.S. aid to the rebels having dried up, our Islamic fundamentalist friends are long past listening to Washington.


Medicaid Program to Pay To Monitor TB Patients
In an effort to deal with patients who risk developing drug-resistant tuberculosis because they do not take their medicine, New York State will begin making Medicaid payments for someone to watch those patients swallow their pills.
The $5.8 million program makes New York the first state to offer Medicaid reimbursements to hospitals, clinics, drug treatment centers and other community sites for the service, which is known as "directly observed therapy," state health officials said.
The program will involve up to 1,000 TB patients in New York City identified by doctors as needing supervision.
If successful, the officials said, it will expand to other parts of the state next year.


Tunnel Plugged, Chicago Moves To Drain System
After nearly a week of round-the-clock construction, city and Federal officials said today that they had plugged the leak that brought the Chicago Loop to a standstill and were preparing to drain 250 million gallons of water from downtown tunnels and basements.
The Loop, Chicago's central business district, is beginning to look like itself again.
Late last week, office workers were again filling the sidewalks at lunch hour, and most downtown buildings had emerged from their forced hibernation, many powered by generators that seemed to hum from every street corner.
But life in downtown Chicago is not likely to return to normal for some time.
Draining the tunnels of water from the Chicago River is expected to be an arduous task that will take as long as two weeks.
And it is not known how much damage the water caused to foundations, utility lines and the old freight tunnels themselves.
Transportation Affected
In recent days, the problem has spread beyond the buildings that were closed when the wall of a tunnel ruptured last Monday and allowed river water to surge through the tunnel system.
Subways in the Loop are closed until further notice, and four lanes are out of service on the Kennedy Expressway, where the pressure of flood water below is threatening to crush the highway's drainage system..
Today, construction crews were sealing the plug with grout.
By Monday morning, they will begin draining the tunnels slowly to avoid an imbalance in water pressure that could damage the plug and the tunnels.
"It will take time," Mayor Richard M. Daley said today at a news conference.
"And that means there will continue to be emergency conditions in the Loop probably for the next couple of weeks." Loop's Misery Diminishing
The drainage follows days of shoring up makeshift dams at several points along the tunnel system.
Construction crews packed stones, sandbags, mattresses and finally concrete into shafts on different sides of the breach, and by late Saturday night the hole appeared to be plugged.
For now, the misery in the Loop has considerably diminished.
The Art Institute of Chicago reopened on Friday.
The Palmer House Hilton Hotel, which had no heat, electricity or guests most of the week, accepted guests again today.
The Board of Trade, its crippled utility lines recently bypassed with auxiliary power, has been holding abbreviated trading sessions.
And City Hall and the Marshall Field department store, powered by generators, are expected to reopen on Monday.
But there is no guarantee of heat or running water.
Those two buildings and 30 others still have flooded basements, and many others are bracing for temporary power failures as the clean-up begins.
Mayor Daley has pleaded for patience.
"I know people are tired of this," he said today.
"This has not been the holiday weekend we all had in mind. We all want to get back to normal. And we will."


INSIDE
Fighting Rages in Bosnia
Serbs seized more territory as the United States ended its airlift of humanitarian aid to the capital.
Relief workers sought more aid.
Page A3.
Rangers Win Playoff Opener
The Rangers beat the Devils, 2-1, in the first game of their N.H.L. playoff series.
SportsMonday, C1.
The Wages of Scandal
The bank scandal will end some careers, but whether it will substantively change the House itself is less certain.
Political Memo, page A15.
New Advice on Cholesterol
Cholesterol screening is as important for elderly people as for younger ones, a study finds.
Page B12.


Finding Profits in Peace at Hughes
Just a few years ago the Soviet Union was still the Evil Empire, Pentagon spending was rising and Harry King was working on a military program at the Hughes Aircraft Company's radar division.
Today the Soviet Union is no more, the future of military contracting is bleak and Mr.
King is developing power systems at Hughes for electric cars being designed by the company's parent, the General Motors Corporation.


Hyundai to Move Its PC Unit to U.S.
A leading South Korean maker of personal computers will announce today that it is moving its operations to Silicon Valley in California in an effort to keep up with the industry's breakneck pace.
The company, Hyundai Electronics Industries, also plans to announce that it is hiring Edward D. Thomas, a former executive at Compuadd and I.B.M., to head the transplanted personal computer operation, which will be called the Hyundai Information Systems division.


Plan by Dinkins Would Open All Libraries 5 Days a Week
Finding a silver lining in a dismal budget, Mayor David N. Dinkins yesterday proposed a $23.4 million increase in spending for the city's crippled libraries over the next two years to restore five-day-a-week service at all 205 branches of the New York, Queens Borough and Brooklyn Public Libraries.
The libraries -- a safe haven after school for 100,000 children of working parents, a gathering place for older people and the cultural heart of many neighborhoods -- have been forced by Draconian budget cuts during the Dinkins administration to limit service at 141 branches to two, three or four days a week.


Battered Men Sounding Equal-Rights Battle Cry
After 15 years of publicity about the plight of battered women, battered men are beginning to demand equal time.
Increasingly, men who say they have been victims of domestic violence are challenging the dogma that all violent spouses are male and are lobbying for changes in counseling, shelters and, above all, public perceptions dealing with domestic abuse.
"We are just beginning to say, 'Hey, men, if you are being slapped, kicked or punched, that's illegal and you don't have to take it anymore,' " said George Gilliland Sr. of St.
Paul, founder of the Domestic Rights Coalition, an advocacy group that plans to open the first shelter for battered men later this year.
"We want equality. Let the cell doors slam shut behind women just as they do on men."


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  None  Tuesday  Federal Budget Report . . .
March  Wednesday  None  Thursday  Durable Goods . . .
March Auto Sales . . .
Mid-March Weekly Jobless Claims Friday  None


The Sun Shines Bright on a Cloudy New York Day
Derby fever seemed to be spreading around New York's horse barns yesterday as the chances grew that all four top finishers in the Wood Memorial would head for Kentucky to challenge Arazi in the Run for the Roses on May 2.
H.
Allen Jerkens, the trainer who saddled four winners Saturday at Aqueduct, including Devil His Due in the Wood, seemed to be leaning toward the Kentucky Derby after some early doubt.
West by West ran himself back into Derby contention by running a strong second.
Rokeby, who flew across the Atlantic from Britain, had sore heels yesterday after finishing third but his itinerary still included Louisville.
And Snappy Landing scraped his hind ankles in the mud during the Wood, but ran fourth only three lengths from the lead and was also still in contention.


Serbs Tighten Grip on Eastern Bosnia
Serbs seized more territory in this struggling new country today as the United States Air Force ended a two-day airlift of humanitarian aid into the capital, Sarajevo.
International relief workers called on European Community nations to step up their humanitarian aid to the former Yugoslav republic, in conjunction with new American aid flights if necessary.
A special envoy from the European Community, Colin Doyle, harshly condemned the decision by Serbs to shell Sarajevo on Saturday night during a visit to the Bosnian capital by a senior American official, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State Ralph R. Johnson.


CHRONICLE
A 31-year-old clarinetist and arts administrator has been appointed executive director of the Harlem School of the Arts, the school announced on Friday.
DARRYL DURHAM, director of the Boston Conservatory Summer Institute, will succeed BETTY ALLEN, who remains president of the school's capital campaign and who has just been named to the city's Advisory Commission for Cultural Affairs.
Mr.
Durham, who has worked for two years on the conservatory's arts development program for minorities, says that a career in fine arts is still seen by some young people as "elitist." He recalls that while he was studying at North Carolina School of the Arts, his friends did not understand why he played classical music.


Let's Look at These 12 Years of Misrule
To the Editor:
The barrenness, paucity, cynicism and indifference of the Republican Administration were clearly exposed on the same day, March 30, by two opposing forces in the Republican Party, namely the anonymous Republican author of "Our Do-Nothing Government" (Op-Ed) and Representative Newt Gingrich ("The Slow-Motion Suicide of the World's Once Greatest City," letter).
The Op-Ed writer describes a Republican Administration bereft of concrete ideas and programs for solving the enormous problems it spawned through 12 years of bungling and ineptitude.


Author Extols Shoeless Joe Jackson
About 50 years ago, Ty Cobb and Grantland Rice drove north from Augusta, Ga., after the Masters golf tournament and stopped at a liquor store in Greenville, S.C.
Cobb greeted the man behind the counter.
"I know you," he said.
"You're Shoeless Joe Jackson."


Maurice Sauve, Canadian Ex-Minister, 68
Maurice Sauve, a former Canadian Cabinet member and advocate for the French-speaking residents of Quebec, died on April 13 at his home in Montreal.
He was 68 years old and died of cancer, his family said.
Mr.
Sauve, a member of the Liberal Party, was elected to the House of Commons in 1962.
Prime Minister Lester B. Pearson appointed him Minister of Forestry in 1964, and his portfolio was expanded to include rural development in 1966.


Roy Rogers Rides Again
Roy Rogers is back in the saddle again.
The fast-food chain had been scheduled for extinction by its new owner, Hardee's Food Systems Inc., which had begun converting more than 200 Roy Rogers restaurants in the Washington-Baltimore area to Hardee's.


How Health Insurers Get Away With Fraud
To the Editor:
The nation's attention has been captured by the plight of those without health insurance.
Perhaps even more disgraceful is the systematic betrayal of policyholders by the health insurance industry -- thanks to a tragic flaw in a law meant to protect employee policyholders, which instead allows insurers to defraud us with impunity.
Eighty-five percent of the Americans who have health insurance are insured through their employers and thus are subject to the provisions of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act, a Federal law enacted in 1974 to protect employee benefit plans.
The law was intended to safeguard employee rights.
But, in 1987, the Supreme Court held that the retirement income act pre-empts state consumer laws, creating a loophole that gives insurance companies immunity from damage suits.
The result has been an explosion of bad-faith practices by insurance companies, particularly in cases of catastrophic illness or injury.


Arthur C. Stern, Pioneer in Effort To Fight Air Pollution, Dies at 83
Arthur C. Stern, a scientist and government official who pioneered in identifying air pollution as a major threat and in mobilizing efforts to combat it, died Friday at the Carolina Meadows Retirement Center in Chapel Hill, N.C.
He was 83 years old.
Mr. Stern died of a heart attack, his family said.


Essay; Bandarbush
Ambassador Bandar bin Sultan may only be a prince in Saudi Arabia, but he has become the King of Washington, D.C.
In the 80's, he told Bill Casey of the Reagan-Bush Administration that the kingdom wanted U.S. arms and credit to flow to Saddam Hussein in his war with non-Arab Iran.
The U.S delivered.


Dance in Review
New Stuff
Performance Space 122
A lot of polished dancing was on display in New Stuff, the choreographic showcase presented on Thursday night.
But some of the works offered little more than surface glitter.


A Moment of Calm on Orthodox Palm Sunday in Moscow


World Economies


Kenya Runners Are Lengthening Their Strides
It seems only a matter of time before Ibrahim Hussein is no longer one of just a few prominent Kenyan marathoners, as he will be Monday in the 96th Boston Marathon.
For all its riches of middle- and long-distance runners, Kenya has produced greater numbers of athletes in the 3,000-meter steeplechase, cross-country, the 5,000 meters and the 10,000 than it has in the marathon.


20th Century Fox's Television Chief Expects to Keep on Beating the Odds
Lucie Salhany has scored her first big victory as the new chairman of 20th Century Fox's television production arm: signing up Chevy Chase to do a late-night talk show.
The show will not be broadcast until the fall of 1993, and she is betting that there will still be room for it in the competitive late-night schedule.


The Devils Take the Tunnel but the Rangers Collect the Goals
If at first you don't stuff the puck into the net, then flail and flail again.
That second-effort commitment, more important than ever in the tight quarters of the Stanley Cup playoffs, allowed the Rangers to defeat the Devils last night, 2-1, in the first game of their Patrick Division semifinal series.


Critic's Notebook; A TV 'Reality' of Dramatizations and Platitudes
When television programmers talk about reality, prepare for a classic lesson in language debasement.
Television approaches "reality" as an infinitely manipulable commodity.
Examples range from news coverage of a desert war and endless expert blather about surgically precise strikes, which months later are revealed to be grossly imprecise, to the steady flow of made-for-TV movies based on facts that have been trimmed, rearranged and even renamed for the purposes of entertainment packaging.
In the belt-tightening business of television nowadays, reality programming means primarily one thing: cheap, at least cheaper than the average sitcom or drama.
The standard ingredients of news documentaries -- an authoritative-sounding narrator, genuine news clips, authentic photographs -- are blended with dramatizations and outright speculation as to what actually may have happened.
When it works, that's pay dirt.


Warning on Iraq And Bomb Bid Silenced in '89
Pointed warnings that Saddam Hussein had embarked on a major effort to build a nuclear bomb were silenced within the Federal bureaucracy nearly two years before the West went to war against Iraq and its atomic complex, Government experts and Congressional investigators say.
The warnings were made in early 1989 by officials of the Energy Department who discovered that Iraq had begun secretly buying nuclear parts, including fuel-making equipment and weapon triggers, in the West.
Over a weekend in April 1989, these officials undertook an urgent effort to inform the National Security Council of the purchases and to propose that Western export controls be quietly tightened to deny Baghdad the bomb.
Warnings Were Called Alarmist
But their warnings and plans were dismissed as alarmist by Energy Department superiors, who knew of Washington's long tilt toward Iraq as a counterbalance to Iran in the Persian Gulf region.
The superiors also knew of American intelligence estimates that Baghdad's bomb-building efforts were rudimentary and might not bear fruit for a decade or more.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  WHO IS MINDING THE FOSTER PARENTS?
New York City has strict rules to protect the 50,000 children it has placed in foster care, include deadlines for adoption, frequency of visits to the children by caseworkers and frequency of visits by the children to their natural parents.
But last year the city's Human Resources Administration, in a budget-cutting move, eliminated its 10-year-old system of evaluating foster-care programs, and critics say there is now no way of knowing whether the rules are being obeyed.
A1.
DINKINS RESTORES LIBRARY FUNDS
Finding a silver lining in a dismal budget, Mayor David N. Dinkins proposed a $23.4 million increase in spending for the city's libraries over the next two years to restore five-day-a-week service at all branches of the New York, Queens Borough and Brooklyn Public Libraries.
A1.
PAYING FOR PATIENTS TO TAKE THEIR PILLS


Exhibition On Blacks And Jews Is Faulted
Hundreds of compelling objects and images -- from a Jewish child's 1939 textbook with a Yiddish translation of a Langston Hughes poem to a photograph of black American soldiers standing among corpses after they liberated Buchenwald -- make up the exhibition "Bridges and Boundaries: African-Americans and American Jews" at the Jewish Museum's temporary galleries at the New-York Historical Society.
But the show, a collaboration between the Jewish Museum and the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People that attempts to trace the complex relationship between blacks and Jews, has itself drawn criticism from several labor organizations, many of whose members are Jewish.


Driver of Gypsy Cab Killed in Manhattan
A gypsy cabdriver was shot and killed last night in upper Manhattan, apparently during a robbery attempt, the police said.
It was the second killing of a cabdriver in New York City in two days.
The driver, who was not immediately identified, died instantly from a gunshot to the head just before 9 P.M. after picking up three men in a deserted area on West 153d Street near Macombs Place in Harlem, the police said.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Romance; When Ms. Right Falls for (Gasp!) Mr. Left
There is a woman who will fight to the death to make sure that Bill Clinton does not beat George Bush.
There is a man who will fight to the death to make sure that Bill Clinton does beat George Bush.
People will say they're in love.


Washington Memo; The Fed's Master of Obfuscation
When it comes to Greenspan-speak, everybody is an expert.
Stockbrokers translate his every utterance into buy and sell orders; bond dealers make their markets dance; the dollar wiggles, the mark jiggles.
Such confidence is somewhat strange, because the sole practitioner of Greenspan-speak, Alan Greenspan, the chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, works extremely hard at being extremely circumspect about his intentions.


BASKETBALL: THE PLAYOFF PICTURE Knicks Seek Second Wind and Nets Hope They're Not Blown Away; Fitch's Squad Hits Its Stride
After Derrick Coleman and Chris Morris both refused to obey Coach Bill Fitch and go back into games last week, the conventional wisdom was that the Nets were a team in the process of self-destructing.
On Saturday night, however, New Jersey showed it is a team that defies conventional wisdom: The Nets defeated the Orlando Magic, 127-111, at Byrne Meadowlands Arena to advance to the National Basketball Association playoffs for the first time since 1986.


Bush to Meet Europeans on Trade Impasse
As President Bush and leaders of the European Community prepare to meet on Wednesday to try breaking the stalemate in global trade talks, American and European officials agree that only the political clout of the President and his counterparts can produce progress.
Farm trade issues have been the biggest hurdle in the talks for more than a year and negotiations have resolved few differences in recent weeks, despite some earlier optimism.
Negotiators from the two sides met last week in London but were unable to move ahead, said Carla A. Hills, the United States trade representative.


Santo Domingo Journal; For the World's Brothels, Caribbean Daughters
By nine o'clock each night, two dozen or more young women arrive at the La Herminia Night Club, where they exchange stories and perform their final primping before the start of a long evening of blaring merengues, copious amounts of beer and, they hope, a client or two for sex.
"If I earn 1,000 pesos, I've done pretty well," said Arele Diaz, a striking 20-year-old in a tiny, shrink-wrap black dress, of her hoped-for nightly purse of just under $100.
"Five hundred pesos or less, and it's really been a bust for me."


3-Year-Old Dies In Apartment Fire
Shortly after a woman left her Lower East Side apartment yesterday morning, a fire broke out in her bedroom, killing her 3-year-old son in his crib and critically injuring her two other children, the authorities said.
The cause of the fire was under investigation.
But police and fire officials said that it was probably started with matches.


Japan's Better Example
Why is the Bush Administration so wrongheadedly determined to see that Japan send troops overseas for the first time since World War II?
Legislation to permit Japanese participation in United Nations peacekeeping operations -- like Cambodia or Yugoslavia -- has thrown Tokyo politics into needless turmoil and spread anxiety through Asia.
The likely answer is that the U.S. thinks the American public insists on such involvement as evidence of Japan's emergence as a global power.
Indeed, there's sentiment to that effect in Japan, too.
But Japan has -- and is demonstrating -- better, non-military ways to fulfill its international responsibilities.


A Boston Tee-Hee Party At Expense of New York
The Boston Celtics completed a strong finish to their regular season today, defeating the Miami Heat rather easily to deny the Knicks what not so long ago had seemed assuredly theirs: the Atlantic Division title.
The 109-93 victory was the eighth victory in a row for the Celtics and the 15th in their last 16 games, a streak that brought their final regular-season record to 51-31, the same as the Knicks.
Boston, which was five games behind New York with eight games to play, won the division title through a tie breaker, having won three of its five games against the Knicks this season.


Johnson Beats Expos With a Grand Scram
Howard Johnson didn't look up as he rounded first, and didn't look back once he rounded second.
And when the race was at last over, the game was as well.
Johnson, whose bases-loaded double in the seventh inning screamed into the left-field corner and then eluded Ivan Calderon for an error, drove in three runs in front of him before he crossed the plate himself, hands in the air, the game suddenly in the victory column for the Mets.


New York Lauded For Magnet Schools
New York City's often-criticized public schools are now being praised for creating a network of schools to attract students interested in specific careers that do not end up segregating students by race or class.
In holding up the city as a national model for its career magnet schools, a report by researchers at Columbia University's Teachers College cites the schools' success in preparing students for jobs and college, and praises a policy of requiring magnet schools to admit weak students as well as strong ones.
Article, page B1.


Democratic Presidential Candidates Attend Easter Services


Elle Clamors for Attention With a 'Naughty' Challenge
ELLE is responding to intensified competition in the women's fashion magazine field with a cheeky suggestion, "Go to Elle."
The theme appears in a series of print advertisements and posters that are part of the most extensive, and expensive, trade and consumer circulation promotion campaign to date for the Hachette Magazines monthly.
The ads, which begin running today, appear as Elle's chief competitors, Vogue and Harper's Bazaar, are cranking up their own hoopla machinery.


Review/Gospel; Afrocentric Messages From Sounds of Blackness
Gary Hines, the director of Sounds of Blackness, spoke extensively during the group's show at the Apollo Theater.
But he never mentioned that it was taking place on the night of Good Friday, an omission that might seem surprising from a group that just received a Grammy award for gospel music.
Gospel music has always been a means to multiple ends.
It pros elytizes for Christianity; it binds the churchgoing community; it trains and rewards virtuoso singers; it brings joy to both believers and non-believers.
Sounds of Blackness, a 15-member choir with a band, puts its main energy into Afrocentric community building, reminding listeners of the music's African heritage and urging positive thinking and self-esteem, only occasionally mentioning Jesus or the consolation of prayer.
The group's closing message was "You can make it as long as you keep your head to the sky."


Dance in Review
New York Theater Ballet  Gould Hall 55 East 59th Street Manhattan Through Sunday
The New York Theater Ballet provided just the right dollop of "Cinderella" on Saturday afternoon.
The hourlong production, choreographed by Donald Mahler to the Prokofiev score, tells its story simply and in smoothly abbreviated form, with a good deal of help from Gillian Bradshaw-Smith's mobile fairy-tale set.


Quotation of the Day
"I'm a romantic at heart, but you have to be prepared to make some changes. Both cannot continue to be active in different parties and end up in the same bed." -- DEBBIE DINGELL, an active Republican until she married Congressman John D. Dingell, Democrat of Michigan.  [ A14:2. ]


Changes Expected With New Prison Chief
Astonished by the noise, filth and crowding, the new lawyer recoiled the first time she entered a New York City jail to speak with a defendant.
"It was a place I never wanted to be in," Catherine Marie Abate says of that introduction to the Tombs in lower Manhattan 20 years ago.
Today, after a career as a trial lawyer and as the head of agencies that aided crime victims and supervised released criminals, Ms.
Abate formally takes over as the city's Correction Commissioner and begins running the nation's largest municipal prison system.


Prince Teymuraz Bagration, 79; Headed Relief Efforts for Refugees
Prince Teymuraz Bagration, who escaped the Russian Revolution, became a Yugoslav official in World War II, then headed international relief efforts for political refugees for 43 years, died on April 10 at his home in Manhattan.
He was 79 years old.
He died of a heart attack, his wife said.


Pop World Hears the AIDS Message
The world shrinks a bit today when the "Freddie Mercury Tribute: Concert for AIDS Awareness," at Wembley stadium outside London, will be televised in virtually every country in the world.
Proceeds from the show, a tribute to the lead singer of the group Queen, who died of AIDS on Nov. 24, are to go to AIDS organizations around the world.
Metallica, Seal, Elton John, Spinal Tap, Def Leppard, Extreme, Robert Plant, George Michael, Ian Hunter, Roger Daltrey and David Bowie are all scheduled to perform.
Guns 'n' Roses is on the bill, too, though it is unclear whether the band will show up.
Its lead singer, W. Axl Rose, has skipped several recent concerts in the Midwest while avoiding an arrest warrant on assault and property damage charges issued by St.
Louis County authorities; the warrant is in connection with a Guns 'n' Roses concert last summer in St.
Louis during which Mr.
Rose jumped off stage and a melee ensued.
The three remaining members of Queen are to play with Paul Young and Zucchero.
To Get Attention
While AIDS benefits have been fairly regular fare in Hollywood and on Broadway, the pop world has been slow to acknowledge the disease publicly.


Killing City's Dreams; East Orange Sorrows Over 6 Deaths
In the last week East Orange, a community long troubled by urban ills, has found itself defined, at least temporarily, by the conclusion that six women were murdered and their bodies discarded here beneath train trestles, along highway embankments or in abandoned buildings.
But if America's experience with mass murder is any guide, the geography of these killings was purely coincidental, not an indictment of a place or its people.
"It could have happened anywhere" was a familiar refrain here last week.


Market Place; Will the Bull Run Much Farther?
BULL markets, the old saying goes, are built on walls of worry.
And this bull market seems to be no exception.
Measures of market sentiment had shown such bearishness before the most recent rise that some analysts had forecast that stock prices might soar.
But even as the market was beginning its rise, one widely watched analyst, Steve Leuthold of the Leuthold Group, was warning that an indicator of long-term price trends had turned negative for the first time in more than a year.
If that indicator is correct, the bull market could be nearing an end.


Stride Rite Chairman To Resign
Arnold Hiatt, the shoe salesman who pioneered no-smoking offices and child care at the work place, is stepping down as chairman of the Stride Rite Corporation to devote himself full time to the company's philanthropic foundation.
The Stride Rite board is expected to approve his resignation at a meeting this morning.
The directors are expected to pick Ervin Shanes, the chief executive and president, as the new chairman.


Battered Men Sounding Equal-Rights Battle Cry
After 15 years of publicity about the plight of battered women, battered men are beginning to demand equal time.
Increasingly, men who say they have been victims of domestic violence are challenging the dogma that all violent spouses are male and are lobbying for changes in counseling, shelters and, above all, public perceptions dealing with domestic abuse.
"We are just beginning to say, 'Hey, men, if you are being slapped, kicked or punched, that's illegal and you don't have to take it anymore,' " said George Gilliland Sr. of St.
Paul, founder of the Domestic Rights Coalition, an advocacy group that plans to open the first shelter for battered men later this year.
"We want equality. Let the cell doors slam shut behind women just as they do on men."


Madonna Makes a $60 Million Deal
Pop music's original Material Girl is about to become a multi-media mogul.
Time Warner plans to announce an agreement today in which Madonna, in partnership with Time Warner, will form her own multi-media entertainment company, Maverick.
Under a 7-year arrangement, which can be extended to 11 years, Madonna, who is 33 years old, will be advanced as much $60 million, making this one of the most lucrative contracts offered to a pop star.
The long-term commitment is comparable in scale to a similar deal that Sony signed last year with Michael Jackson.
Although Time Warner executives would not confirm figures that have been widely circulated, Madonna's renegotiated recording contract is said to give this singer a $5 million advance for each of her next seven albums and a 20 percent royalty rate.
This would put her royalty rate on a par with Mr.
Jackson's, which is the highest for any artist in the music business.


Pennsylvania Seizes Underinsured Banks
Pennsylvania state officials said today that they had seized two privately owned banks in a state-financed bailout and that it expected them to reopen this week.
A spokeswoman for the Pennsylvania Department of Banking said the banks, which were not insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, would be the first ever owned by state.


Surprising Increases In Earnings
Early indications are that much of Corporate America managed to wring better-than-predicted profits out of meager overall economic growth in the first quarter.
The steady drumbeat of earnings reports at or over the high end of analysts' estimates -- from companies as diverse as I.B.M., Coca-Cola, Sears and Alcoa -- helped drive the Dow Jones average of 30 large-company stocks to record highs last week and lift stock prices in general.
But economists say there may be important longer-term effects from the reports as well.


Dividend Meetings


AFGHAN GUERRILLAS DIFFER ON MAKEUP OF INTERIM REGIME
With rebel forces poised to take control of the capital of Afghanistan, the leaders of 10 Afghan guerrilla factions failed in a meeting here today to set aside their differences in an effort to avert a chaotic struggle for power.
But as they gathered here, the guerrilla field commander whose fighters have surrounded Kabul and forced President Najibullah to flee made what appeared to be an important gesture of unity with the other rebel factions.
Mr.
Najibullah's whereabouts remain uncertain.


Battered Men Sounding Equal-Rights Battle Cry
After 15 years of publicity about the plight of battered women, battered men are beginning to demand equal time.
Increasingly, men who say they have been victims of domestic violence are challenging the dogma that all violent spouses are male and are lobbying for changes in counseling, shelters and, above all, public perceptions dealing with domestic abuse.
"We are just beginning to say, 'Hey, men, if you are being slapped, kicked or punched, that's illegal and you don't have to take it anymore,' " said George Gilliland Sr. of St.
Paul, founder of the Domestic Rights Coalition, an advocacy group that plans to open the first shelter for battered men later this year.
"We want equality. Let the cell doors slam shut behind women just as they do on men."


Doctor Fights Suspension, Citing Bias GREENWICH, Conn., April 17
A physician who treats many people with AIDS is fighting his suspension from the staff of Greenwich Hospital, saying he was ejected because, out of anxiety about the cost and the stigma of treating AIDS patients, the hospital does not want to be known as a haven for them.
Hospital administrators deny the charges, and say they suspended the doctor, Gary Blick, because of concerns about "quality of care." They would not be more specific about what prompted them to remove him from the staff in October, citing confidentiality rules surrounding such proceedings.
The suspension means he cannot admit patients to the hospital.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo; House Members Can Only Guess How Voters Will React to Bank Scandal
The House bank scandal is a live grenade rolling around the 1992 Congressional elections.
It is sure to end careers, both lofty and undistinguished.
But most thoughtful politicians are wary of guessing just how it will change the House, in either partisan or substantive terms.
House elections are rarely national events, swept along by the same issues from Maine to California.
It did happen after Watergate, and it sometimes happens in recessions.


New Yorkers Can't Take Stiffer Water Taxes
To the Editor:
I was delighted to read a letter (April 2) from someone in Charlottesville, Va., urging stiffer water taxes for New York City residents.
I am a director and officer of an Upper West Side co-op with some dozen apartments, which paid $6,973 in water and sewer taxes in 1976; $13,345 in 1986; with projected water and sewer costs of $39,000 in 1992.
Our real estate taxes have also risen from $97,646 in 1976 to $141,642 in 1986, and $275,000 is budgeted for 1992.


New Campaigns
*
For the first time, Coors Brewing Co. will run a national television campaign promoting all its Coors brands.
Four spots by Foote, Cone &amp; Belding, Chicago, feature the mountains near the company's Golden, Colo., brewery and end with the tagline "Coors family of fine beers." *
Taco Bell, the fast-food chain, is introducing a television campaign featuring Johnny Cash.
A spot, created by Foote, Cone &amp; Belding, San Francisco, features a miniature Mr.
Cash strumming a guitar.
He sings, "Where else you gonna get so many choices with just a 'little Cash'?"


Pro Bono
*
The New York City Department of Transportation is introducing a print campaign to publicize a program called Voluntary Entry by License Plate, which was developed to help reduce pollution.
The program encourages motorists coming to the city to leave their cars at home once a week, based on the last digit of their license plates.
The advertisements, created by Hill, Holliday, Connors, Cosmopulos Inc., New York, carry the theme "Your car, leave it or breathe it."


I.R.A. Candidate Says Vote Loss Is Temporary
Surrounded by cheering Roman Catholic supporters and grim-faced British soldiers with rifles at the ready, Gerry Adams, the head of the political wing of the Irish Republican Army, said today that his defeat in the British parliamentary election was temporary and would not weaken his party's position as an important voice in this troubled province.
Mr.
Adams, the president of Sinn Fein, lost his parliamentary seat on April 9 when Protestant voters in his predominantly Catholic district in West Belfast shifted their support to Joseph Hendron, the candidate of the moderate Catholic Social Democratic Labor Party.
Previously, the Protestants largely voted for pro-British unionist parties.


A Sports Auction With a Difference
Jeffrey Modell died in 1986 at age 16 from complications of primary immune deficiency, a genetic disorder affecting thousands of children.
His parents, FRED and VICKI, established a foundation at Manhattan's Mount Sinai Medical Center, and it has raised over $2 million for research.


Single-Digit States
To the Editor:
Theo Lippman Jr. cites his iron law that no President since Franklin Pierce in 1852 has been elected from a single-digit electoral-vote state (letter, April 6).
Sadly, not true.
Remember Dwight D. Eisenhower, a two-term President from single-digit Kansas?
"Ah, but he was born in Texas," can be the retort, though he moved to Kansas as an infant and grew up there.
Very well, if one insists on calling Ike a Texan, then one is stuck with at least two other single-digit Presidents -- Calvin Coolidge and Chester A. Arthur, both of whom were born in tiny Vermont.
MORRIS OLITSKY Bryn Mawr, Pa., April 6, 1992


Discord Is Said to Stall Plan to Raise I.M.F. Loan Aid to Ex-Soviets
The International Monetary Fund is considering a plan to help the former Soviet republics pay billions of dollars' worth of their trade bills, but cannot act because its member countries are divided on the idea, says a senior official at the lending institution.
The plan would be in addition to $25 billion to $30 billion worth of conventional I.M.F. loans over the next four years and would allow all of the institution's members, including the former Soviet republics when they join, to borrow extra money.


A Northern Afghan City Is Now a Power Center
It was in this city of ocher mud rounded mud walls, mud houses, mud streets -- that the regime of President Najibullah began to crumble.
And it is this city that has become a new center of power in the country.
The shift is largely the work of Gen.
Abdul Rashid Doestam, the leader of the country's largest militia.
On March 18, he abandoned the Government in Kabul, forged an alliance with dissident army officers and leaders of the major guerrilla factions and quietly captured Mazar-i-Sharif, the country's second-largest city.


British Court Backs Lloyd's
The Lloyd's of London insurance group said last week that it had won a crucial legal battle upholding the principle that members called upon to cover insurance claims must "pay now and sue later."
The decision by the British High Court is a blow for members of insurance groups, wealthy individuals known as "names" who pledge their own assets to back insurance and trade with unlimited liability.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Public Relations; Amid Hollywood's Fanfare, Publicity Machines Sputter
This town is loopy.
Although Hollywood is built on fantasy and self-promotion, the movie studios are actually struggling to resolve a long-simmering problem: their publicity machines, which should operate smoothly, are seriously flawed.
In contrast to the aggressive publicity operations of some television and cable networks and several smaller film companies, the big studios often seem like giant beached whales, huffing and puffing but stuck in the sand.


Bridge
A player who breaches a sound bidding guideline will nearly always get his just deserts.
But once in a while the gods smile on him, and the theorists are left open-mouthed and speechless.
A case in point is the diagramed deal played in a Chicago game at the Manhattan Club, 23 West 73d Street in Manhattan.
Bidding a five-card suit twice is almost always an error, although there are two exceptions for the opening bidder.
One occurs after a response at the two-level (one spade-two hearts-two spades) and the other when it is his second suit.
In a competitive auction there are no exceptions, and South's final bid in the auction shown is therefore an eyebrow-raiser.
But the declarer, Joe Lawrence, sailed home in four hearts in a 5-1 fit despite losing the first three tricks in clubs.


And Now, a Word From the President
Two years ago, the first United States national women's hockey team was in the capital city of Canada, Ottawa, about to play its first game in the first women's world tournament.
At the behest of his friend, Canadian Prime Minister BRIAN MULRONEY, President BUSH sent the team a goodwill message.
The American coach, DON MacLEOD, kept the White House greeting a secret until the last minute.
Then in the locker room before the team went out to play Canada, the tournament favorite, the coach told his athletes they were representing their country and the President was on their side.


The Talk of Hollywood; 'Malcolm X' Is Setting An Industry Brushfire Months Before Release
Denzel Washington remarked the other day that his newest film, "Malcolm X," would not be the most controversial film of the year.
"It's going to be the most controversial film of the decade," he said.
It's probably just Hollywood hyperbole, but the actor's comment underlines the anticipation here for the forthcoming Spike Lee film, which is stirring even more talk, if that's possible, than that other controversial Warner Brothers film, Oliver Stone's "J. F. K." And "Malcolm X," which is being edited, doesn't even open until Thanksgiving.


Economic Watch; Those Big Executive Salaries May Mask a Bigger Problem
It's nice work if you can get it.
The $86 million paycheck that Coca-Cola's chairman, Roberto C. Goizueta, received last year is apparently the highest ever awarded for a year's labor.
And with the market at a record high, dozens of other chief executives are expected to receive multimillion-dollar packages built around stock bonuses.
Is America's corporate leadership overpaid?
In a defense that will no doubt be echoed by many of his peers, Mr.
Goizueta suggested that his $83 million stock bonus was small change compared with the $50 billion increase in the market value of Coke shares during his decade-long tenure.


New Power in a City of Mud
It was in Mazar-i-Sharif that the rule of President Najibullah began to crumble.
A general who abandoned the Afghan leader has made the city of mud walls, mud houses and mud streets a center of power.
Page A8.


Peru's No. 2 to Form Rival Government
A Peruvian Vice President arrived here from Miami late Saturday night and vowed to form a rival government to oppose President Alberto K. Fujimori, who with military backing seized near-dictatorial powers two weeks ago.
The official, Maximo San Roman, said Mr.
Fujimori violated his constitutional mandate when he closed courts and Congress, contending that his efforts to combat drug traffickers and guerrillas of the far left were being thwarted by corruption.


Accounts
*
Polska Telephonia Komorkowa, Warsaw, to Leo Burnett Warsaw, to advertise Centertel, Poland's first cellular telephone network.
Burnett edged out three other Warsaw agencies in a review.
Billings were not disclosed.
Poland's Ministry of Finance has also selected Burnett to advertise the country's first savings-bond program, following a review that included D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles, Grey Advertising, McCann-Erickson and Young &amp; Rubicam.
Billings were not disclosed. *
Dunhill Personnel System Inc., Woodbury, L.I., to Warner, Bicking, Morris &amp; Partners Inc., New York, as the employment-services company's agency of record.
Billings were not disclosed.


Hockey; We've Just Begun to Skate, Say The Devils
Tight checking, tight team defense and a low score were what the Devils wanted in the opening contest of the playoff series with the Rangers, and that's exactly what they got.
Nevertheless, the Devils came up on the wrong end of the result last night.
Their one consolation, and a big one at that, was that the game had been played to their strengths.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Courier Beats Chang  Jim Courier did double duty yesterday in Hong Kong, winning two matches to maintain his status as the world's top-ranked male player.
Courier beat Michael Chang, 7-5, 6-3, in the final after beating fourth-seeded Brad Gilbert in a semifinal postponed from Saturday because of rain.
In the final, Courier lost his serve in the first game but came back to break Chang in the fourth and 12th games.
Courier continued to pile on the pressure in the second set.
Chang, seeded third and ranked sixth in the world, advanced to the final by beating Australian Todd Woodbridge, 6-3, 6-7 (5-7), 6-1, in a semifinal match on Saturday.
Gilbert teamed with Jim Grabb to win the doubles title, 6-2, 6-1, from South African Byron Talbot and Byron Black of Zimbabwe. (AP) Seles Prevails: Top-seeded Monica Seles took only slightly more than an hour to defeat third-seeded Zina Garrison, 6-1, 6-1, in the final of the Virginia Slims of Houston.
Seles took 1 hour 5 minutes to beat Garrison, a native of Houston who learned the game on the city's public courts.
The match improved Seles's record in Houston to 13-0.
"I always love to play here," said Seles, ranked No. 1 in the world.
"It's great for my confidence." (AP) Breakthrough for Argentine: Unseeded Gabriel Markus of Argentina won his first title on the men's tour yesterday, beating Javier Sanchez of Spain, 6-4, 6-4, in the Nice Open in France.
The 22-year-old, ranked 78th in the world, eliminated top-seeded Pete Sampras, ranked No. 4, in the semifinals Saturday. (AP) HIGH SCHOOL BASKETBALL  Harrington Is Star  Othella Harrington, a 6-foot-9 1/2-inch center from Jackson, Miss., scored 19 points and pulled down 21 rebounds to lead the West to a 100-85 victory over the East yesterday in the McDonald's All-America game in Atlanta.
Harrington, presented the John Wooden Award as most valuable player, made 9 of 14 field goal shots and had three steals.
Afterward, he announced he would attend college at Kentucky.
Jason Kidd of Alameda, Calif., the national player of the year on several all-America teams, added 12 points and 6 assists. (AP) HORSE SHOW  Genius Wins Smartly  Thomas Fruhmann of Austria and his mount, Genius, jumped two faultless rounds in the third phase to win the 14th World Cup Final for horse show jumpers yesterday at the Del Mar Fairgrounds in Del Mar, Calif.
The 41-year-old horseman and his 13-year-old Hanoverian gelding entered the final competiton with zero penalty faults based on a fifth-place finish in Thursday's speed event and a second place in Friday's jumpoff contest.
SOCCER  U.S.
Defeats Honduras  Alexi Lalas and Steve Snow scored two minutes apart midway through the second half, and Dante Washington scored with three minutes left as the United States Olympic team rallied to beat Honduras, 4-3.
The United States (3-0) needs a minimum of two points in its final three games to qualify for its third consecutive Olympics.
The United States will play Mexico (0-1-1) on Sunday at Bethlehem, Pa.
Two teams will advance to the Barcelona Games from the final round of qualifying in the North and Central American and Caribbean region.
Canada (0-0-2) is second with two points, followed by Mexico and Honduras (0-2-1) with one point each. (AP)


BASKETBALL: THE PLAYOFF PICTURE Knicks Seek Second Wind and Nets Hope They're Not Blown Away; Riley is Rushing to Regroup
They hoped.
They prayed.
But it didn't matter.
The Knicks watched helplessly yesterday afternoon as the Celtics clinched the Atlantic Division title with a 109-93 victory over the Miami Heat.
In the first round of the National Basketball Association playoffs, New York, relegated to second place in the division by the Boston victory, will play the Detroit Pistons in a three-of-five game series that will begin Friday at Madison Square Garden.


Cholesterol Testing Urged for Elderly
In findings that challenge traditional medical treatment of the elderly, a nine-year study of New Yorkers has found that the kinds and amounts of cholesterol in blood remain important to health and longevity even for people in their 70's and 80's.
Few doctors currently test very old people for cholesterol levels and even fewer consider treating such people for amounts of fats and cholesterol in the blood that are known to be unhealthy in younger adults.


Roe v. Wade: Still Good Law
In advance of Wednesday's abortion arguments in the Supreme Court, the U.S.
Court of Appeals in San Francisco has handed down a ruling of its own.
Striking down Guam's law criminalizing abortion, the court found that Roe v.
Wade, the 1973 decision that now hangs in the balance, remains good law.
A woman's right to choose remains a fundamental freedom.
That's the right starting point for this week's argument over a Pennsylvania law that does not outlaw abortions but oppressively regulates them.
An appeals court in Philadelphia effectively pronounced Roe dead by upholding most of the Pennsylvania law.
Abortion opponents, cheering the recent trend, and abortion rights groups, stirring women to political action, also have been talking as though Roe were dead.


Officer Stabbed After Stopping Graffiti Marker
A New York City police officer on his way to work was stabbed six times yesterday after he told three teen-agers to stop scrawling graffiti on a southbound D train in the South Bronx, the police said.
He was attacked by a separate group of three men in their 20's who warned the officer, who was not in uniform, not to interfere with the youths.


Control of TB Depends on Testing for TB
To the Editor:
The opinions Dr.
Sanford Kuvin expresses in "Control of TB Depends on AIDS Testing" (letter, April 1) are typical of the kind of medical misinformation that is rampant, even among practitioners.
As a board-certified infectious diseases physician for a clinic population of more than 900 patients with the human immunodeficiency virus, the virus that causes AIDS, I feel obliged to clarify some of these misunderstandings, which Dr.
Kuvin presents as fact.


Re-enter Shevardnadze, The Phoenix of Georgia
This week, Eduard A. Shevardnadze moved into yet another office, this one in the former Institute of Marxism-Leninism on Rustaveli Prospekt, the main boulevard that bears the scars of the civil war that raged here four months ago.
The former Soviet Foreign Minister's new domain has a provisional look about it, like the national government he now presides over.
Phones and desks are still being installed, the walls of the waiting room are bare, and in the stairwell outside, a young man stands in the midst of a milling crowd, guarding the door with a machine gun.


New York's Career Magnet Schools Lauded as Nation's Model
New York City's beleaguered public schools are now being held up as the best in the country for something -- creating a network of magnet schools that do not end up segregating students by race or class.
A report released today by researchers at Columbia University's Teachers College praises New York City as a national model for its career magnet schools, which draw students from across the city and prepare them for both specific careers and college. 'Most Exciting Set of Choices'


An Indoor Tourney for Mere Mortals
In recent times, soccer's efforts in the United States to produce major spectator events have been unsuccessful.
Perhaps that will change in 1994, when the World Cup is played here.
But as a participant sport, soccer is thriving and a coming indoor tournament at Lake Placid, N.Y., will attest to that.
More than 1,000 players from 61 teams in three divisions will compete at the Soccer America Dawn-to-Dusk Festival in the Olympic Arena on Saturday and Sunday.


Miscellany
*
American Entertainment Marketing Inc., New York, announced that Ponderosa Steakhouse had become the first national advertiser to sign an agreement with the National Motorcoach Television Network, which will provide charter and tour buses with video equipment to play movies and commercials.


Hold the Fire on Public Television
Republican hostility toward the Public Broadcasting System is hardly new: Both Richard Nixon and Ronald Reagan would have crippled it if Congress hadn't thwarted them.
Now Republican critics are attacking again.
And this time they are after even such icons of educational television as "Sesame Street."
Their complaints that public broadcasting is marred by "liberal bias" have yet to be substantiated.
And their charges that "Sesame Street" is a poor use of Government funds are without merit.
Congress would be wise to refrain from dealing on a partisan basis with a broadcasting system that has operated well unfettered.


People
*
Anne Holton, advertising director at Country Living magazine in New York, was named to the additional new position of associate publisher.


Some Self-Publishers Don't Perish
Craig I. Zirbel is the author of "The Texas Connection: The Assassination of John F. Kennedy." He is also the editor of "The Texas Connection." And the marketing manager.
And the proofreader.
And the subsidiary-rights director.
Mr.
Zirbel has every reason to be pleased with the work of Mr.
Zirbel.
His book has been on The New York Times best-seller list of hardcover nonfiction for eight weeks and currently is at No. 11.
That is good news for the publisher -- who is Mr.
Zirbel.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity offerings are expected this week:
Arcadian Partner L.P., 14.7 preference units (representing limited partnership interests).
Lehman Brothers.


Bronx Woman Is Found Stabbed to Death
A 48-year-old woman who worked as the superintendent of her building in the Bronx while her husband, an Army reservist, served in Saudi Arabia was found stabbed to death in her apartment early yesterday, the police said.
The woman, Dorothy Harris, who lived at 635 East 169th Street in Morrisania, had been stabbed repeatedly in the back, said a police spokesman, Sgt.
Nicholas Vreeland.


West Grove Journal; Living Where One's Nose Is a Liability
Joseph Dixon woke up at 6 A.M. the other day and wrote in his official Odor Survey Log, "Strong rotten flesh smell; nasal irritation, nosebleed, headache." Sharon Horwitz, a neighbor in this bucolic borough, described the smell in the air as "acrid, putrid," and logged in her symptoms as "muscle aches, sinus headache, fatigue."
So much for country living.
Mr.
Dixon, Ms.
Horwitz and more than a dozen other residents in this southern part of Chester County, which is about 35 miles west of Philadelphia, are recording their feelings for a survey by the State Department of Environmental Resources.
And more than 500 others, or about 20 percent of the population around here, have signed a petition complaining to the State Department of Health about the smells and associated pains that seep into their lives from a nearby farm, which has a heavily manured compost pile sprawling over three acres.


Sports of The Times: Hockey; Messier's Rangers Wake Up Just in Time
For the Rangers, last night was supposed to be the start of something big, the start of an eight-week journey toward the first Stanley Cup since 1940 for hockey's most frustrated franchise.
But this really was the start of why Mark Messier was imported from the Edmonton Oilers after having marched in five playoff parades there.


Playboy's Philosophy Still Pays Off
Poor old Post New Age Man.
Pity him as he sits pondering who he is.
Where, oh, where are his Cosmo, his Redbook, his Ms. magazine to help him through?


Basketball; Lakers Reach Playoffs By Winning in Overtime
The Los Angeles Lakers, whose playoff chances appeared finished last week, completed an improbable comeback tonight, beating the Los Angeles Clippers, 109-108, in overtime and advancing into the playoffs for the 16th straight season.
The Lakers won the eighth and last berth in the Western Conference ahead of the Houston Rockets, who lost to the Phoenix Suns, 100-97.
A victory by the Rockets would have ended the Lakers' hopes.
Instead, their defeat kept the Lakers alive.


A Plan to Catch Speeders In the Blink of a Shutter
Within two or three weeks, New Jersey motorists who ignore speed limits are likely to get a letter in the mail warning them that they are being watched.
And photographed.
The next time, they may get a summons, and be invited down to see themselves on the state's version of "Candid Camera": photo radar.


As Work Begins on a Big New Mall, L.I. Officials Hope for an Economic Lift
Construction of the largest shopping mall built on Long Island in two decades is to begin on a 69-acre site here next month, injecting new life into the region's construction industry.
The developer, Alan Fortunoff, president of five Fortunoff housewares and jewelry stores in the New York metropolitan region, said the ground-breaking was scheduled for the first week in May.


Curbing Prostitution on Demand Side
UNDER cover of darkness, Joseph Firine and Sally Prangley move swiftly along four blocks of Edgewood Avenue in New Haven, covering almost every telephone pole and tree with posters that name the area's new "John of the Week."
The posters state the name and address of a man arrested for soliciting a prostitute in their neighborhood and warn, "Johns! Stay out of our neighborhood or your name will be here next week."


System to Oversee Foster Care Dismantled in Budget Cutbacks
New York City has strict rules to protect the welfare of the 50,000 abused or neglected children it has placed in foster care.
There are deadlines for how quickly children should be adopted.
There are rules for how often caseworkers should visit them, and how often the children should see their natural parents.
But critics say there is no way to know whether these standards are met, because the city's Human Resources Administration, to save money, has eliminated its 10-year-old system of evaluating foster-care programs.


Italians Even Kiwi Series; Koch 2 Up Over Conner
It was a matter of finding the windshifts and then playing them for all they were worth today for the four boats that are struggling to win the right to sail for the America's Cup.
Italy's Il Moro di Venezia managed to pull off a last-minute upset over New Zealand in the finals of the challenger trials by coming from behind in the seventh leg of the match and beating the Kiwi team by a second, tying the five-of-nine-race series, 1-1.


The U.N. Today
General Assembly DISARMAMENT COMMISSION -- 10:00 A.M. and 3 P.M.
General information phone: (212) 963-1234 Tours are conducted 9 A.M.-5:45 P.M.


Corrections
A brief article on the Company News page of Business Day on March 6 about W. R. Grace &amp; Company's purchase of the food-service packaging business of Du Pont Canada Inc. described part of the deal incorrectly.
It does not include a Du Pont Canada plant.
A March 10 letter from Du Pont, pointing out the error, was delayed in reaching the editors.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
Bankers Trust Co., New York, a unit of Bankers Trust New York Corp., named Alexander G. Hesterberg senior vice president. *
California Water Service Co., San Jose, Calif., named Donald L. Houck, president, to the additional post of chief executive.


Quarterbacks in Draft: A Spotty Crop
The job of quarterback is the most glamorous, the best paid, and many would argue, the most important, in the National Football League.
But for the past few years, teams have been working harder and harder to find the right person to fill the position.
It's a search made more difficult because over the last nine years the college ranks haven't produced an abundance of tailor-made quarterbacks.
The league may never see another draft like the one in 1983, when six quarterbacks were taken in the first round.
There's been more grooming than booming among the young quarterbacks who have entered the draft since the likes of John Elway, Jim Kelly, Dan Marino, Bernie Kosar and Boomer Esiason in the early and mid-1980's.


American Airlines Cuts Fares
American Airlines announced yesterday that it was lowering full-coach and discount fares on many routes, in a calculated warning to weaker carriers that had undercut the simplified fare structure American announced less than two weeks ago.
American also changed the advance purchase requirement for its 21-day fare to 14 days, a change that will take effect next Monday.


Armco Steel
The Armco Steel Company said it intended to close a hot-strip rolling mill and associated units at its Ashland works by the end of July.
The company, a venture of Armco Inc. and the Kawasaki Steel Corporation of Japan said the shutdowns would eliminate the jobs of about 700 of the plant's current 3,650 employees.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
FBS Mortgage Corp., St.
Paul, a part of the First Bank System Inc., has filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for a shelf offering of up to $1 billion in mortgage pass-through certificates.
*
NAC Re Corp., Greenwich, Conn., has filed for $100 million in notes due 1999 through Dillon, Read &amp; Co.


Chief's Speech of 1854 Given New Meaning (and Words)
Since his death in 1866, Chief Seattle has grown in fame and stature to a point where he has become a sort of Abraham Lincoln of American Indians, a gifted orator and visionary leader.
This week, a book called "Brother Eagle, Sister Sky: A Message From Chief Seattle" is No. 5 on the New York Times best seller list for nonfiction.
Also this week, as part of the official celebration of Earth Day on Wednesday, organizers have asked religious leaders from around the world to read a famous letter from Chief Seattle to President Franklin Pierce.


Israel to Permit Reopening of Last Arab University Closed by Army
As a sign that life in the occupied territories is returning to more normal rhythms after four years of the Palestinian uprising, Israeli officials said today that they would reopen Bir Zeit University, the last Arab university still closed by military order.
Gen.
Danny Rothschild, the coordinator of activities for the Israeli Defense Ministry in the occupied territories, told university officials today that students in the school's science and engineering department could return to classes on April 29, and that the rest of the university would reopen during the summer semester.


Fed Gives New Evidence Of 80's Gains by Richest
The very rich increased their share of the nation's total pool of privately held property during the 1980's economic boom, researchers at the Federal Reserve and the Internal Revenue Service reported yesterday.
Total private wealth grew in the decade, and people at many income levels owned more assets at the peak of the boom in 1989 than they had six years earlier.
But the richest 1 percent of American households, all of them millionaires at a minimum, owned a bigger share of the total at the end of that period, according to the Federal Reserve's triennial Survey of Consumer Finances.
They accounted for 37 percent of private net worth in 1989, up from 31 percent in 1983.


Hershey Follows Mars on 5 Refund
Take that candy wrapper out of the waste basket.
Hershey, following in the footsteps of its archrival M&amp;M Mars, said yesterday that consumers would get a 5-cent refund for each candy wrapper mailed to the company.


In Baking Wasteland, a Restoration Attempt
FIFTY years ago the saltbush scrublands of the Sonoran Desert were filled with barrel and hedgehog cacti, the bizarre bat-pollinated night-blooming cereus and wolfberry plants dotted with their tomatillo fruits, as well as the hardy, gray-green saltbush scrub itself.
Coyotes chased jackrabbits, hawks sailed the skies and the burrowing owl guarded its young in tunnels dug out of the scorching 100-degree ground.
That was before farmers began discovering in the 1930's that for cotton farming these desert soils of Arizona could be even more productive with irrigation than the moister lands of the Southeast.
Over the years as the cotton industry saw boom and bust, farmers have plowed millions of acres of these lowland deserts only to abandon them later.
Today many of these deserted farms hold little more than dust devils and tumbleweeds.


Futures Panel Choice Is a Professor in Utah
The White House said yesterday that President Bush would nominate Steven Manaster to be a commissioner of the Commodity Futures Trading Commission.
Dr.
Manaster, who is 43, is a professor of finance at the University of Utah in Salt Lake City, but he was the commission's chief economist from June 1989 to September 1990.
As chief economist, he supervised a staff of about 100, engaged in analysis, research and market surveillance.


Chess
If you were to look for sympathy from Siegbert Tarrasch, challenger for the world championship in 1908, by saying you had lost a game by trying too hard to win, you would be met by the great teacher's acerbic, "No, you played to lose." As far as the irascible Tarrasch was concerned, a bad move was a bad move.
And that was that.
It is not recorded what Tarrasch thought about two players in an even position, both overstraining to win.
So maybe he would have been rendered speechless by the first-round game in the Klooster International Tournament in Ter Apel, the Netherlands, between the grandmasters Larry Christiansen of the United States and Vladimir Yepishin of the Commonwealth of Independent States.


Edinburg Journal; Where the Black Rhinoceroses Play
Scuffed and bruised from a recent unsuccessful mating dance with the shy female next door, Macho still comes lumbering when Calvin Bentsen offers a chunk of apple.
Macho, a 2,500-pound endangered black rhinoceros bull from Africa, is accustomed to being pampered on La Coma Ranch, Mr.
Bentsen's 2,200-acre spread about 25 miles northeast of McAllen on the Mexican border, where the prickly pear cactus and wild olive are now in bloom.


Hockey; Devils One Down but More or Less Up
As far as the Devils were concerned, their performance on Sunday came under the heading of standing up for each other and battling opponents who harbored notions of intimidation.
"The team is coming together," Coach Tom McVie said of the Devils' physical presence in the opening game.
"It's been talked a lot about it. It's something you need in order to win."


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats; Clinton Defends His Character to Supporters
Gov.
Bill Clinton today used the sympathetic surroundings of a hometown audience to defend his character against the criticisms of his detractors and appeal to his supporters to "stand up for what you know is true."
Speaking to a money-raising luncheon that attracted 1,000 supporters and increased the amount of money raised for the Clinton campaign in Arkansas to more than $2 million, Mr.
Clinton said much of the press coverage of his campaign had distorted his personal and government record.
He appealed to the audience, many of them state employees, to aid his campaign by telling voters around the country about his record in Arkansas before the Democratic convention in New York in July.


Single Amino Acid Creates Natural Rose-Colored Glasses
SOME people see the world through eyes in which the apples in an orchard shine a little redder and the blush on a baby's cheek flushes a little pinker.
According to two new studies, this rosier view of the world results from a difference in a single amino acid in the eye's red photopigments.
Ever since 1881, when Lord Rayleigh invented a standardized way of testing what colors people see, scientists have been puzzling over how and why people live in such differently hued worlds.


As China Looks at World Order, It Detects New Struggles Emerging
As the band strikes up for a new international order in the 1990's, one major power broods on the side of the ballroom, equally alarmed at the Western tune and at the prospect of being left out of the dance.
As China broods, it pumps more money into the military -- a 50 percent increase since 1989 -- and sells what it describes as civilian nuclear technology to Algeria and Iran.
The message seems to be that while China has lost strategic importance with the collapse of the Soviet Union, Beijing still has a dizzying capacity to disrupt the post-cold-war party.


Market Place; A Penny's Worth For T   Medical
IS a penny a share really worth $286 million in market value?
That seemed to be the case yesterday when the stock of T
Medical Inc. plunged $7.75, or nearly 20 percent, to $33.50, in the wake of an earnings report that was only a bit below what most analysts were forecasting.
The rapid fall, on heavy volume of 2.5 million shares in Nasdaq trading, stunned the company as well as its Wall Street fans.
"Most of the people here felt the stock would go up," said Dale R. Benzine, vice president for corporate affairs at T  .
"We had a good quarter, and it is confusing why the stock acted as it did."


A Wounded Angolan Town, Trying to Stay Alive
Every week or so, a droop-winged Ilyushin-76 lands at a small airstrip set amid the tall grass and scrub trees of the Angolan savannah and disgorges food and other supplies that keep this town alive.
The cargo, flown in by Russian pilots on contract for international aid agencies, also includes beer, whisky and cheap consumer goods that are trucked downtown and sold within minutes at the thriving black market.


Books Catch Up With New Windows
JUDGING from a recent weekday visit to the local software shop, the Microsoft Windows bandwagon is really rolling along.
It seemed that just about all of the dozen or so customers (it isn't a big store) were upgrading to version 3.1.
Of course, this gave the salesclerks an unparalleled opportunity to sell programs that work with Windows and books about 3.1.
The first two books on 3.1 to land on this desk are both from Microsoft Press, the publishing arm of the Microsoft Corporation.
"Concise Guide to Microsoft Windows 3.1," by Kris Jamsa ($12.95), truly is concise.
In 195 pages, including appendixes and index, Mr.
Jamsa covers everything from how to start Windows in the first place, through the much-improved File Manager module, and even descriptions of two games played under Windows, Solitaire and Minesweeper.


KUWAITIS BATTLING HUGE POOLS OF OIL
As the cost of restoring Kuwait's oil industry to its condition before the gulf war nears an estimate of $10 billion, the country still faces an environmental hazard of unknown proportions in the shape of huge oil lakes forming in the desert.
These oil lakes were created when retreating Iraqi forces sabotaged wells that did not catch fire but spewed their contents into the desert.
Some of the huge pools that were formed are now half a mile wide, more than a mile long, and 2 to 3 feet deep.
Source of Noxious Fumes
The oil is penetrating the soil, killing plants, birds and insects.
Its polluting effect has become this country's main environmental worry, replacing the overwhelming smoke from 752 wells set on fire by the Iraqis in February 1991 and put out with the help of a huge international force of firefighters by November.


The Mall as Cocoon; Safety, Both Real and Imagined, Is All
When Richard N. DeMerell arrives for work at the mall, he first removes the silver loop with the tiny skull that usually hangs from his earlobe and that definitely does not say "hi."
Then he slips into the crisp white shirt of a mall security officer with the blue sergeant's stripes and the gold badge.


Corrections
An article on Friday about cuts in New York City subway service misidentified the northern terminus of the A line.
The last stop is 207th Street in Manhattan.


Travel Questions Answered (Are We There Yet?)
QUICK, how many miles from Baton Rouge to Las Vegas? (Answer: 1,752.) How many miles from Houston to Halifax? (2,447.) And how long would it take to drive from here to Fairbanks, Alaska? (131.8 hours.)
Margaret Murray and Gary Mays need to know this and all the routings in between.
So do Elizabeth Rohmer and Betty Buchanan.
They sit before video screens here in a small, second-floor room where travel dreams are drawn on computer maps that will take many thousands of families across North America in coming weeks.


States See Connecticut Business as Ripe for Picking
Murray A. Gerber, whose small plastics company is hardly known outside Middletown, Conn., was stunned to get a personal invitation to lunch earlier this month with the former governor of Virginia, Gerald L. Baliles.
Mr.
Baliles made a personal pitch about the virtues of Virginia as a possible new home for Mr.
Gerber's 60-employee company, Prototype and Plastic Mold, and Mr.
Gerber said that when he left the restaurant he was "impressed as hell."


Still Bitter, Caterpillar Workers Return
Workers at Caterpillar Inc. returned to their jobs today, still bitter toward their employer and still frustrated that their five-month strike had brought them nothing.
Caterpillar, a maker of construction equipment, conducted long orientation meetings with workers to welcome them back and to try to eliminate tensions.
A Disgruntled Work Force
Although many of the 12,600 strikers came back to work today at five plants in Illinois, Caterpillar said that only 70 percent of the union work force would be back on the job by the end of the week.
So many production processes were changed during the strike, the company said, that the remaining workers must be brought in gradually so that the plants can gear up without problems.
But the company again gave assurances today that virtually all striking workers would be asked back.


Gallup, N.M., Tax-Exempts
A tax-exempt offering by Gallup, N. M., has been tentatively priced to yield a maximum 6.64 percent for an issue due in 2017 through a group of underwriters led by Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Company.
For investors seeking shorter maturities, the financing offers serial bonds with yields ranging from 5 percent in 1996 to 6.1 percent in 2002 and 6.5 percent in 2007.


Edward F. Fry, 56, A Historian Devoted to 20th-Century Art
Edward F. Fry, an art historian, a curator and a critic who specialized in 20th-century art, died on Friday at his home in Gladwyne, Pa.
He was 56 years old.
He died of a heart attack, said his wife, Sandra Ericson Fry.


2 West Virginia Players Injured in Car Wreck
Two West Virginia basketball players, WILFRED KIRKALDY and LAWRENCE POLLARD, were hospitalized in serious condition in Cumberland, Md., yesterday after a car wreck.
Kirkaldy, a reserve center, and Pollard, a reserve forward, had stable vital signs at Cumberland Memorial Hospital after the crash about 16 miles east of Cumberland on Interstate 68, said West Virginia's sports information director, SHELLY POE.


Baseball: National League; Pirates Win Seventh in a Row
Pirates 11, Expos 1
MONTREAL, April 20 (AP) -- Kirk Gibson hit a grand slam in Pittsburgh's nine-run ninth inning and the Pirates won their seventh game in a row this afternoon, behind the pitching of unbeaten Randy Tomlin.
Gibson hit a 3-2 pitch from Bill Sampen over the right-field fence.
Barry Bonds, who had singled to lead off the inning, followed later with a three-run homer, also off Sampen.
The Pirates sent 13 men to the plate as their former teammate, Bill Landrum, was rocked for five of the runs.
Sampen gave up the other four runs.


Prosecutor in Beating Case Urges Jury to Rely on Tape
The prosecutor in the trial of four white Los Angeles police officers made a final plea to jurors today to believe their eyes when they view the videotape of the beating of Rodney G. King, a black motorist who was subdued by repeated kicks and 56 blows from police batons.
As closing arguments began today after seven weeks of testimony by 55 witnesses, the prosecutor, Terry White, a deputy district attorney, brushed aside defense arguments that the officers followed proper procedure in the beating on March 3, 1991.
The beating caused widespread revulsion, touched off a national debate over police excesses and led for a search to replace Chief Daryl F. Gates.
That search ended last week when it was announced that Willie L. Williams, the Police Commissioner in Philadelphia, would succeed Chief Gates.
Defense witnesses have described the beating, which was filmed by an amateur photographer, as one that conformed with standard police guidelines on the use of force.
In the twisting and turning of the mostly prone Mr.
King, they have pointed to what they described as threatening movements that would have justified the officers' continuing use of force.
Final Showing of Videptape
Noting that Mr.
King had not been called to testify, Mr.
White said: "What more could you ask for? You have the videotape that shows objectively, without bias, impartially, what happened that night. The videotape shows conclusively what happened that night. It can't be rebutted."
Mr.
White concluded his statement with a final showing of the 81-second videotape and a question to the jurors, "Now who do you believe, the defendants or your own eyes?"
The defendants are Sgt.
Stacey C. Koon, 41 years old, and Officers Laurence M. Powell, 29; Theodore J. Briseno, 39; and Timothy E. Wind, 31.
Three of them have been suspended from the force without pay. and Officer Wind, a rookie without tenure, has been dismissed.
Lawyers for the four defendants will present their closing arguments at the conclusion of Mr.
White's presentation.
Their summations are expected to clash because Officer Briseno, who did not use a baton and is only shown kicking Mr.
King once in the head, has turned on his fellow officers, accusing them of acting "out of control." Charges and Penalties
If convicted, the defendants face possible maximum prison terms ranging from four years for Officer Briseno to seven years for Officer Wind.
Sergeant Koon and Officer Powell, who face a maximum sentence of seven years and eight months if convicted , are also charged with filing false police reports that played down the severity of the beating, a point Mr.
White said demonstrated that they knew they had broken the law.
Speaking of Officer Powell's police report, the prosecutor said: "He knew at that time and he knows today that what happened out there was wrong. It was unlawful. He could not afford to write a true police report."
The videotape, which has been dissected by defense lawyers and their witnesses, is unambiguous when viewed in its entirety, Mr.
White said.
"At some point reasonable force can become unreasonable, and you have to determine what point that is," he told the jury.
"When you reach the point on that tape where you say 'Enough is enough,' that's where reasonable force ends. And that is what this whole case boils down to."
Rather than showing an aggressive suspect, he said: "When you look at this tape, you have a man on the ground rolling around and they continued to strike him. What is he doing to be a threat to them?"
An independent commission headed by Warren M. Christopher, a former Deputy Secretary of State, called for wide-ranging changes in the department that sought to reduce some of the antagonism between the police and much of the city's population.
But Mr.
White made a point of telling the jury: "The Los Angeles Police Department is not on trial here. Mayor Tom Bradley is not on trial here. Chief Gates is not on trial here."
Mr.
White portrayed Officer Powell, who is shown on the tape delivering most of the baton blows, as cavalier and brutal.
"The only thing he told the truth about in this trial is when he spelled his name right," the prosecutor said.
Mr.
White also raised the issue of racial bias, referring to a computer message by Officer Powell before the beating in which he referred to a stakeout as "right out of 'Gorillas in the Mist.' "
"This is a racist statement" the prosecutor said.
"You have to wonder what was his motive when he was beating Mr. King."


Mr. Bush's Botched Bundles
An error in the program handed out at President Bush's $1.1 million fund-raising dinner in Dearborn, Mich., last week has laid bare a disreputable practice used by both parties to circumvent the Federal ban on corporate campaign contributions.
The practice is called "bundling." Corporate officials hit up their employees for individual contributions and then bundle them together as one huge gift.
Their goal: to buy influence with the candidate.
Bundling evades both the ban on corporate contributions and the $5,000 limit on gifts by political action committees, while assuring that the company's generosity is noticed.


Speeded Approval of AIDS Drug Is Termed Justified by Test Data
New data suggest that the Food and Drug Administration did the right thing last July when it voted to allow limited use of a new AIDS drug, even though it had not yet been fully tested, a panel of experts and the Commissioner of Food and Drugs said today.
The panel said the drug, didanosine, or DDI, had "demonstrated anticipated clinical benefit" the agency had hoped for in allowing it to be used.
But the committee declined for now to expand the drug's availability to people who had not first tried the standard therapy, the AIDS drug AZT.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Finance; Not Yet in Presidential Race, Perot Spends $400,000 on Campaign
Ross Perot, the billionaire business executive who says he is considering running for President this year as an independent, spent more than $400,000 of his own money on his campaign last month, according to the first official record of his campaign finances filed today with the Federal Elections Commission.
That is eight times the amount of their own money that Presidential candidates are normally allowed to use.
But, since Mr.
Perot is not accepting Federal campaign funds, he is not covered by the $50,000 personal contribution limit that applies to candidates who do accept Federal funds.
Other Reports Compared
Mr.
Perot, whose fortune is estimated at $2.5 billion to $3.5 billion, has said he is prepared to spend $100 million or more if he decides to run.
The Democratic and Republican nominees in the general election will be limited to slightly more than $30 million each, all of it public money.
What Mr.
Perot submitted today was the monthly accounting of his campaign receipts and expenses for March, the first month for which he has filed.
The documents showed that he raised $457,633.42 last month and spent $394,803.11.
President Bush's March report showed receipts of $4.7 million and expenditures of $6.9 million.
Gov.
Bill Clinton's report showed receipts of $4.9 million and spending in March of $5.4 million.
The report of former Gov.
Edmund G. Brown Jr. of California, Mr.
Clinton's major remaining rival for the Democratic nomination, was not available tonight.
Of the money Mr.
Perot raised, $409,823.77 came out of his own pocket.
Most of the rest, according to a statement by the Perot campaign, came from $5 contributions from more than 5,000 people.
Under the law, donations of less than $200 do not have to be itemized, and the donors' names do not have to be made public.
Mr.
Perot has said he would not seek contributions of more than $5.
But his campaign said some volunteers had spent more than that of their own money in various goods and services that were listed as "in kind" contributions.
Even though he is not accepting Federal money for his campaign, Mr.
Perot is still bound by the law that allows Presidential candidates to receive no more than $1,000 from any individual in the general election campaign and no more than $5,000 from any political action committee.
The Perot campaign's statement said the expenditures were used for petition drives to get Mr.
Perot's name on the ballot in all 50 states.
That drive did not begin to catch fire until late last month, so much more is likely to be spent in April.


Sinking Seawolf Won't Sink Jobs
Jobs, jobs, jobs.
That's the rallying cry of defense contractors who want to keep building arms America no longer needs.
Regrettably members of Congress, of both parties, are heeding the cry and trying to restore funds for weapons like the Seawolf submarine, whose mission sank with the Soviet threat.
The legislators need to look skeptically at the contractors' job claims.
Beyond a brief transition period, the size of the defense budget is unrelated to the unemployment rate.
That's because gains in civilian employment will offset the defense job losses -- even in Connecticut and Rhode Island, where much of the work on Seawolf submarines is done.


Review/Music; Comet's Orchestral Farewell
Catherine Comet's tenure as music director of the American Symphony Orchestra ended at Carnegie Hall on Sunday afternoon, not all that long after it had begun.
The occasion was a curious program devoted to Mussorgsky, Schumann and David Ott.
Miss Comet's hiring two years ago promised an answer to one of this orchestra's two major problems.
Since its honorable beginnings under Leopold Stokowski in the mid-1960's, the ensemble has trudged an undistinguished path.
The indifferent ensemble seemed to brighten under Miss Comet's skillful hand.


Princeton Student Falls From Tower
A freshman at Princeton University was in stable condition this morning after falling 40 feet while climbing the bell tower at Nassau Hall.
The student, Geoffrey MacArthur, 19 years old, was was trying to steal the bell's 45-pound clapper, investigators said.
Mr.
MacArthur, who is from Wilmington, Del., was climbing a lightning rod wire to the tower about 3:30 A.M. on Sunday when a bolt holding the wire gave way, investigators said.


Take This! Take That! Rangers Toughen Up.
The Rangers, a bit bullied in their 2-1 victory over the Devils on Sunday night in Game 1 of their Patrick Division semifinal series, resolved today to do something about it.
From Coach Roger Neilson to enforcer-in-waiting Tie Domi, the talk was tougher and nastier about Game 2 on Tuesday at Madison Square Garden.
The Rangers did not like the way Claude Lemieux badgered Brian Leetch, or how Lemieux and Scott Stevens worked over Kris King with their sticks and bodies.


El Al Profit Rises
El Al Israel Airlines today reported a profit in 1991 of $38.9 million, nearly triple its $14.1 million profit in 1990 when traffic slowed during the crisis leading to the Persian Gulf war.
Revenues rose by 12 percent from 1990 to $877.6 million in 1991.


Emotional Season Will Continue for Lakers
Their season seemed to be filled with only sadness and injury, and if the Los Angeles Lakers wanted to simply finish it and walk away, who could blame them?
But now it's April, the playoffs are just days away, and look who's here.
Isn't that the Lakers?


Profits Up at Nationsbank, Chase and Dime
Nationsbank, now the country's fourth-largest banking company, said yesterday that its first-quarter profits increased 95 percent, while earnings at Chase Manhattan rose 20.5 percent.
At the Dime Savings Bank, profits were five times as high as their very depressed level a year ago.
Like most other banking companies, Nationsbank, Chase and Dime said their first-quarter results benefited from a wider spread between the interest rates they paid for deposits and the rates they collected on loans and increased collections of fees from consumers.
All three were badly hurt by losses on real estate loans the last few years, but Nationsbank seems to be recovering more quickly than Chase or the Dime.


Neither the Nets Nor the Future Scares Fitch
Hours after his team clinched a playoff berth last Saturday night, Coach Bill Fitch quietly celebrated this rewarding and unexpected achievement into the early morning hours with a group of his closest friends.
He didn't identify the friends, but the logical presumption is that none of them owns or works for the New Jersey Nets.
Five years from now, if the Nets have evolved into a solid National Basketball Association contender, this might be the season that will be remembered as the one during which they advanced from lowly crawl to wobbly walk to light playoff run.
Possibly the ongoing turmoil pitting Fitch versus management and Fitch versus his players will have become less than a footnote to history.


Chain Takes Fashion Tongue-in-Chic
If exposed pipes, white walls and wooden crates are the height of store design and blue jeans and T-shirts the garb of national choice, then Express is a throwback to another age -- in fact, to another century.
Express stores, a division of Limited Inc., are a bit of Versailles tucked into 7,500 square feet of the local mall, and the young women's chic career and casual clothing they sell evokes Madison Avenue rather than Main Street.


COMPANY BRIEFS
*
Advacare Inc., Horsham, Pa., expects to report revenue of about $18.2 million and income before extraordinary write-offs of about $800,000 for the quarter ended March 31. *
Ameritech Corp., Chicago, joined an international consortium that will bid for the first cellular license in Sao Paulo, Brazil.


DINKINS IS PLANNING 20 HEALTH CENTERS TO SERVE THE POOR
Mayor David N. Dinkins said yesterday that New York City was planning to open 20 health centers to provide poor people with family doctors who will focus on preventive medicine.
At a time of national debate over how best to deliver health care and still reduce costs, the effort is the largest ever undertaken in the city and perhaps throughout the country.


Business Scene; Ousting Strikers A Costly Tactic
THE threat by Caterpillar Inc. to replace strikers with newly hired workers has raised an issue that neither the economics profession nor corporate executives have publicly addressed: Is it less costly to settle with strikers, or to hire new people at lower wages and fewer benefits, but bear the expense of training them and also the cost of lost production and profits until the new hires are as capable as the old staff had been?
Presumably Caterpillar's officials tried to weigh the relative costs before they threatened to replace 12,000 strikers -- a threat that was sufficient to bring the strikers back to work.
Undoubtedly, their efforts at cost analysis were partly successful and partly guesswork, because some of the costs of replacing strikers simply cannot be quantified, experts say.
But increasingly the demands of many modern workplaces appear to be making the replacement worker too costly a weapon.


Sales of Yugo End in U.S.
The Yugo, which attracted motorists in the 1980's with its low sticker price but drove them away with its quality problems, has been withdrawn from the United States market, leaving dealers and owners in the lurch.
Yugo America Inc. told dealers in a letter last week that the compact car was a victim of civil strife in its European homeland.


Don't Discourage Use of Congressional Gym
To the Editor:
Re "Congress and White House Shed Perks of Power With Rare Zeal" (front page, April 4): Of all the eliminated or scaled-down perquisites of Congress, the one that makes the least sense is the $400 charge for the gymnasium.
The gym was the home away from home for me.
There I met colleagues, especially those from the opposite side of the aisle, and discussed Congressional business in a placid atmosphere away from the politics and maneuvers in committee and on the House of Representatives floor, and immediately restored my body.


BankAmerica To Sell Data Unit
The BankAmerica Corporation has signed a definitive agreement under which Automated Data Processing will buy the assets and liabilities of BankAmerica's Business Services division, whose primary business is payroll processing.
Based in Roseland, N.J., Automated Data is one of the largest independent computing service firms in the United States, with more than 225,000 clients and $1.7 billion in revenues.


Using Natural Sounds, System Tries to 'See' Objects Deep in Ocean
THE day may be near when a submarine captain will be able to steer a course through a thicket of undersea obstacles merely by watching a video image of his ship's surroundings, an image generated not by light but from subtle fluctuations in the natural sound that permeates the oceans.
"Seeing" by natural sound appears to have come a long step closer with a series of experiments conducted recently by scientists at the Scripps Institution of Oceanography at La Jolla, Calif., and Florida Atlantic University in Boca Raton.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Candidate's Record; Arkansas Water Pollution Looms as a Campaign Issue
Four years after George Bush took a famous boat ride through Boston's polluted harbor and took control of the environmental debate in his Presidential quest, environmental specialists in the Administration say Mr.
Bush's re-election campaign is now deciding whether to make a similar campaign stop here in northwest Arkansas.
Across this splendid region of hump-backed hills, hardwood forests and emerald pastures an angry struggle has erupted over wastes from hundreds of millions of farm animals.


Corrections
A listing in the Social Events column on Sunday referred incorrectly to a benefit for CARE being held tomorrow.
The 8 P.M. performance of "A Streetcar Named Desire" is to be followed by a reception, not a dinner.


Review/Television; Suspicions vs. Proof In Mideast Banking Case
"The Bank of Crooks and Criminals," tonight's offering from "Frontline," at 9 on Channel 13, is out to show that movers and shakers in Washington made no move to shake up the Bank of Credit and Commerce International despite knowing it was a fount of corruption.
Relying heavily on Senate investigators, the program charges that the Justice Department, the Treasury Department and of course the Central Intelligence Agency knew about B.C.C.I.'s services to drug traffickers, arms dealers, terrorists and other unsavory elements around the world but obstructed efforts by investigators like District Attorney Robert M. Morgenthau of Manhattan to crack down.


Welfare Eligibility Checks Drag as Applicants Surge
New York City has been so swamped with people seeking welfare benefits in the last year that it has fallen way behind on checking to see that those already on the rolls are still poor enough to qualify for help.
The delays in checking eligibility mean the city may have paid out as much as $5 million more than it should have in welfare benefits, state social-services officials say.


Corrections
A picture of the singer Axl Rose on some copies of the television page yesterday was published in error and incorrectly captioned.
It was from publicity files and did not show the singer in "A Concert for Life," which took place yesterday in London.


Hongkong Bank
The Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corporation opened an office in Ho Chi Minh City, the former Saigon, its first presence there since the Vietnam War ended in 1975, the bank's Vietnam representative, Bill Cameron, said.
Mr.
Cameron, who said the bank wanted to play a part in Vietnam's economic growth, said the bank had not yet asked the Vietnamese Government for permission to open a full banking branch in Vietnam.
Hongkong and Shanghai is the eighth foreign bank to open a representative office in Vietnam, which is trying to attract overseas investment and modernize its own banking system.


Slimy Bacteria
Scientists say a slimy coating protects a type of bacteria that is the most common cause of infection among people who have artificial body parts, like limbs, joints and heart valves.
The coating enables the bacteria to stick to prosthetic surfaces and to infect the human body without being detected and attacked by the immune system.
A group of researchers at Harvard University and North Carolina State University studying various strains of staphylococcus bacteria, have found that those lacking the enzyme coagulase are coated with a slime composed of a polysaccharide, a chain of sugar molecules, that acts like a glue.
The polysaccharide shields the bacterial cell, making it difficult for the body's immune system to recognize and destroy the bacteria.


Madison Square Garden Cancels Circus Shows
Ringling Brothers and Barnum &amp; Bailey Circus performances at Madison Square Garden tonight at 7:30, Friday at 7:30 P.M. and Sunday at 1 and 5:30 P.M. have been pre-empted by New York Rangers and New York Knicks playoffs.
Matinees at 1 P.M. today and Friday will take place as scheduled.


By Design; Flyaway Scarfs
At Chanel they were the size of a sheet.
Donna Karan's were as large as pareos.
Marc Jacobs's mufflers trailed to the ankle.
The overscale scarf is suddenly sweeping back into fashion.
Not since the heyday of Halston in the 70's has so much fabric been flung with abandon over fashion.
For next fall, designers on both sides of the Atlantic have made the big wrap a major accessory.


At Kabul's Gates, Tough Rebel Chief
As rebel troops mass around Kabul, much of the Afghan capital's fate lies in the hands of a soft-spoken guerrilla commander with a wispy beard, craggy face and rakishly tilted Afghan woolen cap.
The commander, Ahmad Shah Masood, was the mastermind behind the drive of rebel and militia forces last week.
The rebels swept down from northern Afghanistan and besieged Kabul, forcing President Najibullah to flee.


Risky 'Realism' in Peru
Buoyed by support from desperate citizens and egged on by reckless associates, President Alberto Fujimori of Peru persists in his dangerous attempt at army-backed dictatorship.
He has a month to come to his senses.
The Organization of American States has given him until May 23 to begin restoring democracy or face economic sanctions.
An O.A.S. fact-finding mission begins work in Lima today.
Meanwhile, Peru's banned congress is moving to organize an alternative, constitutional government.


Baseball; No Matter Who's at Fault, Yankees Are Losers
In a memorable scene from an episode of "The Odd Couple," Felix explains that when you assume something, you make a donkey out of "you and me." The Yankees made a routine assumption yesterday, but they alone wound up being the donkeys.
"You assume he's out and you shouldn't," Don Mattingly, the Yankees' first baseman, said about the pivotal first-inning play that produced a 3-1 victory for the Cleveland Indians.


What to Wear In a Recession
Sportswear dressing, born during the Great Depression -- is with us again.
There are new pieces to put together in the separates scheme, which is a key to casual dressing.
The vest is a basic component, worn over a blouse or, new this season, over a jacket.
Leather is a major factor, to be mixed with other leather pieces or with silk and wool.
The scarf is a significant addition, large enough to serve as a blanket.


Sidelined at Texas
University of Texas officials have told Coach CLIFF GUSTAFSON not to allow STEPHEN LARKIN, a freshman outfielder who suffers from a heart condition, to play in games or practice, the player's mother says.
"Stephen called and said, 'They're not letting me play,' " SHIRLEY LARKIN said yesterday from her home in Cincinnati.
"I called the coach to find out why and he said the athletic director said he's not allowed to let Stephen play until they have done further testing because of his heart condition."


CHRONICLE
ROONE ARLEDGE, the president of ABC News, is to undergo surgery tomorrow to remove a malignant tumor of the prostate.
The 60-year-old television executive is not expected to require further treatment, said Joanna Bistany, his assistant, who is a vice president of ABC News.
Ms.
Bistany said Mr.
Arledge informed his staff of his impending absence yesterday at an editorial meeting.


Protesters Set For Collision On Abortion
The abortion rights debate here reached a new level of tension and intensity today as abortion-rights supporters massed outside a major abortion clinic in the morning and anti-abortion organizers held an evening rally that drew more than 1,000 in a meeting of prayer and solidarity.
The rally was the first major show of force here by Operation Rescue, which has vowed to close abortion clinics in the Buffalo area in what it is calling a Spring of Life campaign scheduled to last until May 2.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.25-6.5
6.25-6.5
9.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
6.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.68
3.87
5.79
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.69
3.64
5.69
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.86
3.76
5.79
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.24
7.10
8.01
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.01
7.92
8.29
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.97
8.88
9.35
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.70
6.68
7.29
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


A $40 Million Jackpot Requires Luck, and Sometimes a Commute


Corrections
A map yesterday with an article about East Orange, N.J., misidentified two major highways.
South of Perth Amboy, the New Jersey Turnpike runs into the western part of the state and the Garden State Parkway runs along the shore.


Ads Warn G.O.P. on Cutting Homestead Rebate Program
New Jersey Democrats today announced a $150,000 broadcast and direct-mail campaign to warn Republicans away from cutting the homestead rebate program, which returns as much as $500 to homeowners and renters.
A script of a radio commercial to be broadcast on stations serving the New Jersey market beginning Tuesday features ominous music and the warning, "They're after your money, and they know where you live."


Stocks Turn Lower and Dow Drops 30.19
Stock prices stumbled yesterday, losing the upward momentum gathered in last week's sparkling rally.
The Dow Jones industrial average, after soaring more than 110 points last week, gave back 30.19, ending at 3,336.31.


Dinkins's New Budget Approach: Looking Toward Re-election
After two years of budget proposals that tried to be fiscally correct even if they were politically unpalatable, Mayor David N. Dinkins is now trying hard to find enough good news to shape a budget that will make him more popular as his re-election campaign approaches.
In the last week, the Mayor has moved to restore library service five days a week at all branches, to rescind planned cuts in spending for capital construction, to propose new tax credits for businesses that donate to cultural institutions and even to spend more money to fix a smelly sewage plant in Harlem.


High Hopes for the New OS/2
AFTER five years of intense development, the International Business Machines Corporation is finally sending version 2.0 of its OS/2 operating system to the stores.
I.B.M. has described OS/2 2.0 as a "better DOS than DOS, and a better Windows than Windows."
It is clearly a better OS/2 than the first version of OS/2, which was enthusiastically ignored.
Announced in 1987 as the heir apparent to DOS, OS/ 2 has sold fewer than a million copies, mostly to I.B.M.'s large corporate customers.
In contrast, Microsoft's Windows 3.0 and the newer 3.1 have sold 10 million copies in the last two years.
Microsoft reports that it plans to sell 10 million more this year.


Drop in Black Ph.D.'s Brings Debate on Aid for Foreigners
For years American educators have worried about the small number of black students going on to receive Ph.D.'s, the degrees that make them eligible to become the professors and researchers of tomorrow.
In particular, they have been unable to explain why the number of black men who get their doctorates, small to begin with, has been cut in half since 1975.
The numbers are sobering.
Of the 36,027 Ph.D.'s granted in 1990, only 320 -- less than 1 percent -- were awarded to black men.
And 508, or just over 1 percent, were given to black women.


Market Place; A Penny's Worth For T   Medical
IS a penny a share really worth $286 million in market value?
That seemed to be the case yesterday when the stock of T
Medical Inc. plunged $7.75, or nearly 20 percent, to $33.50, in the wake of an earnings report that was only a bit below what most analysts were forecasting.
The rapid fall, on heavy volume of 2.5 million shares in Nasdaq trading, stunned the company as well as its Wall Street fans.
"Most of the people here felt the stock would go up," said Dale R. Benzine, vice president for corporate affairs at T  .
"We had a good quarter, and it is confusing why the stock acted as it did."


Abortion Bullying in Buffalo
Members of Operation Rescue, the anti-abortion group that created chaos in Wichita last summer, were greeted by a big sign when they arrived in Buffalo over the weekend: "You're not in Kansas anymore."
The message provided apt warning that Buffalonians who support abortion will not allow the sidewalk terrorists from Operation Rescue to shut down clinics unlawfully as they did in Wichita.
But it put a heavy burden on partisans on both sides to keep the demonstrations peaceful.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  DINKINS OFFERS PLAN FOR HEALTH CENTERS
Mayor Dinkins said New York City planned to open 20 health centers in poor communities to provide residents with family doctors who would focus on preventive medicine.
The effort, the largest ever undertaken in the city, will be watched closely in terms of the national debate over how best to deliver health care and still reduce costs.
A1.
Mayor's budget moves: looking ahead as re-election bid approaches.
News analysis, B2.
HAPPY LAND OWNERS GO ON TRIAL


Books of The Times; A Killer Strikes as Sea Turtles Fill the Streets
This time, however, Ms.
Hoffman does not attempt to turn her characters' stories into a metaphor for societal change.
Whereas "Seventh Heaven" became a heavy-handed allegory about the wrenching transition America made from the seemingly quiescent 50's to the confusions of the 60's, "Turtle Moon" aspires to be little more than a straightforward story, a murder mystery combined with a domestic drama about parents and children, estranged husbands and wives.
It's a story that showcases Ms.
Hoffman's assurance as a writer, and her less admirable penchant for situating her characters in a slick, tricked-up plot that's decorated with pointlessly whimsical asides.


CHRONICLE
Speaking of awards, the recipients of the second annual Stonewall Awards, which honor individuals whose efforts have enhanced the quality of life for gay men and women, have been announced, albeit with little fanfare and no public ceremony.


American Express Shifts Some Business
The American Express Company has realigned responsibilities for direct marketing for its charge cards following a marketing department reorganization.
A spokesman for American Express said yesterday that as the trade publications Advertising Age and Adweek had reported, Bronner Slosberg Humphrey in Boston and Wunderman Worldwide in New York had been named to handle work aimed at opening green and gold card accounts and keeping them active.


Poland Faces New Battle on Abortion
Poland's Roman Catholic Church and its Government supporters have redoubled efforts to restrict abortion, even as public opinion polls continue to show overwhelming support for a permissive policy on what has been Poland's most widely used form of family planning.
Nearly half the members of Parliament in this predominantly Catholic country have pledged to support a bill that would repeal the liberal 1956 law on abortion and allow the procedure only in cases of rape or a threat to the mother's life.
Violators would face prison sentences of up to two years under the proposal.


Baseball: American League; Jays Win Other Boston Marathon
Blue Jays 6, Red Sox 4
BOSTON, April 20 (AP) -- Roberto Alomar grounded a bad-hop double off shortstop Tim Naehring's glove with two outs in the 13th inning for the go-ahead run, and Toronto went on to beat Boston today for a split of their four-game series.
Alomar broke up the game after a balk by Tom Bolton (0-1), the third Boston pitcher, permitted Alfredo Griffin to take second.
Joe Carter, who has hit in 13 straight games, followed with a single off Peter Hoy, scoring Alomar with an insurance run.


CHRONICLE
Awards given to performers, writers and artists may be a dime a dozen (though usually worth much more than a dime), but rarely does anyone honor the patrons of the arts.
That is to be remedied today with the presentation of the new Mont blanc de la Culture awards, sponsored by the pen manufacturer, at a luncheon at the New York Public Library.


Hospital Corp. Profit Surges
The Hospital Corporation of America said today that it earned $76.9 million, or 50 cents a share, in its first quarter as a reincarnated public company.
Hospital Corporation, whose stock fell 37.5 cents on the New York Stock Exchange today, to $20.375, said its earnings for the three months that ended on March 31 rose 75.1 percent from its profit of $43.9 million a year earlier when it was a private company.


Patterns
Gordon Henderson's Future
Gordon Henderson, a New York designer who seemed on a star track two years ago, may be shopping for a new backer if he loses the support of his licensing partner.
Mr.
Henderson's designer collection is produced and sold under a licensing arrangement with World Hong Kong, which is headed by Ricky Sasaki, a mercurial Japanese garment executive with wide-ranging manufacturing interests in Asia.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11  CHINA AS WALLFLOWER
China seems out of step with the world as it faces what party leaders have called two new cold wars in the aftermath of the last one.
A1
A Chinese official has been expelled from the Communist Party.
A10  KUWAIT'S LAKES OF POLLUTION
Sprawling lakes of oil that seeps into soil and kills plants and insects has become Kuwait's main environmental worry since the smoke of burning oil wells cleared.
A1  ARMS TRANSFERS CONFIRMED
Washington confirmed that Saudi Arabia had illegally transferred American-made military equipment to Iraq, Syria and Bangladesh, but that the Saudis had said the shipments were "inadvertent." A9  BREAK WITH YUGOSLAVIA?
The U.S. is considering severing diplomatic relations with the Serb-dominated Government of Yugoslavia and closing the United States Embassy in Belgrade.
A3  KEEPER OF AFGHANISTAN'S FATE Much of the Afghan capital's fate lies in the hand of a soft-spoken guerrilla commander, Ahmad Shah Masood, the mastermind behind the ouster of President Najibullah.
A8
An Islamic rebel government is foreseen for Afghanistan.
A8  KHMER ROUGE SIGNS COMMITMENT
The Khmer Rouge, which was responsible for countless deaths during its reign in Cambodia, joined the nation's three other factions in signing two international commitments to respect human rights.
A6  SYRIA CHAFES AT SANCTIONS
Syria, uneasy over the United Nations embargo against Libya, has produced the first crack in widespread adherence to the sanctions by the Arab world.
A5  ABORTION RESTRICTIONS SOUGHT
Opposing public opinion, Poland's Roman Catholic Church and its Government supporters have redoubled efforts to limit abortion.
A3  Seville Journal: Expo '92 opens with icebergs and aquariums.
A4  In Luena, Angola, salvation flies on the wings of an Ilyushin-76.
A8  Israeli officials said they would reopen an Arab University.
A11  National A14-21  FOR THE RICH, A BIGGER SLICE
The very rich accumulated a larger share of the nation's total pool of privately held property in the 1980's economic boom, researchers at the Federal Reserve and the Internal Revenue Service reported.
The richest households accounted for 37 percent of private net worth in 1989, up from 31 percent in 1983.
A1  SHORTAGE OF BLACK PH.D.'S
Many factors have been blamed for the steep decline in the number of black men who get doctorates, but now some educators say another major cause is that universities make it easier for foreigners to get the financial aid than the nation's blacks.
A1  WEAK SPOT FOR CLINTON?
Governor Clinton touts his work on the environment, but during his tenure Alabama's White River region has become fouled with slime in the water and dead fish on the banks.
President Bush is debating whether to visit the area as part of his re-election campaign.
A20  RECRUITING CHARACTER WITNESSES
Governor Clinton asked a hometown audience to tell the rest of the nation that his character and record were true.
A20
Perot spent $400,000 on his unofficial campaign last month.
A21  LIMITING THE FEDERAL COURTS
The Supreme Court agreed to decide whether to limit Federal court review of state convictions that may have been obtained in violation of the Miranda rule.
A15  DEATH PENALTY MARCHES AHEAD
As California prepared to end a 25-year moratorium on capital punishment, people on both sides of the issue cast the state's action as a bellwether for the nation.
A14  BEATING TRIAL NEARS END
Prosecutors made closing arguments against four white Los Angeles police officers charged in the case of Rodney King, the black motorist whose beating was captured on videotape.
A14  A LONG ROAD TO RECOVERY
Three months after his arms were torn off and reattached, a North Dakota teen-ager spends six hours with his physical therapist.
He starts with jokes, but soon the strain of the therapy and prolonged uncertainty takes its toll.
A16  PUTTING ELOQUENCE IN HIS MOUTH
Since Chief Seattle died in 1866, environmentalists have imbued him with the oratorical and prophetic gifts of an Abraham Lincoln.
But a number of historians say the Northwest Indian chief never said most of what he is supposed to have said.
A1  Workers returned to Caterpillar, bitter and frustrated.A16  South Texas offered haven for the black rhinoceros.
A14  Metropolitan Digest, B1 DINKINS'S NEW HEALTH CARE PLAN
At a time of national debate over how best to deliver health care and still reduce costs, Mayor Dinkins said that New York City was planning to open 20 health centers to provide poor people with family doctors who will focus on preventive medicine.
A1  WOOING AWAY BUSINESSES
Business leaders and economic development officials say that although poaching on other state's businesses is an old and honored game, the effort has taken on new sophistication and aggressiveness in the last few years.
And Connecticut has become a target.
A1  Business Digest, D1  Science Times C1-10  How the metabolic chemistry of hibernation keeps the bear alive.
C1  Aggressive pose of young black males under psychologists' eye.
C1  Lost city emerges from sands.
C1  Speeded approval for an AIDS drug is said to be justified.
C3  Fate of an ancient symbol, the giant crane, hangs in the balance.
C4  Fashion Page B7  What to wear in a recession.
Obituaries B6  Benny Hill, British comedian  Arts/Entertainment C13-18  A challenge for rap music.
C13  Shelley Duvall, storyteller.
C13  A board game for the greedy.
C14  AIDS benefit concert.
C14  Word and Image: "Turtle Moon," a novel by Alice Hoffmann.
C17  Sports B8-15  Baseball: Yanks lose to Indians.
B9  Basketball: Far-away Knicks.
B14  Hockey: Rangers toughen up.
B12  Another North Stars upset.
B15  Running: Hussein and Markova win Boston Marathon.
B9  Editorials/Op-Ed A22-23  Editorials A22  Abortion bullying in Buffalo.
Risky "realism" in Peru.
Mr.
Bush's botched bundles.
Seawolf and jobs.
Letters A22  Russell Baker: The civility plank.
A23  A. M. Rosenthal: The wasteland myth.
A23  Michael Dorris: Noble savages?
We'll drink to that.
A23  Stansfield Turner: Freeze-dry The Bomb.
A23


Observer; The Civility Plank
As President I'd have television kick the lawyers out of prime time and put back cowboys.
In the 1950's when America was on top of the world, television had almost nothing but cowboys.
Now television has lawyers up to here, and America is not on top of the world, though it could be if it stopped acting like a drunken riot on the street corner and went for dignity and self-respect.


Shelley Duvall and the Tales She Tells to Children
In her production office, where an oversize dish that ran away with a bow-tied spoon is jettisoned not far from the giant Olive Oyl shoes she wore in the film "Popeye," Shelley Duvall, the actress with a propensity for portraying long-legged kooks on screen, is trying to explain why her career has veered off into the realm of children's programming.
"Well, I dreamed a lot when I was a child," she says, her mellifluous voice coated by a Texas twang.
"I'd be sitting at the dinner table and suddenly I'd just go into this staring thing. And my parents would go, 'Shelley, Shelley -- hey!' I wouldn't snap out of it until somebody shook me or spoke very loudly. But I just had a lot to think about. There's a lot to dream.


Test Runs for Futuristic Bus-Tube System
Long glass tubes packed with people may someday stand on street corners throughout New York City, essential elements in a computerized bus system capable of providing direct connections between buses and even with subways, transportation officials say.
Glimpses of that future are already in place, if only temporarily, at four corners in lower Manhattan where the bus tubes have been installed for a six-week demonstration.


3.9% Increase In Dole Profit
The Dole Food Company said today that its earnings for the first quarter increased 3.9 percent and that it was considering selling to the public a stake in some of its real estate operations.
Dole said its first-quarter earnings were $26.7 million, or 45 cents a share, up from $25.7 million, or 43 cents a share, for the 1991 period.
Revenues increased 7.7 percent, to $753 million.


Youth Home Shaking Its Neighbors
The house at 1315 Plimpton Avenue looks just like the other cleanly renovated brick row houses on one of the nicest blocks in one of the many careworn sections of the Bronx.
One winter morning, though, its neighbors woke up to find that it was about to become a detention home for children awaiting trial.


Hamptons All Atwitter For Bluebird
In the 19th century, gourmands ate them and hatmakers used them on bonnets.
In the mid-20th century, pesticides wiped out 90 percent of them, and they virtually disappeared from New York State.
But now, bluebirds are making a comeback on the East End of Long Island, and residents here are doing all they can to help.


RESULTS PLUS
Tennis Once Again, Borg Loses Early  Bjorn Borg, returning to the scene of his comeback last year, made another quick exit yesterday with a 7-6 (7-5), 6-2 loss to injury-hampered Wayne Ferreira at the Monte Carlo Open.
In a first-round match lacking excitement and quality play, the 20-year-old South African was able to beat Borg despite a thigh problem that affected his play throughout the match.
Ferreira had to receive treatment to the back of his left leg after the third game.
He continued to play, making errors but still keeping pace with the 35-year-old Borg.
Ferreira is ranked 22d in the world and beat John McEnroe in the quarterfinals of the Australian Open.
Borg is currently tied for 1,094th.
After a first set that lasted 71 minutes, Ferreira raced through the second set in 25 minutes.
After losing the opening set despite having a set point in the 10th game, Borg said he became frustrated.
The match was almost a duplicate of Borg's first-round loss last week in Nice, when a flu-weakened Frenchman, Olivier Delaitre, beat him, 7-5, 6-2.
Last year, amid heavy publicity, Borg tried to start a comeback here but lost in the opening round to Jordi Arrese of Spain in straight sets.


Correction Head's Father Tied to Mafia
The father of New York City's new Correction Commissioner, Catherine M. Abate, was until three years ago a high-ranking member of an organized-crime family, New Jersey law-enforcement authorities said yesterday.
Ms.
Abate, who took command yesterday of the Correction Department, the agency that runs the city's jail system, said the allegations against her father, Joseph F. Abate, were "ridiculous." In an interview yesterday, she said that her 89-year-old father was "suffering from senility" and that he had been confined by illness to his home in Margate, N.J., a suburb of Atlantic City, for many years.


Hanson Names Chief Executive
Hanson P.L.C., the British industrial conglomerate, said yesterday that Derek C. Bonham had been promoted from chief financial officer to the new position of chief executive.
Mr.
Bonham, 48 years old, will continue to report to Lord Hanson, the chairman, and will be responsible for operations outside the United States.
Hanson, with more than half of its operations in the United States, also said that William M. Landuyt, the 36-year-old chief financial officer of Hanson Industries, the company's American arm, would move to London to assume Mr.
Bonham's old position.


Bid to Save Rare Crane Advancing
THEY are the tallest flying birds in the world, at five feet.
Their bodies are pale gray, their heads a flash of color: green beaks, orange-yellow eyes and bright red necks.
Their call, which they use to defend their territory, can be heard for miles.
Now these birds, members of a subspecies called the Eastern sarus crane that is found in Southeast Asia, are the object of intense preservation efforts.


KHMER ROUGE SIGN RIGHTS COVENANTS
The Khmer Rouge, together with the leaders of Cambodia's three other mutually hostile factions, signed two international covenants today that committed them to far-reaching respect for human rights.
In their four years of draconian rule in the 1970's, the Khmer Rouge caused countless Cambodian deaths.


Japanese Stock Market Remains Stuck in a Rut
After a month of steep declines, the battered Tokyo stock market continued to settle into a deep rut Monday and today.
A growing number of Government officials and investment experts here say the slump could last for months.
And trading volume has been limp this week -- a further sign that many investors are abandoning stocks, analysts said.
Adding to the general pessimism were an unexpected surge in some interest rates and signs that the Government is unable to arrest the stock market decline.


Black Scientists Study the 'Pose' Of the Inner City
THE aloof swagger and studied unflappability projected by young black men from inner-city urban areas is a "cool pose," a bit of posturing that insulates them from an otherwise overwhelming social reality, a new report holds.
While the cool pose is often misread by teachers, principals and police officers as an attitude of defiance, psychologists who have studied it say it is a way for black youths to maintain a sense of integrity and suppress rage at being blocked from usual routes to esteem and success.
Indeed, black inner-city youths are so besieged that they seem "an endangered species," in the words of Dr.
Richard Majors, a psychologist at the University of Wisconsin at Eau Claire, who has written on the cool pose.


Suspect Is Arrested In Assault of Priest
A Brooklyn man, who the police believe is part of a gang that preys on bank customers, was arrested yesterday and charged in the assault and robbery of a 69-year-old Roman Catholic priest as he stood on line to deposit the tuition from his church's parochial school at a Brooklyn bank last Thursday, the police said.
The suspect, Todd Brown, 24, of 554 Bainbridge Street in Bedford Stuyvesant, was charged with four counts of robbery, one count of assault and one count of criminal possession of a weapon, said Detective Capt.
Charles Wells of the 14th detective division.


Foreman to Give Holmes Helping Hand
Here is a case of life imitating art.
Remember the film in which Rocky Balboa calls on Apollo Creed to get him in fighting trim?
Well, the former heavyweight champion, Larry Holmes, is taking a page from the Sylvester Stallone playbook: He is having George Foreman help him to form his strategy for his June 19 heavyweight title challenge asgainst Evander Holyfield in Las Vegas, Nev.


Private Owner to Sell L.I. and Queens Water Utility
Facing a groundswell of customer protests over rates, the corporate parent of the largest water company in Queens and Nassau County said today that it would sell the utility and withdraw from the water business.
The company, JWP Inc., based in Purchase, N.Y., said the sale was part of a corporate restructuring because of reduced earnings.
It said it would seek buyers for the Jamaica Water Supply Company, which serves 118,000 homes in Queens and western Nassau, and also for the Sea Cliff Water Company, a small utility with 4,200 customers in northern Nassau.


Prices Tumble on Economic News
Prices of Treasury securities tumbled yesterday and long-term interest rates moved above 8 percent again as dealers reacted to stronger-than-expected economic reports released late last week and began to establish positions for the $60 billion worth of new coupon-bearing issues to be sold over the next three weeks.
The Government securities market was closed on Friday in most countries in observance of Good Friday.
And European financial markets were closed yesterday for Easter Monday.


Ford's Jaguar Bet: Payoff Isn't Close
To Ford Motor Company shareholders wondering when to expect a decent return from Ford's $2.5 billion acquisition of Jaguar, the British luxury car maker, Nicholas Scheele's words will not be comforting.
When asked when that time might come, Mr.
Scheele, Jaguar's new chairman, replied: "My boss at Ford said it took us close to 40 years to get any benefit from the acquisition of Lincoln. I hope it doesn't take us 40 years to get any benefit out of Jaguar."


Byron K. Callan, 77, A Law Firm Founder
Byron King Callan, a founding member of the Manhattan law firm of Cichanowicz, Callan &amp; Keane, died on Friday at Huntington Hospital in Huntington, L.I.
He was 77 years old and lived in Cold Spring Harbor, L.I.
His family said he died of leukemia.
Mr.
Callan, a native of Manhattan, received his law degree from Fordham University in 1936.
He served as an operational intelligence officer in the United States Navy in World War II and worked after the war as counsel for United States Navigation Inc., a freight carrier.


Judge to Start Weighing Charges That Owners Were at Fault in Happy Land Fire
There were too many people at play in the Happy Land Social Club early in the morning of March 25, 1990.
There were too few sprinklers to douse the fire that burst through the only door.
And there were too few emergency lights to guide to safety the 87 people who suffocated or burned to death.
While those facts were clear when inspectors first sifted through the ashes, recriminations are still flying more than two years later over who is to blame.
Today in Bronx Criminal Court, a judge will begin weighing charges brought by the city that the deadly conditions inside the club were the fault of the owners of the building.
In turn, lawyers for the two defendants have contended that the city is prosecuting their clients to deflect blame from itself.


AIDS Pro Bono Group Plans A Wider Fight for Publicity
NEARLY six months after beginning their first organized fight against AIDS, leading advertising executives say they are making headway in widening the exposure of their broadcast and print messages.
Yet many of these executives, frustrated and impatient over what they feel to be a lack of progress in getting free ad time and space from the media, say they will intensify their efforts.


Hibernating Bears Emerge With Hints About Human Ills
THIS time each year, bears are lumbering out of their dens after a long deep sleep that rivals that of Rip Van Winkle.
For up to five months, bears do not eat, drink, defecate or urinate; they have no nutrition, no waste disposal and yet they emerge each spring groggy but healthy.
Hibernating bears are able to defy some basic rules of mammalian physiology, research has shown.
Five months of inactivity would lead to disastrous bone thinning in humans, but leaves bear bones unharmed.
Although bears do not move their large muscles for more than 100 days, they actually increase their lean body mass in the den.
And while bears do not urinate during their months of hibernation, their bodies show no buildup of urea, a toxic waste product of protein metabolism normally eliminated by the kidneys.


People
*
Diane S. Ashley, 36 years old, was named to the new position of president at Ciociola &amp; Co., New York and Philadelphia.
She was previously executive vice president of strategic planning.


And Now, a Trashathon, Sponsored by the Bag
To the Editor:
Today, a Sunday, I saw in my neighborhood park a walkathon in support of a worthy cause.
With the advent of spring we will see other walkathons and bikeathons.
Not to take anything away from the participants or the worthy causes they support, the practical side of me would like to see a trashathon, an event where contributions could be made based on the number of shopping bags filled with trash collected from our parks, highways or streets.


Hunting at St. John's
The St.
John's University search committee that will recommend a successor to its retired basketball coach, LOU CARNESECCA, conducted its first meeting yesterday.
A source familiar with the meeting, a telephone conference call, said that the committee only spoke in general terms.
The Rev.
DONALD J. HARRINGTON, St.
John's president, established the committee a week ago today, after Carnesecca's announcement.
Offices at the university were closed yesterday at the end of the holiday period.


I.B.M. to Show New Work Station
I.B.M. will introduce its most powerful computer work station today, a rack-mounted computer designed for advanced scientific and commercial applications.
The Risc/System 6000 Powerserver 970 adds special hardware features and new software advances and is priced from $97,822.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
OAKLAND ATHLETICS -- Recalled Jerry Browne, infielder, from Tacoma of the Pacific Coast League.
Optioned John Briscoe, pitcher, to Tacoma of the Pacific Coast League.
National League
HOUSTON ASTROS -- Placed Ken Caminiti, third baseman, on the 15-day disabled list.
Recalled Eric Yelding, infielder, from Tucson of the Pacific Coast League.
MONTREAL EXPOS -- Optioned Doug Simons, pitcher, to Indianapolis of the American Association.
Recalled Mel Rojas, pitcher, from Indianapolis.
Transferred Darren Reed, outfielder, from a 20-day injury rehabilitation assignment to the 15-day disabled list.
PITTSBURGH PIRATES -- Placed Bob Walk, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list.
Recalled Dennis Lamp, pitcher, from Buffalo of the American Association.
SAN FRANCISCO GIANTS -- Assigned Mike Benjamin, infielder, to Phoenix of the Pacific Coast League on a rehabilitation assignment.
Basketball  National Basketball Association
GOLDEN STATE WARRIORS -- Added Tom Tolbert, forward, to the playoff roster.
Removed Jud Buechler, forward, from the playoff roster.
INDIANA PACERS -- Activated Rik Smits, center, from the injured list.
Removed Randy Wittman, guard, from the playoff roster.
SEATTLE SUPERSONICS -- Activated Benoit Benjamin, center, from the injured list.
Removed Bart Kofoed, guard, from the playoff roster.
United States Basketball League
NEW JERSEY JAMMERS -- Signed Marvin Andrews, guard, and Kermit Holmes, forward. College
BLOOMFIELD -- Named Bob Cordero men's basketball coach.
MURRAY STATE -- Extended the contract of Scott Edgar, men's basketball coach, through the 1995-96 season.
RHODE ISLAND -- Extended the contract of Al Skinner, men's basketball coach, throuth the 1995-96 season.
WALSH -- Named Steve Loy men's basketball coach.
WISCONSIN -- Named Stan Van Gundy men's assistant basketball coach.


Sports of The Times; Stanley Cup Is a Whole New Season
MUST not fight.
Must not get caught out of position.
Must not make foolish mistakes.
Like Mel Brooks cavemen reciting their mission to themselves, the hockey players act out their evolutionary progress from brawlers to artisans.
It happens every spring, as regular as taxes.
The hockey season ends; the Stanley Cup season begins.
This amazing transformation is ingrained in the players' genes, like the hereditary instincts that make swallows return to Capistrano or salmon swim upstream to spawn.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The very rich accumulated a larger share of the nation's total pool of privately held property during the 1980's, researchers at the Fed and the I.R.S. reported.
The richest 1 percent accounted for 37 percent of private net worth in 1989, up from 31 percent in 1983.  [ Page A1. ]


Oh, Those Aching Reds
JOSE RIJO's elbow aches, BARRY LARKIN's knee hurts, and the Cincinnati Reds' momentum is broken.
What more could go wrong on another disastrous West Coast trip?
The Reds knew they had problems when they left Cincinnati last week with a four-game winning streak and a growing injury list.
They didn't realize the problems would get so bad so quickly.


Baseball; Torborg Still Trying To Figure Out Way As National Leaguer
Jeff Torborg had been sure it was a myth, this humorously arrogant notion that managing in the National League was measurably more difficult than doing so in the American League.
"I thought it was the N.L. managers pumping themselves up," said Torborg, who managed the Chicago White Sox from 1989 to 1991.


Miscellany
*
Skybox International Inc., Research Triangle Park, N.C., formerly Impel Marketing Inc., has signed Magic Johnson as its first corporate spokesman.
It is the first endorsement agreement Mr.
Johnson has made since disclosing he has the virus that causes AIDS. *
J.
Greg Sherry, former director of communications for Spalding Sports Worldwide, Chicopee, Mass., has formed the Sherry Group, a communications concern based in Warren, N.J., with offices in New York and Wilbraham, Mass.


China Ousts a Top Aide From Party
The Communist Party Politburo has ordered the expulsion of a senior official from the party on the ground that he revealed state secrets and spread counterrevolutionary propaganda, according to a party document reportedly now being circulated among high officials.
The expulsion will also strip the official, Bao Tong, a 59-year-old advocate of political change, from his seat on the 175-member Central Committee.
The expulsion suggests that a criminal trial is likely soon for Mr.
Bao, who has been imprisoned since May 1989 and is the highest-ranking official arrested in the aftermath of the Tiananmen democracy movement three years ago.


Networks Are Paying a Costly Price
Evidence of sanity in the spending for sports rights is mounting:
The National Football League agreed to give $28 million in relief to NBC, ABC and CBS in recognition of the slow advertising marketplace.


Israelis Arrest Kahane's Son For an Attack on a Mosque
The Police in Jerusalem today arrested Binyanim Zeev Kahane, the leader of a far-right group called Kahane Chai, and charged him with vandalizing a mosque in a Muslim village on the West Bank.
Mr.
Kahane is the son of Rabbi Meir Kahane, who founded the militant Jewish Defense League.
Rabbi Kahane was slain in New York City in November 1990.


3d Cabby Shot in 3 Days
A livery cab driver was shot and critically wounded last night after answering a radio dispatch to pick up a passenger in the East New York section of Brooklyn, the police said.
It was the third shooting of a cabdriver in New York in the last three days.
The driver, Gabino Serreire, of 69 Vermont Street in Brooklyn, was in critical condition last night at Brookdale Hospital.
He had answered a call from his dispatcher at the New Lots Car Service about 11 P.M., a police spokeswoman said.


Q&amp;A
Solid Tires
Q.
Why can't tires be made of solid rubber, so they can't be punctured?


A Call to Prayer as Passover Continues


Bridge
Throughout the 1930's, Asbury Park, N.J., was famous as the scene of national championships.
The country's most famous players could be seen in action there, stretched out comfortably in rocking chairs.
Whether this induced thought or sleep is unclear.
After 1941 the Asbury Park Convention Center became too small to house a national championship, although regional play continued there until 1969.
Bridge came back to Asbury Park the weekend of April 4-5, but not at the Convention Center: a New Jersey Bridge League sectional tournament was played at the Berkeley-Carteret Hotel, where many of the experts stayed in the early days of the game.


Market Place; A Penny's Worth For T [ 2 ]  Medical
IS a penny a share really worth $286 million in market value?
That seemed to be the case yesterday when the stock of T [ 2 ]  Medical Inc. plunged $7.75, or nearly 20 percent, to $33.50, in the wake of an earnings report that was only a bit below what most analysts were forecasting.
The rapid fall, on heavy volume of 2.5 million shares in Nasdaq trading, stunned the company as well as its Wall Street fans.
"Most of the people here felt the stock would go up," said Dale R. Benzine, vice president for corporate affairs at T [ 2 ] .
"We had a good quarter, and it is confusing why the stock acted as it did."


In Malls, Controversy and Politics Are as Welcome as Crime
When the protester dressed in the Santa suit came to the mall to urge a revolt against the Connecticut income tax, it fell to Sgt.
Richard N. DeMerell throw him out.
The mall's protective services officers are the arbiters of who can say what at the mall.
Their employers, the mall managers, have decided that when it comes to politics, protest, and other disputes, very little can be said inside their walls.


Bill to Quiet Wailing Car Alarms Draws Criticism
A measure to restrict what kinds of car alarms can be used in New York City and how long they should be allowed to bleat met substantial criticism at a City Council hearing yesterday, as everyone agreed that the alarms are a runaway irritant, but no one could agree on how to rein them in.


Baker Weighing a Break With Belgrade
Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d is considering a break in American relations with the Serbian-dominated Government of Yugoslavia and the closing of the embassy in Belgrade, Administration officials said today.
Mr.
Baker was impressed seven days ago by the visit here of Haris Silajdzic, the Foreign Minister of Bosnia and Herzegovina, who told him that Serbian militiamen and Yugoslav Army units had invaded his republic, killing civilians.


Benny Hill, 67, English Comedian And Creator of TV Show, Is Dead
Benny Hill, the English television comedian whose mischievous grin and cherubic looks somehow made him a master of double-entendre, British bawdy style, and ultimately gained him a kind of international cult status, was found dead last night at his home in southwest London.
He was 67 years old.
While the cause of death was not determined, Mr.
Hill's chronic heart condition had been well publicized in the London newspapers.
The police in Teddington, his hometown, discovered the body after neighbors grew concerned after not seeing Mr.
Hill for two days, a spokeswoman for Scotland Yard said last night.


Peru Wants Stability More Than Due Process; Worse Could Follow
To the Editor:
My only addition to your coverage on Peru is that something needs to be said about why President Alberto K. Fujimori dissolved Congress, suspended the Constitution, imposed censorship and arrested politicians.
Mr.
Fujimori was elected in 1990 without an established political party, and largely because he was not a professional politician.
Two major political parties, the American Popular Revolutionary Alliance and Accion Popular, were chastened and disgraced in the public's eye because of their inability to solve the political, social and economic problems that plagued their regimes in the 1980's.
The Unified Left, another important political party, is a disjointed and often recalcitrant Marxist coalition.


In Mexico Too, Cave Art Scrubbed Away
To the Editor:
"French Youth Clean a Cave and Damage Prehistoric Art" (news item, March 22) is shocking, but not unique.
I can attest that three priceless line drawings of the Olmec culture -- a figure and two animal heads, dating from 1000 to 500 B.C. -- have been erased in the Juxtlahuaca Cave, State of Guerrero, Mexico.
When I first visited the milelong cave in 1966, guided by Enrique Ortega, the son of the caretaker, and accompanied by Gillett G. Griffin of Princeton University, I realized that the drawings and polychrome murals were of the Olmec culture, which thrived in Mexico from about 1200 to 400 B.C.
In an article in Natural History magazine for April 1967, I identified the drawings and paintings as Olmec, the earliest true cave paintings then known in the New World.
You reported the news April 14, 1967, with a photograph of one of the paintings and a rendering by Frances Pratt of the now-vanished drawings.


Baseball; Steinbrenner Seeing Vincent at End of Dugout
The next-to-last obstacle in the way of George Steinbrenner's possible return to power with the New York Yankees should be cleared today when a lawsuit brought against Fay Vincent, the commissioner of baseball, by a former Steinbrenner lieutenant is formally dropped.
Lawyers for Leonard Kleinman are expected to file papers with the United States District Court in Manhattan seeking to have Kleinman's $30 million lawsuit against Vincent discontinued, a move that comes five days after Steinbrenner and Kleinman, the former chief operating officer of the Yankees, settled their differences over salary and the suit against the commissioner.


Quotation of the Day
"Inequality is at its highest since the great leveling of wages and wealth during the New Deal and World War II." -- CLAUDIA GOLDIN, economic historian.  [ A17:1. ]


Multimedia Profits Rise
Multimedia Inc. said today that first-quarter earnings rose 15.5 percent, as gains in cable-television and entertainment revenues more than offset declines in newspaper and broadcast revenue.
Multimedia earned $10.4 million, or 28 cents a share, compared with $9 million, or 24 cents a share, in 1991.
Revenue rose 5.7 percent, to $126 million, from $119 million a year earlier.


INSIDE
Afghan Rebel Chief Is Key
As rebel troops mass around Kabul, much of the Afghan capital's fate lies in the hands of a soft-spoken guerrilla commander.
Page A8.
Limiting the Federal Courts
The Supreme Court will decide whether to curb Federal court review of state convictions that may have been illegally obtained.
Page A15.
New Fare Cuts by American
American Airlines announced that it was cutting full-coach and discount fares on many routes, putting pressure on weaker carriers.
Page D1.
World's Fair Opens in Seville
A giant world's fair opened in Spain to coincide with the 500th anniversary of Columbus's voyage to the Americas.
Seville Journal, page A4.


Accounts
*
Bob Evans Farms Inc., Columbus, Ohio, narrowed the review on its $17.7 million account, previously at Campbell-Mithun-Esty , Chicago, to two finalists: Eire Partners, Chicago, and J. Walter Thompson Detroit.
A decision is expected by June 1. *
Solgar Vitamin Co., Lynbrook, L.I., to Kirshenbaum &amp; Bond, New York, for the company's account, previously handled by Follis DeVito Verdi, New York.
Billings were not disclosed.


Vincent Jefferds, 75, Walt Disney Executive
Vincent Harris Jefferds, a creative marketing executive in the Walt Disney organization for three decades, died April 12 at his home in Los Angeles.
He was 75 years old.
A statement from Disney Consumer Products, a division of the Walt Disney Company in Burbank, Calif., said he died of a heart attack.


Record Companies Are Challenging 'Sampling' in Rap
The practice of sampling -- electronically copying bits of sound from another artist's recordings -- is a prime element in rap music.
But recent lawsuits against sampling have raised concerns that rap records in their present form will become too expensive to produce.
The challenges have some record-company lawyers thinking anew about what constitutes fair use of artists' material.
Others in the music business are worried that a clampdown on sampling would adversely affect the creativity of rap artists.
Sampling is central to the ethos of rap, or hip-hop, which originated in poor urban neighborhoods where borrowing bits of many songs to build a piece of music began as a necessity and evolved into something of an art form.


On My Mind; The Wasteland Myth
Everybody knows that American politics is an intellectual wasteland, a desert barren of clear and courageous thought.
Everybody knows it, but it's not true.
It is one of those myths pounded into our heads day after day until it becomes accepted as truth.
At that moment it does become a kind of reality, affecting the country's vision of what it is, where it wants to go and how in Heaven to get there.


Seville Journal; The World's Fair Opens, but Where's Columbus?
Replicas of the Nina, Pinta and Santa Maria are moored along the Guadalquivir River, so it cannot be said that Christopher Columbus has been entirely forgotten in the giant world's fair that opened here today to celebrate the quincentenary of his voyage to the Americas.
But it did not go unnoticed that King Juan Carlos did not mention the great navigator by name when he inaugurated the last -- and largest -- universal exhibition of the 20th century.
Columbus, it seems, has become too controversial of late.
Instead, the stars of the show are Seville, Spain and humanity.


Game Imitates Art With Greed, Malice and Spite
In a small corner of the entertainment business, greed is still good.
Without it, there's no way to win at Let's Buy Hollywood, a new board game that rewards such enduring human qualities as naked ambition, malice, envy and spite.


Boston Marathon; Boston Traffic Flows, and Hussein and Markova Speed Along
With ideal weather conditions and other runners setting an early pace too fast to sustain, Ibrahim Hussein of Kenya and Olga Markova of Russia were swept along at the Boston Marathon today, finishing with the second-fastest times ever run on the course.
For Hussein, the 33-year-old defending champion who had also won in 1988, the rewards were substantial, $60,000 in prize money and acknowledgement by the Kenyan athletic federation that he would be one of three marathoners to represent his country in the Barcelona Olympics this summer.
His winning time of 2 hours 8 minutes 14 seconds lowered his own national record by 29 seconds and ranked as the 16th fastest marathon run anywhere.


Home Loan Banks To Set Interest
The Office of Finance for the Federal Home Loan Banks plans to announce today the interest rates for a three-part debt offering totaling $1.265 billion that will be handled through various securities dealers.
Among the securities offered for sale are a $315 million two-year issue to mature on April 25, 1994; a $610 million three-year issue due on April 25, 1995, and a $340 million five-year security due April 25, 1997.


Syria Trying to Breach Air Embargo on Libya
Syria, uneasy over the United Nations embargo against Libya, has produced the first crack in widespread adherence to the sanctions by the Arab world.
Syrian officials, who have offered public support to Libya, tried unsuccessfully to get neighboring countries to give airspace clearance for a Syrian Arab Airlines jet that was scheduled to fly from Damascus to Tripoli today.


Vikings Get a Cultural Face Lift, In Time for a Mere Quincentennial
For centuries after the marauding Vikings retreated to their native Scandinavia, around the year 1060, Roman Catholic congregations in Western Europe would routinely intone the words "A furore Normandorum libera nos, Domine," praying for protection from the wild men of the north.
In modern times, novels, comic books and movies have kept alive the image of the Vikings as giant bearded pagans who attacked unsuspecting towns and cities to the south, ransacking their churches for treasures and carrying off their women as slaves.
They were tough, yes, but how uncivilized!


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday about the resignation of the chairman of the Stride Rite Corporation identified the new chairman incorrectly.
He is Ervin Shames.


U.S. Says Saudis Sent U.S.-Made Arms to Iraq and 2 Other Nations
The Bush Administration today confirmed reports that Saudi Arabia engaged in unauthorized transfers of American-made military equipment to Iraq, Syria and Bangladesh.
Administration officials said, however, that they had brought these unauthorized transfers to the attention of both Saudi Arabia and Congress, as required by law, and had been told by the Saudis that the shipments were "inadvertent."


Peru Wants Stability More Than Due Process
To the Editor:
The events you report in "Peru Suspends Democracy, Citing Revolt" (front page, April 7) may seem dramatic and alarming at first glance; however, the institutional takeover by President Alberto K. Fujimori and the army deserve at least a careful investigation.
Independent polls show that more than 70 percent of Peruvians agree or go along with the measures taken by the President.
The international community has nothing but condemnation, and that is understandable.
International observers see only an assault on elected institutions.
Peruvians see a ray of hope.
The institutional takeover was announced to alleviate the pressing problems of Peru: terrorism, violence, corruption and economic disarray, almost anarchy.


Don't Discourage Use of Congressional Gym; Madison's Example
To the Editor:
Members of Congress eschewing the perquisites of office (front page, April 4) might recall James Madison.


Capital Cities/ABC Net Falls 28.7%
Capital Cities/ABC Inc. said yesterday that its earnings for the first quarter fell 28.7 percent and that the ABC network had reported a loss.
The company attributed the weak performance to the absence of revenues from the Super Bowl and the National Football League's Wild Card playoffs, as well as from the Academy Awards, which ABC broadcast this year but in the second quarter instead of the first as in 1991.
The company also cited the continued weakness in advertising demand.


Colgate Corrects Mix-Up in Copy
The Colgate-Palmolive Company has the advertising equivalent of spinach on its teeth.
As Colgate moved recently to increase its advertising spending by 16 percent, a chunk went into buying full-page newspaper ads in 23 markets last month for an advertisement that said the "calcium in Colgate helps fluoride penetrate teeth," thus providing protection against cavities.
The ad carried the American Dental Association's seal of approval.


The Frankincense Route Emerges From the Desert
THE archeologists who recently announced the discovery of the legendary lost city of Ubar in the Arabian Peninsula have found the remains of another major emporium in the ancient frankincense trade: the ruins of an even larger city near the coast of the Indian Ocean.
The new discovery is considered a significant step in establishing the full scope of the frankincense traffic at its most prosperous time, at the height of the Roman Empire in the early centuries after Christ, and at one of its major sources, in the Qara Mountains of southern Oman.
This seems to remove any remaining questions about how and where the prized commodity was shipped across the Arabian desert by a network of caravan routes to Mesopotamia and the Mediterranean and by ships across the sea to India.


Honors
*
Kenneth R. Lamm, senior vice president and management supervisor at Cramer-Krasselt, Milwaukee, has been awarded the Silver Medal of the Milwaukee Advertising Club.
The award will be presented at a dinner tomorrow.


New York State Needs Tough Hate-Crime Law
To the Editor:
The recent attack on a Hasidic man in the Crown Heights section of Brooklyn is another outrageous and criminal act of bigotry.
The victim was physically assaulted and verbally abused by the perpetrator's chant of "Hitler, Hitler, Hitler."
This kind of viciousness is both special in character and increasing in frequency.
It is the kind of bias crime that is the subject of tough legislation now pending in the New York State Legislature in Albany.
The proposed law would substantially increase penalties when a crime is motivated by anti-Semitism, racism or bigotry of any kind.
It has passed the Assembly but languishes in the State Senate.


New Loans Still Elude Olympia
Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd., which met with 100 of its lenders last week, has so far been unable to persuade the banks to provide it with desperately needed fresh loans.
One banker indicated that if the company did not get at least some of the money by the end of the week, it might be forced to seek bankruptcy protection for some of its assets.
Olympia &amp; York asked its lenders on April 13 for about $175 million in new loans for its work on Canary Wharf, a 71-acre office project in London, and about $85 million for general Canadian operating expenses that it must pay off by the end of the week.


47 Floors Planned For Tower On 67th St.
A team that includes a former top New York City development official is planning a 47-story apartment tower near Lincoln Center, with a 10-screen movie theater and a post office at its base.
And neighbors, looking warily at several enormous proposals in the West 60's -- including Donald J. Trump's Riverside South development along the Hudson River -- are already mobilizing for a fight, although they are not quite sure how to wage their battle.


Alamo Rent A Car Offering Uniform Rates Nationwide
Alamo Rent A Car Inc. said yesterday that it was offering new, lower rates that would be uniform throughout its 102 locations nationwide.
But the rate cuts, which will last until June 24, did not immediately set off a widespread price war.
Hertz was the only other car rental company to match any of the new rates offered by Alamo, whose share of the car rental market is estimated to be less than 10 percent.


Love Life of Antelopes Blooms on Smelly Turf
THE key to success for love-hungry African antelope males is not necessarily being bigger or bolder or any better than the competition, but instead seems to be living on the smelliest home turf, researchers have found.
Scientists from Cambridge University studying two species of African antelope found that more than anything else females seem to like a good, pungent territory.
Researchers found these smells were so important that an unpopular male could become an instant hit if the territory he was on was sprinkled with soil from a more successful territory.
The males exchange proprietorship of the most successful territories every one or two days.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Week; Bush and Clinton Face A Long, Familiar Road
The two parties are sliding into a general election campaign with all the reassuring rituals of modern Presidential politics.
President Bush is back out on the hustings, talking about his commitment to change and a reinvigorated domestic agenda, just as he did in 1988. (A tacit admission that this message, somehow, did not get conveyed during four years of running the Government.) Gov.
Bill Clinton is trying to make the transition from little-known Democratic Governor to potential President, just as Michael S. Dukakis tried in the spring of 1988.
Other Democrats are busily engaged in another party tradition: carping about their probable nominee.


No. 2 Officer Is Named Stride Rite Chairman
The board of the Stride Rite Corporation, as expected, elected Ervin R. Shames as chairman yesterday.
On June 1, he will replace Arnold S. Hiatt, who will devote himself full time to being the chairman of the Stride Rite Charitable Foundation.
Mr.
Hiatt, who is 64 years old, will continue to be a member of the company's board.


Knicks Go Out of Way To Prepare
The Knicks may be in South Carolina, but their minds are on Detroit.
The Knicks opened their mini-camp today at the College of Charleston, preparing for their three-of-five-game playoff series against the Detroit Pistons, which starts Friday night at Madison Square Garden.


High Court to Rule on Limiting Criminal Appeals
The Supreme Court agreed today to decide whether to restrict severely Federal court review of state convictions that may have been obtained in violation of the Miranda rule, which requires the police to advise criminal suspects of their constitutional right against compelled self-incrimination.
Such a restriction, which the Court appears likely to impose, would mark a substantial further contraction of the jurisdiction of Federal judges to review petitions for writs of habeas corpus from state prison inmates.
These petitions challenge the constitutionality of convictions or sentences.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Earnings
Citicorp, Chemical, Bankers Trust, Wells Fargo and Banc One all reported strong earnings, and their stocks posted solid gains.
Citicorp said it earned $183 million, thanks to higher profits in its consumer business and gains on the sale of various investments and subsidiaries.  [ Page D1. ]
Amoco said its net income fell 70.9 percent, providing the first look at what analysts expect to be a series of large profit declines within the oil industry.  [ D1. ]


Morris Fires 5-Hitter To Bring Mark to 3-0
Blue Jays 2, Indians 1
TORONTO, April 21 (AP) -- Jack Morris pitched a five-hitter and Roberto Alomar hit a two-run homer as the Toronto Blue Jays won tonight for their 13th consecutive victory over Cleveland.
Morris (3-0) struck out eight and walked none in his second complete game, and increased his record against Cleveland to 30-10.
He retired his final 12 batters in order.
Dennis Cook (0-2) allowed two runs and five hits in six and two-thirds innings as the Indians lost their eighth straight in the Skydome.


'How Many Men in America. . . .'
BOB COSTAS of NBC won his third Sports Emmy as outstanding host and JOHN MADDEN of CBS won his eighth as outstanding analyst Monday night.
CURT GOWDY, formerly of NBC and ABC, received the Lifetime Achievement Award for a career he did not always view as a plum.
"I used to go home," Gowdy said at the ceremony, "get a bottle of beer and sit in the kitchen and complain to my wife about the traveling and sometimes the criticism and she'd say, 'Stop and think about how many men in America would like to have your job?' "


Youth, 18, Arrested In Officer's Stabbing
An 18-year-old Bronx youth was arrested yesterday and charged with stabbing an unarmed off-duty New York City police officer six times on Sunday.
The officer had told three teen-agers to stop scrawling graffiti on a subway car in the South Bronx.
The youth, Nicholas Garrick of 930 Grand Concourse in the Bronx, was charged with attempted murder in the stabbing of Derrick Boddie, a 29-year-old officer on his way to his job at Bronx Central Booking, at 161st Street and Grand Concourse.


Sealy and Lappas Are Honored
MALIK SEALY of St.
John's has been named the top college player in the New York metropolitan area for the second year in a row.
Sealy, who averaged 22.6 points a game, was named winner of the Lieut.
Frank J. Haggerty Award, which is given by the National Invitation Tournament and the Metropolitan Basketball Writers Association to the best player from 64 colleges in the New York-New Jersey-Connecticut area.
STEVE LAPPAS, who led Manhattan (25-9) to the most victories in school history and has since accepted the coaching job at Villanova, received the Peter A. Carlesimo Division I coach of the year award.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
Aero Corp., Dallas, an aircraft maintenance, modification, and engineering unit of Whitehall Corp., appointed Edward Shockley president and chief executive. *
Calvin Klein Cosmetics, New York, a unit of the Calvin Klein Inc., named Karen Quinn senior director, marketing communications.


Political Lives in Fiction's Mirror -- Excerpts from three forthcoming novels in an election year; 'Hard Line'
In Helsinki, Finland, before the end of the cold war, a U.S.
President and a reform-minded Soviet leader meet to discuss disarmament.
The President was seated in a comfortable wing chair that afforded him a clear view of the forest.
Anthony Winthrop, the Secretary of State, took a seat on a wooden chair with a woven rush seat, his legs primly crossed at the ankles.


Personal Health
THE daffodils are up, the robins are back and people freed at last from the confines of winter are plunging headlong into springtime activities: cleaning, painting, gardening, hiking, playing tennis, golf and baseball.
So aching backs, sore knees and elbows, allergic reactions and other problems will not be far behind.


Is Simms Going to San Diego? No Way, Giants' Young Says
Less than four days before the National Football League draft, questions on the status of Phil Simms, the Giants' backup quarterback, have resurfaced.
A person on the West Coast familiar with pro football business said the San Diego Chargers were interested in trading for Simms and a deal may be announced Sunday, when the N.F.L. draft takes place.
According to that person, the Giants intend to draft quarterback David Klingler of Houston in the first round and may try to trade up to be sure of getting him.


No Bed of Roses


A Rabbi's Voice Is Heard in Sing Sing


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about Saudi transfers of American-made military equipment referred incorrectly at one point to those who received it.
As noted elsewhere in the article, American officials said that Iraq received 2,000-pound bombs and that Syria and Bangladesh received military transport vehicles.


The Court's Rush to Kill
When the Supreme Court overturned the final stay of a California execution early yesterday, it issued an order unlike any in its history: "No further stays of Robert Alton Harris's execution shall be entered by the Federal courts except upon order of this Court." Mr.
Harris was quickly returned to San Quentin's gas chamber and executed for two wanton 1978 murders.
The Supreme Court's order meant that nothing Mr.
Harris's lawyers might say could possibly matter.
After years of delay, the edict was understandable, and the justices do have the last word.
But rarely do they impose it
before
the lower courts have ruled.
Capital punishment and Chief Justice Rehnquist's program to administer it faster have again bent the Court out of shape.


F.B.I. Promises Gains to Blacks In a Settlement
The Federal Bureau of Investigation, accused by black agents of discriminating in promotions, transfers and assignments, announced an agreement today to promote some of them and provide dozens of others with new jobs and special training.
Under the agreement, the bureau said it would allow outside consultants to review its promotion system and would accept fundamental changes in how it selected, groomed and evaluated employees for advancement to the senior managerial ranks.


Time Warner Rebounds With a $3 Million Profit
Time Warner Inc. said yesterday that its net profits for the first quarter swung to $3 million, from a loss of $50 million in the comparable quarter last year.
The company achieved the turnaround largely through a sharp drop in interest expenses after paying off part of its debt with proceeds from a stock offering.


Review/Television; Facing Corruption Close to Home
Maybe it's the law of averages or maybe it's just Michael Ontkean, but the USA Network has found itself a reasonably decent movie, the kind of moody, hard-boiled urban morality tale that used to star Dan Duryea, with maybe Howard da Silva in a supporting role.
USA's "World Premiere Movie" presentations are generally low-budget disaster areas, but "Legacy of Lies," set for 9 tonight, doesn't let modest production values get in its undeniably curious way.
The scene is Chicago, its glittering night skyline overlaid with a bluesy music track.
The gangsters are stirring once again, only in this "Godfather" variation the mob families are Jewish.
Zack Resnick (Mr. Ontkean) is a scrupulously honest cop assigned to investigate the street killing of a prominent orchestra conductor.
Apparently, the thugs got the wrong man.
Zack's partner, Sam Flowers (Joe Morton), advises him not to dig too deeply.
Zack plunges ahead.
Foolish hero.


CHRONICLE
One of the biggest draws in town on Saturday?
It's not a show, not a rock concert, not a ball game.
Rather, it is a forum at Hunter College entitled "Women Tell the Truth: A Conference on Parity, Power and Sexual Harassment," with Prof.
ANITA F. HILL as the keynote speaker.
A capacity crowd of 2,000 people is already scheduled to attend, and another 1,500 have been told there is no more room.
"The responses stunned us," said GLORIA STEINEM, who will introduce Professor Hill.
"We cut off reservations on April 13, and even then there was a big waiting list. This is a year in which women are finally saying about many of the men in decision-making positions, 'They just don't get it.' There has been an enormous amount of outrage and energy released by many things, but clearly the match to the fuse was the Clarence Thomas hearing.


When You're the 'Governor's Man,' Lumps Are Part of the Job
Impatiently tapping her toes as she waited outside a locked meeting room for the arrival of "the Governor's man," Janet Haitsma reeled off a litany of reasons why her fondness for Gov.
Jim Florio had waned.
"Automobile insurance stinks, he raised the sales tax to 7 percent and he taxed toilet paper," said Mrs.
Haitsma, who said she voted for Mr.
Florio three years ago because "he seemed like such a nice fellow."


Dr. Bernard Jacobs, 68, Orthopedic Surgeon
Dr.
Bernard Jacobs, an orthopedic surgeon and clinical professor at Cornell University Medical College who was an authority on the spine, died on Sunday at his home in New Rochelle, N.Y.
He was 68 years old.
Dr. Jacobs died of heart failure, said his wife, Ingrid.


After Years Under Wraps, A Midtown Park Is Back
Like wildlife after a forest fire, New Yorkers ventured back into a splendiferously renovated Bryant Park yesterday, curious but wary, hopeful of reclaiming the park from illicit drug trade and trying to go about their business in a place that did not feel quite familiar.
The $8.9 million restoration of the park between 40th and 42d Streets behind the New York Public Library on Fifth Avenue has been three years in the building but 12 in the making.
It will be officially unveiled on May 14 but was unofficially ushered in yesterday with a morning tree-planting ceremony beneath a gloomy sky.


For the Night Stand, a Library Of Intellectual Bedtime Snacks
ALL those who keep food books on your bedside table, raise your right hand.
If food is what you like to read about before you go to sleep, you are in luck this season, with essay collections from Edward Behr and Barbara Kafka, two of this country's most thoughtful and interesting food writers.


Linemen, 34 Juniors Bolster N.F.L. Draft
The way a National Football League team views each draft often depends on the particular vantage point.
If you are the Dallas Cowboys and have two picks in each of the first three rounds, then this year's draft looks rosy.
If you are the Minnesota Vikings and have no picks until the fourth round, then this is a draft full of potential, but also one with few players who can make an immediate impact.


U.N. Chief, in India, Vows to Press Afghan Effort
The United Nations Secretary General, Boutros Boutros-Ghali, said today that he would press ahead with efforts for national reconciliation in Afghanistan among the warring factions, although uncertainty surrounds his peace effort.
Speaking briefly at the airport here soon after arrival, Mr.
Boutros-Ghali said the United Nations was committed to insuring the territorial integrity and political independence of Afhanistan.


60-Minute Gourmet
SOFT-SHELL crabs are in their cyclical season once again, arriving in the Northeast mostly from ocean waters off the Middle Atlantic States.
As the weather grows warmer, they will be harvested farther north.
When a blue crab, the species most often seen in markets, sheds its shell, it expands by as much as a third.
Blue crabs are particularly meaty at this point.
They must be removed from the traps immediately or hard-shell crabs may devour them.


5 White Legislators Join Mandela Group
The African National Congress effectively gained a beachhead in Parliament today when five white legislators switched allegiance from the small Democratic Party, once the political home for white liberals, to join the congress.
Though the African National Congress refuses to recognize the legitimacy of Parliament because it excludes blacks, its leadership expressed delight today over its new members, clearly hoping that more whites of prominence would follow.
The congress has been struggling to win support beyond its traditional black base.


Book Notes
Rockin' for Runyon
The hottest ticket in town these days is the revival of "Guys and Dolls," the musical based on characters from Damon Runyon's stories.
But hotter even than tickets to the show are Runyon's books, which, it seems, are out of print.
While the Martin Beck Theater was ringing up record sales, local bookstores were ringing up nothing but disappointment.
Even a random check of several used-book stores turned up no Runyons.


Sports of The Times; The Bulls At High Tide
HERE, in the Venice of the West, where people now paddle through the hallways of their offices, the N.B.A. playoffs come just in time.
It may take some minds off the flooding of the Loop area from the waters of the Chicago River: What could come first, a second Bulls championship or a dry Wacker Drive?
While the United States Army Corps of Engineers and assorted other agencies attempt to battle the flood disaster, now in its second week, and radio reports inform where to find mass transportation shuttles to avoid the saturated streets and sodden subways, the Bulls, high and dry, and happy about it, began preparation yesterday to defend their title.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: On The Road; The Night of a Lifetime As Brown Meets Match
Jerry Brown knows that some days, and some states, turn out better than others.
That's the way the karma crumbles.
Plagued by a flurry of critical news reports, trapped in a monologue that sounds more stale than stormy, Edmund G. Brown Jr., the former California Governor, has been careering around Pennsylvania.
Gov.
Bill Clinton is ignoring him, and contributions to his Presidential campaign's "800" number have dropped off.


2d Jury to Begin Deliberations in Tourist's Slaying
A Manhattan jury will begin deliberations today on the fate of three men accused of killing Brian Watkins, after hearing the prosecution yesterday accuse the defendants of murdering the 22-year-old Utah tourist and robbing his family "just so they could go dancing."
"They showed no remorse for what they did, no regret," said Assistant District Attorney Thomas Schiels.
"They just saw the Watkins family as easy pickings."


2 Cabbies Shot With Same Gun, Police Say
Two gypsy-cab drivers who were shot to death in separate incidents about a mile apart over the weekend were killed with the same .380 semiautomatic handgun, the police said yesterday.
It was not clear whether the same person killed both men, said Deputy Inspector Lawrence Loesch, a police spokesman.
"All we know is that it was the same gun," he said.


Kleinman Decision Close but Lagging
As Yogi Berra once said, "It ain't over till it's over." In this instance, the remark applies to the three-pronged legal hassle involving Commissioner Fay Vincent, George Steinbrenner and Leonard Kleinman.
Kleinman's lawyers had been expected to file papers in United States District Court yesterday discontinuing Kleinman's lawsuit against Vincent.
That step was part of an agreement between Kleinman and Steinbrenner under which the Yankees would pay Kleinman $1 million he contends they owe him.


Informal or Rude?
To The Living Section:
People like the woman applying makeup on the subway, along with those who eat their meals wherever they please, give informality a bad name  [ "Informality Reigns, and Good Manners Get a Bad Name," April 1 ] .
These types are not informal.
They are rude, showing no regard for the rights of others.
Who wants to smell their food or have them perform their morning rituals at such close range?
Have you ever sat behind someone combing her hair on a bus and wondered whether dandruff might soon land on your lap?


New York State Mortgage Offering
A $130 million financing by the State of New York Mortgage Agency was tentatively priced through underwriters led by Bear, Stearns &amp; Company.
Half the issue comprises serial bonds priced to yield from 4.6 percent in 1994 to 6.5 percent in 2004, with a longer-term issue due 2015, priced to yield 6.95 percent.


Mubarak Meets Qaddafi and Sees Little Progress
President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt said today that there was "a ray of hope" for a resolution to the current impasse between Libya and the United Nations over two suspects wanted in the bombing of a Pan Am jetliner in 1988.
But commenting as he emerged from a meeting with the Libyan leader, Col.
Muammar el-Qaddafi, in the Egyptian coastal town of Sidi Barani, Mr.
Mubarak conceded that "the matter needs work."


Amoco Net Falls 70.9% In Quarter
The Amoco Corporation said today that its net income fell 70.9 percent in the first quarter, providing the first look at what analysts expect to be a series of large profit declines within the oil industry.
Excluding a special gain of $311 million in the corresponding quarter a year ago related to an accounting change, the earnings decline was 52.4 percent, to $234 million, or 47 cents a share, from $492 million, or 98 cents a share.
Revenues fell 12.3 percent, to $6.4 billion from $7.3 billion.


The Post of President Is Filled at Banc One
The Banc One Corporation, a rapidly expanding bank based in Columbus, Ohio. yesterday named Donald L. McWhorter president, filling a previously vacant post.
He will be responsible for most day-to-day operations, freeing John B. McCoy, the chairman and chief executive, to focus on broader issues.
"It is important to continue to expand our executive management depth as our company continues to expand," Mr.
McCoy said.


Turkey Protects Its Citizens of Kurdish Origin
To the Editor:
In "Double Trouble for the Kurds" (editorial, April 1), you fail to depict realistically the situation of Turkish citizens of Kurdish origin.
After the Persian Gulf war, the attention and sympathy of the world focused on the plight of the Kurds in Iraq.
In 1988, and again in 1991, Turkey did its utmost to assist Iraqi Kurds fleeing atrocities in Iraq.


Pepsi and Coke Set Nutrasweet
The Pepsi-Cola Company said it had a signed a long-term agreement for the Nutrasweet Company to continue to supply aspartame for sweetening its soft drinks.
After the announcement, the Coca-Cola Company said it had signed a long-term agreement in December extending its relationship with Nutrasweet, a unit of the Monsanto Company.


New York Steps Back From the Energy Brink
To the Editor:
Cancelling the massive Hydro-Quebec power contract (news article, front page, March 28) will not only preserve the Canadian subarctic and the land rights of indigenous peoples, but it will also protect New York State's ability to make its own energy decisions for many years to come.
The irreversibility of the enormous scope of engineering work that was proposed would have had immense impacts on both sides of the border.
Once those economic obligations, legal entanglements and physical alterations to the land were in progress, the consequences of the actions would not have been removable.


SURPLUS IN BUDGET EXPECTED FOR YEAR BY NEW YORK CITY
The Dinkins administration said yesterday that New York City would end this fiscal year with a substantial surplus and therefore would not have to borrow to help balance next year's budget.
The news represented a major turnabout from the budget trauma that has so dominated the first half of Mayor David N. Dinkins's term, highlighted by such Draconian threats as closing the Central Park Zoo.


METRO DIGEST
RIPPLES FROM A SCANDAL
Across New York, New Jersey and Connecticut, United Way organizations are suffering from the scandal that has shaken the United Way of America.
As a result, the region's United Way directors -- from the $19,600-a-year executive in Sullivan County, N.Y., to the $291,000-a-year New York City chief -- are preparing to do battle for their personal reputations and the future of their charities.
Already, unprecedented numbers of employees at New York area companies have canceled the pledges they made in the fall, and some spring fund-raising campaigns have been postponed.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  DINKINS ANNOUNCES A BUDGET SURPLUS
The Dinkins administration said the city will end this fiscal year with a substantial surplus and will be able to avoid borrowing to balance next year's budget.
The news represented a major turnabout from the budget trauma that has so dominated the first half of Mayor Dinkins's term.
While a year ago, he threatened to close the Central Park Zoo, yesterday the Mayor was promising $3 million to fix up the Prospect Park Zoo.
A1.
BACKING FOR A COMMISSIONER
Governor Cuomo, Mayor Dinkins and other political leaders rallied to the support of New York City's new Correction Commissioner, Catherine M. Abate, after New Jersey law-enforcement authorities said that her father had been a high-ranking member of an organized-crime group until three years ago.
Mr.
Cuomo praised Ms.
Abate, as "one of our finest public servants." B3.
A BEGGAR CALLS IT QUITS
After years of standing on New York streets with a tin cup, Thomas Armstrong, a 64-year-old blind man who was injured two weeks ago when a cab mounted a midtown Manhattan sidewalk and hit him and his dog, said it was time to leave the city.
"I'm afraid to go back now. I don't think I want to be on the streets of New York anymore. I guess I've lost my nerve." B3.
Deliberations to start in tourist's slaying.
B2.
Indictment in bombing of real-estate office.
B3.
Harvey Myerson wraps up his defense in Federal fraud trial.
B4.
REGION  A SURPLUS IN WESTCHESTER
Continuing a long tradition, Westchester County announced a surplus of $22 million in its $1.1 billion 1991 budget and plans to rehire some workers who were laid off.
But officials said they would still push for an increase in the county sales tax.
Critics questioned whether the county had deliberately overestimated its spending and whether the tax increase is needed.
B5.
THE RABBI OF SING SING
Irving Koslowe has been the rabbi of of the maximum security prison in Ossining, N.Y., for 42 years, serving what some might consider the most cloistered Jewish community in the country.
"People ask me what I'm doing, bringing matzoh ball soup to a bunch of killers," he said, "But maybe we can make some change." B5.
THE GOVERNOR'S STAND-IN
Officially, he is a traveling representative for Governor Florio.
But lately, Harold H. Spence Jr.'s job has been more akin to the stunt man who takes the pasting for the star.
"I've been called a lackey, a yes man for the Governor and a lot worse," he said.
B5.
About New York B3  Chronicle ?&lt;&gt;? &lt;&gt;B7


Gains in Deciphering Genes Set Off Effort to Guard Data Against Abuses
Genetic engineers' success in reading the blueprints of life is touching off wide-ranging efforts to regulate the way information about heredity can be collected, used, maintained and disseminated.
These efforts, including action by state legislatures and in Congress, are prompted by rapid progress in gene research and fears that the technology could set off bitter disputes between those who seek to keep their genetic makeup private and employers, insurance companies or even prospective spouses who want to know all they can about a possible employee, customer or mate.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Apr. 17
Apr. 10
Apr. 19
1992
1992
1991
Gasoline production, daily
6.7
6.8
6.8
Distillate production, daily
2.8
2.9
2.8
Gasoline stocks
217.5
215.5
204.9
Distillate stocks
92.5
90.5
97.2
Crude imports, daily
5.7
6.9
4.5
Product imports, daily
1.8
1.6
2.3
Crude stocks
349.4
346.8
337.9
Crude production, daily
7.3
7.3
7.4
Refinery utilization (%)
86.0
86.8
83.9
Source: American Petroleum Institute


A Higher Rock Bottom For Many New Air Fares
American Airlines has spent two weeks trumpeting the broad cuts it has made in air fares.
What it has not talked much about is that on hundreds of routes, including ones as well traveled as New York to Chicago, its rock-bottom fare actually rose -- sometimes as much as doubling.
Between Chicago and Birmingham, Ala., for example, the lowest American round-trip fare has gone from $128 to $260.
Typical of an airline's lowest fare, the former price was for non-refundable tickets requiring an advance purchase, and the price was available only on certain flights each day.


Review/Film; Alienation As Poetic Spectacle
Patrick Bouchitey's "Cold Moon" ("Lune Froide"), the French film opening today at the Walter Reade Theater, is less a drama about alienation than a small gray spectacle that pictures alienation in starkly poetic terms that become editorial comment.
Two 40-ish layabouts, Dede (Mr. Bouchitey) and Simon (Jean-Francois Stevenin), spend their days wandering around the industrial debris of an unidentified port city.
When first seen, they are idling away the time at an otherwise deserted beach.
Simon, the short, stocky, more romantic one, lies on the sand, his shirt open, feeling the warmth of the sun.
Dede walks along the shore, singing a refrain about masturbation, followed by a mangy female dog.


Cuomo in Transit Talks
New York State has no extra money to help finance a new contract for New York City's 32,000 subway and bus workers, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo said yesterday.
He met in Albany with Sonny Hall, president of Local 100 of the Transport Workers Union.
Union leaders and the Metropolitan Transportation Authority agreed on a tentative contract in January with raises of 4.5 percent this year and 2 percent next year.
But the union's members rejected the pact in March.


Books of The Times; Examining TV and Finding Very Little There
The Age of Missing Information  By Bill McKibben 261 pages. Random House. $20.
In a highly personal and original study of television viewing in America, Bill McKibben goes beyond Marshall McLuhan's theory that the medium is the message.
In "The Age of Missing Information," Mr.
McKibben maintains that there's no message in the medium.


U.N. Envoy Tells the Rebels They Must Be Afghans First
Fearing an eruption of ethnic warfare among rival Afghan militias, a special United Nations envoy met with 100 rebel commanders in this northern stronghold today.
He pleaded with them to avoid a new round of bloodshed and to begin talking about the future of their country.
"The biggest problem now is national union," the United Nations envoy, Benon Sevan, told a room packed with northern commanders.
"This is the reason I stress that unless you first start thinking as Afghans and less about your ethnic backgrounds, things will not get better. They will get worse.


United Way Affiliates Reflect the Communities They Serve
The 35 principal United Way affiliates in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut are as different from one another as urban Jersey City is from patrician Greenwich, Conn.
First there is the question of size, then of character.


Corrections
A front-page article yesterday about growth in total private wealth misstated the number constituting the top 1 percent of American families.
It is 934,000, not 834,000.


CHRONICLE
It was 1967 when BOBBY SHORT first sat down at the piano in the Cafe Carlyle to sing and play his repertory of ballads, and he's still at it, with plans for a 25th anniversary engagement there starting Tuesday and continuing through June 27.
Mr.
Short shows no signs of wilting at the keyboard, though he did admit the other day that he is only doing 10 shows a week now, compared with his original stint of 18 a week.


Clinton Campaigns in Philadelphia


Food Notes
Helpings of Long Island
The annual Windows on Long Island Tastings of about 50 Long Island wines, accompanied by food from 14 of the Island's restaurants, has been expanded from one evening to two to accommodate the crowds.
Last year 500 people were turned away.


Ryan Expected Back on Saturday
Texas Rangers pitcher NOLAN RYAN won't be activated off the disabled list until Saturday, Manager BOBBY VALENTINE said last night in Arlington, Tex.
Ryan drew the opening day start on April 6, but was placed on the disabled list the next day with a strained left calf muscle and inflamed right Achilles' tendon.
The 45-year-old pitcher was slated to make his next start today, at home against the Tigers, but now Valentine says he plans to start Ryan on Saturday at Boston against the Red Sox.


Gaylord Donnelley, Former Head Of Printing Company, Dies at 81
Gaylord Donnelley, patriarch of the Chicago printing family and a well-known conservationist, died in his sleep on Sunday at his Ashepoo Plantation in eastern South Carolina.
He was 81 years old, and his principal residence was in Libertyville, Ill., a suburb of Chicago.
He died of heart failure, a family member said.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
NEW YORK YANKEES -- Placed Pat Kelly, second baseman, on the 15-day disabled list.
Recalled Dave Silvestri, shortstop, from Columbus of the International League.
National League


Showdown for Democracy in New York
Campaign reform in New York: It just might happen if Gov.
Mario Cuomo sticks to principle.
For months he has been sending strong signals that he'll veto the Legislature's reapportionment plans unless it agrees to overhaul New York State's discredited election system.
The threat has finally persuaded intransigent Senate Republicans to begin bargaining.
Any day now, voters will find out whether the secretive negotiations have produced cosmetic changes or a serious plan.
Much depends on Mr.
Cuomo's tenacity in three critical areas:


Political Lives in Fiction's Mirror -- Excerpts from three forthcoming novels in an election year; 'Black Water'
A young woman, Kelly Kelleher, and a Senator meet at a July Fourth party on an island off Maine.
Rushing to catch a ferry that will take them to the mainland for a date, their car skids off a bridge and into water.
A nd, yet, had it happened?


Review/Ballet Theater; Big Bad Wolf Meets Courageous Young Boy
Now it can be told.
Before "The Nutcracker" there was "Peter and the Wolf." This may not be historically true: Tchaikovsky wrote his ballet score before Prokofiev wrote his orchestral fable.
But before "Nutcracker" mania swept the land in the wake of George Balanchine's 1954 full-length version, it was American Ballet Theater's "Peter and the Wolf" that introduced thousands of American children, yours truly included, to professional ballet.
With fond visions dancing in their heads, those who saw the first staging of Prokoviev's score at Ballet Theater, from 1940 to 1960, might have approached the opening of the company's new season on Monday night with some trepidation.


Yes, That Leonard Marshall
For LEONARD MARSHALL of the Giants, a celebrity appearance last week proved doubly expensive.
First he lost a gold money clip and $1,700.
Then he learned that he wasn't as famous as famous football players are supposed to be.
Marshall, who lost the money at the Great Adventure amusement park in Jackson, N.J., eventually got it back -- but only at the expense of his ego.


Small Concerns Unite To Link Clients' PC's
With nearly 50 million computers on the desks in American companies, more and more businesses have tackled the complicated task of linking their desktop machines, whether scattered within the same building or geographically dispersed among branch offices.
And as these corporate computer users increasingly turn to outside experts for help, a "systems integration" market has emerged -- a field in which networking expertise often allows specialty concerns to compete with giants like the Electronic Data Systems unit of General Motors.


Harvard to Hear Magic Johnson
MAGIC JOHNSON, the former Los Angeles Lakers star, will speak to Harvard Medical School graduates June 4 as part of the school's commencement ceremonies.
Johnson, who retired from professional basketball Nov. 7 because he had contracted the virus that causes AIDS, was invited by the graduating class to speak.


Serbs Intensify Sarajevo Attacks; 'Pure Terrorism,' Bosnia Charges
Furious gun battles and shelling of Sarajevo's old Muslim-Slav center by Serbian forces erupted anew tonight as truce negotiations mediated by the European Community failed to stem a three-week offensive in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
"The European Community monitoring mission spent all day attempting to negotiate a cease-fire," a Western diplomat said.
"At one point it seemed positive, but it didn't come about. The first thing in the morning, they will try the whole thing all over again."


Lawyer Charged With Fraud Assails Prosecution's 'Setup'
Acting as his own lawyer, Harvey Myerson delivered an emotional summation in his defense yesterday at his trial on charges that he defrauded his law firm and several clients of more than $3 million.
Mr.
Myerson addressed the jury with a flair that was his trademark as a flamboyant corporate lawyer who enjoyed a lavish style of living.
He argued that several former associates fraudulently inflated client bills and then testified against him.


How Does the Help Eat? Often Very Well, Thank You
OUR waiter recommends the almond-dusted turbot or the confit of duck.
This is no small decision, not when the meal will cost at least $75 a person.
You wonder: What did he eat for dinner?
Has he ever tasted this food?
Or did he grab a hot dog on the way to work?
In most fancy restaurants, the waiters try the food occasionally.
They do know what it tastes like.
But they don't eat it every day.


Sumo Star Charges Racism in Japan
In a direct challenge to one of Japan's most tradition-bound institutions, Konishiki, the 576-pound American who is quite literally this country's biggest sports star, said today that "simple racism" explained why he had been denied the highest rank in sumo wrestling.
Until now, the giant Samoan-born wrestler, whose real name is Salevaa Atisanoe, has stayed out of an increasingly political debate here over whether a foreigner should be allowed to become a "yokozuna," or grand champion.
But in comments to Japan's leading financial newspaper over the weekend and in a telephone interview today, Konishiki said he had decided to break his silence because "I can't contain my feeling any longer."


Economic Scene; As Phoenix Rises In East Europe
WILL Poland end up as a prosperous colony of Germany, the bread basket for the colossus of central Europe?
Might Hungary vault past its neighbors and forge strong trade ties with America?
Could Russia become a major, cash-on-the-barrel importer of Japanese goods?
Such questions sound fanciful with the former Soviet satellites struggling to avoid potholes on the road to capitalism, and Boris Yeltsin wondering where his next bowl of borscht will come from.
But viewed through the prism of development economics, the recovery of the European Communist economies seems likely: If Thailand and Taiwan can make the leap to modernity, so, too, can the better-endowed lands of the failed empire.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Candidate's Health; Tsongas Doctors Say 2d Round of Cancer Was Treated in '87
Contrary to their earlier assurances, Paul E. Tsongas's doctors now say that he suffered a recurrence of lymphoma in 1987, less than a year after undergoing an experimental bone marrow transplant, and was treated with an additional course of radiation for the cancer.
Mr.
Tsongas said in an interview Monday that he did not recall his doctors saying that a biopsy of a lymph node from his armpit in the summer of 1987 showed cancer, as the doctors say they did.


Olympia Gets Short-Term Bank Loan
Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd. has raised nearly $100 million through a bank loan and the sale of its stake in one of Canada's biggest financial services companies, Toronto and New York financial officials said today.
Olympia &amp; York, the Reichmann brothers' embattled property company, has been scrambling for funds to avoid bankruptcy.


Frito-Lay Sounds Call: 'Try One!'
A FREE lunch? No such thing. But free snacks, shampoo or detergent? Certainly.
Product sampling, that time-honored marketing tool, is back in style.


Theater in Review
The Oxcart (La Carreta)  Puerto Rican Traveling Theater 304 West 47th Street Through Sunday By Rene Marques; translated by Dr.
Charles Pilditch; directed by Alba Oms; set by H. G. Arrott; lighting, Brian Haynsworth; costumes, Mary Marsicano; production stage manager, Elizabeth Valsing; assistant stage manager, Luis Caballero; assistant director, Fernando Quinones; producer, Miriam Colon Valle.
Presented by the Puerto Rican Traveling Theater, with the sponsorship of the Coors Brewing Company.
WITH: Eddie Andino, Miriam Cruz, Chris De Oni, Ebony Diaz, Jackeline Duprey, Norberto Kerner, Esther Mari, Iraida Polanco, Fernando Quinones, Victor Sierra, Jeanette Toro and Walter Valentin.
A plot summary of "La Carreta" ("The Oxcart"), written in 1951 by the Puerto Rican novelist and playwright Rene Marques, would suggest it could hardly succeed on stage: too mystical, too melodramatic, too argumentative.


I.B.M. and Intel In Graphics Pact
The International Business Machines Corporation and the Intel Corporation agreed to collaborate on making an I.B.M. personal-computer graphics system an industry standard.
Under the arrangement, Intel will develop new versions of a graphics chip set that matches an I.B.M. standard known as XGA, or Extended Graphics Array, and I.B.M. will provide chip design information.


Summerall Enters Ford Clinic
PAT SUMMERALL, the CBS sportscaster who has had problems with alcohol for years, has taken a monthlong leave while he receives treatment at the Betty Ford Clinic, his agent said yesterday.
The agent, BOB ROSEN, said that the 61-year-old Summerall entered the clinic last Friday and would probably return to work on May 23 for the broadcast of the Colonial Open.


Piston Tapes Will Tell Tale for Knicks
At a team dinner Monday, Pat Riley gave each Knick player videotapes to take to his room.
You can't rent these videotapes at a video store.
They were tapes of the Detroit Pistons, focusing on specific plays, tendencies, and characteristics that the coaching staff wants the Knicks to study.
By the time New York opens its three-of-five-game playoff series against the Pistons on Friday, the Knicks hope to know Detroit's offense almost as well as the Pistons do.
All National Basketball Association coaches use videotapes extensively, but none is more meticulous, more methodical, or more maniacal about the use of videotape than Riley.


A Hard-Boiled Look at Midwest Foods
"NEVER eat at any place called Mom's," counseled Nelson Algren, a writer who spent his life chronicling the travails of the lost souls of America in books like "The Man With the Golden Arm."
It's the kind of snappy aphorism (with its corollaries "Never play cards with any man named Doc" and "Never sleep with anyone whose troubles are worse than your own") that suited Algren, who won the first National Book Award, in 1950, and who died in 1981 at the age of 72.
He was known for his gambling, drinking and womanizing as well as for his novels, which also included "Walk on the Wild Side," and numerous short stories.
They were peopled by prostitutes, drug addicts, con artists and the like.
It's a piece of advice that, to date, is probably Algren's most public association with food.


Connecticut Offers $383.6 Million
The State of Connecticut tentatively priced $383.6 million in general obligation bonds yesterday through underwriters led by Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Company.
Underwriters said the offering consisted of $378 million in series B bonds and $5.59 million in series A taxable refunding bonds, with the series A to be competitively bid.


Grand Duke Vladimir Dies at 74; Pretender to the Throne of Russia
Grand Duke Vladimir Kirillovich Romanov, who would have been heir to the throne of the czars if imperial Russia still existed, died suddenly during a news conference in Miami yesterday.
He was 74 years old.
The Grand Duke, a direct descendant of Czar Alexander II, who ruled from 1855 to 1881, was in Miami for a speech he was to give today before a forum of civic and business leaders.
He was at a bank, being interviewed by Spanish-language reporters, when he fell unconscious.


The Rabbi at Sing Sing Tends an Isolated Flock
The iron gates of the prison swung open and a stern-looking correction officer broke into a smile.
"Shalom, Rabbi," he said, and waved Irving Koslowe, the rabbi of Sing Sing, inside.
It was bagels and lox at "the Big House," as the maximum-security prison overlooking the Hudson River here is often called.


Yanks Win As Guillen Is Lost For Season
When your team has three middle infielders and the only one who is not a rookie almost gets drilled in the face with a foul ball, you might think this is just not going to be your night.
Yankees Manager Buck Showalter had to be thinking that tonight.
Andy Stankiewicz fouled off a pitch that Randy Velarde nearly munched on while standing in the on-deck circle in the fifth inning of a scoreless game, and Showalter was groaning.
If Velarde had been injured, the Yankees would have had Stankiewicz and Dave Silvestri as their double-play combination.
Two rookies and nothing to smile about.


Couples and Love Turn '92 Into a Vintage Year
Propelled by the power game that used to be its exclusive domain, America is back on top in the world of golf.
Fred Couples and Davis Love 3d have not only emerged as potential superstars; they've also infused the sport in the United States with a clarity and excitement that it has been missing for years.
On their records alone, the long-hitting Couples and Love have been the best players in the world this year.
Couples, of course, has been phenomenal, capping 10 months in which he won six times in North America with his first major championship, at the Masters two weeks ago.
He is currently No. 1 in the world Sony Ranking by a larger point margin than any player since Seve Ballesteros in 1987.


A NEW AIDS DRUG NEARS APPROVAL
In a test of a new Federal policy to speed approval of desperately needed drugs, an advisory committee to the Food and Drug Administration recommended today that a new AIDS drug be given a conditional approval.
The committee recommended that the drug, DDC, or dideoxycytidine, be marketed for use in combination with another drug, AZT, or azidothymidine, which was the first drug approved for the treatment of AIDS.
It made the decision on the basis of preliminary data and specified that the drug be removed from the market if firmer data from continuing studies fail to uphold the hints of benefit.


Bridge
Some six decades ago, in the early days of the game, one famous player offered a brilliant thought to another.
"If I double a slam," Theodore Lightner told Ely Culbertson, "I want you to make an unusual lead."
When the time came to use the Lightner double it created a disaster and Culbertson refused to have anything more to do with it.
It was not included in the Culbertson system, but thousands of players heard about it and adopted it with profit.
It eventually became standard.


Baker Spells Out U.S. Approach: Alliances and 'Democratic Peace'
Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d spelled out America's approach to foreign policy in the post-cold-war world today, saying it must aim to build a "democratic peace" around the globe, while sharing the burdens of that peace with Washington's allies through "collective engagement."
Speaking to the Chicago Council on Foreign Relations, Mr.
Baker charged those who advocate isolationist, "America first" patriotism with "avoiding the challenges of our times by pretending they do not exist."


Metropolitan Diary
A BIG-SPENDER friend writes:
Let me tell you about the seder I was invited to at Hedy and Warren's in Wayne, N.J.
I'd never been to their home but they're very special people and the occasion definitely called for more than a bottle of Manischewitz Concord Grape.
A few days before Passover, I found the perfect gift: a Waterford Crystal mezuza.
Hedy and Warren's digs, I had heard, were quite splendid and since they aren't what you'd call minimalists, I decided a crystal mezuza was a good choice.
Even for $68.
Some things can't be measured in cash.


Hanson's Finance Head Named Chief Executive
Hanson P.L.C., the British industrial conglomerate with extensive American operations, has promoted Derek C. Bonham to the newly created post of chief executive.
He was finance director.
Mr.
Bonham, 48, an accountant, joined Hanson in 1971 as deputy financial comptroller.
He became financial comptroller in 1973, an associate director in 1976 and joined the board of Hanson P.L.C. in 1981.
Mr.
Bonham is a member of the Financial Accounting Standards Advisory Council (United States) and has served on the Accounting Standards Committee in Britain.


With Steinbrenner, Permanent Is Not Permanent
We all know what action George Steinbrenner believes would be in the best interests of the Yankees and, therefore, for all of major league baseball.
And Fay Vincent, the commissioner, has already given his interpretation of the best-interests-of-baseball clause when it comes to Steinbrenner.
Two years ago he was prepared to issue a two-year suspension of Steinbrenner, following a lengthy investigation of the Yankee owner's activities.


U.S. Reports Rise in Low-Weight Births
At the same time infant mortality rates are falling, the number of babies born abnormally small is rising, the United States Public Health Service said today.
Louis W. Sullivan, the Secretary of Health and Human Services, said at a news conference today that "the long downward trend in infant mortality" continued last year.
Based on preliminary data, he said, the Government estimates that the infant mortality rate declined 2 percent last year, to 8.9 deaths in the first year of life for every 1,000 births, or 36,500 deaths.
The rate was 9.1 in 1990.


No Headline
Dr.
Howard Sylvester Ellis, an economist of the post-World War II era and professor emeritus of economics at the University of California at Berkeley, died Wednesday at the Rosscare Convalescent Center in Capitola, Calif., near San Jose.
He was 93 years old.
His family said he died after a long illness.
Dr.
Ellis, a tenured professor at Berkeley for 30 years, was one of the nation's leading experts of his time on monetary theory, exchange controls and international economics.
He was an authority on the Marshall Plan, the program to aid European recovery after World War II, and on the economic development of Latin America.


Duluth Is Letting Company Run Its School District
In this rugged port city on the western shores of Lake Superior, red-brick school buildings still jut from the hillsides and yellow school buses still carry schoolchildren along bluestone cliffs.
But something fundamentally different has happened to the school system itself.
In the first experiment of its kind, the local school board has handed over control of the district to a private company that, for the three months ending June 30, will serve as interim superintendent of schools, devising a budget, hiring a permanent superintendent and managing perhaps the most sensitive job a district ever faces -- the closing of schools.
If the relationship works out, the company could stay on permanently.


Pakistan Loses Influence Over Afghan Rebels
Despite a series of high-level talks between Pakistani Government officials and Afghan rebel leaders, it has become clear this week that Pakistan's ability to influence the Afghan rebels is now limited, Western diplomats say.
For years Pakistan secured its influence with Afghan guerrillas by controling the flow of weapons and money to groups based in Pakistan and thus fed the rivalries between the guerrilla groups.
Now with the rapidly unraveling events in Kabul, the Afghan capital, politics and solutions have moved inside Afghanistan, and Pakistan's role has been left on the sidelines.


Sears Makes Changes In Catalogue Division
Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company said yesterday that it would shave another 4,900 jobs from its retail operations next month by closing the counters in 860 stores in the United States where customers can pick up merchandise ordered from the company's catalogues.
Customers will still be able to pick up large items like appliances at Sears stores, but smaller items will be mailed, the company said.


Turkey Protects Its Citizens of Kurdish Origin; Iraqi Land Mines
To the Editor:
The land-mine disaster in Iraqi Kurdistan is even greater than you suggest in "The Soil Yields Terror for Iraq's Kurds" (news article, April 13).
The Baghdad regime mined not only frontier areas, as many governments have done during war or active insurgencies, but also lands deep inside the Kurdish lands, as we document in a forthcoming report.
President Saddam Hussein of Iraq did this in a policy of depopulating the Kurdish countryside in the late 1980's, which involved razing as many as 4,000 Kurdish villages and the disappearance of scores of thousands of Kurds who are now presumed dead.
Mines were then planted to deter rebels, but also to prevent peasants who had survived from returning home.


Market Place; The Callable Bond Is Out of Style
The callable bond seems to be vanishing from the American investment landscape.
It is not just that such bonds are now being bought back by the issuers, as they seek to lock in lower borrowing costs.
It is also that the overwhelming majority of new corporate bonds are being issued with no such call provision.
In the first quarter of this year, only 8 percent of new investment-grade bonds were callable, in contrast to 84 percent in 1985.


Price-Fixing Hurts U.S. Competitiveness
To the Editor:
Competitiveness is getting to be like the weather: Everyone talks about it, but no one does anything about it, and when they do they make things worse.
"When to Wink at Price-Fixing" (editorial, April 4), your attempt to distinguish resale price maintenance from other kinds of price-fixing, is analogous to President Bush's stand on global warming.
Like that view of the President, the argument that fixing retail prices will insure that customers get better service or more information relies on faith rather than logic.
Retailers are most likely to pocket any additional profit resulting from fixed prices.


Playoffs Are a Welcome Sight For Nets, but Cavaliers Aren't
When the Nets last played the Cavaliers, on April 10 at Byrne Meadowlands Arena, Bill Fitch went over to shake the hand of the Cleveland coach, Lenny Wilkens, and to tell him, "I don't want to see you anymore unless it's in the Eastern Conference championship series."
Well, Wilkens didn't listen, and now the Nets have to open the playoffs against Cleveland in a three-of-five-game Eastern Conference quarterfinal series Thursday night in Richfield, Ohio.


Pinchas Zukerman Recital
Pinchas Zukerman will play violin and viola in a recital on Tuesday at 8 P.M. at Carnegie Hall.
Accompanied by the pianist Marc Neikrug, he will play Mozart's Violin Sonata in E flat (K. 302); Beethoven's "Kreutzer" Sonata; Schumann's Three Romances, "Fantasiestucke" and the "Marchenbilder" for viola and piano, and Toru Takemitsu's "Hika." Tickets are $10 to $40.
Information: (212) 247-7800.


Cigarette Sales Up 2% in Japan
A record 328 billion cigarettes were sold in Japan in the year that ended in March, up 2 percent from a year earlier, the Tobacco Institute of Japan said today.
Foreign cigarette sales, mostly of American brands, rose 6.1 percent, to 54 billion cigarettes, it said.
The value of the cigarette sales was 3.7 trillion yen ($27.6 billion).
Foreign cigarettes accounted for 16.5 percent.


INSIDE
A.N.C. Gains in South Africa
The African National Congress effectively gained a beachhead in Parliament when five white legislators switched allegiance.
Page A3.
Fujimori Weakened in Peru
The Government of President Alberto K. Fujimori in Peru began to show signs of serious erosion as key officials resigned.
Page A7.
Panel Backs AIDS Drug
An advisory committee to the Food and Drug Administration recommended provisional approval of a new AIDS drug.
Page A22.
Guarding Genetic Data
Legislators are taking steps to regulate the way genetic information can be collected, used and disseminated.
Health, page C12.


Power Bonds In Massachusetts
The Massachusetts Municipal Wholesale Electric Company tentatively priced $434.5 million in tax-exempt power supply system revenue bonds yesterday with a maximum yield of about 7.025 percent for an issue due 2017.
An underwriting group led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company said other long maturities included a bond due 2008 priced to yield 6.95 percent, an issue due 2010 priced to yield about 6.974 percent and an issue due 2018 priced to yield about 6.96 percent.


Philharmonic to Play July Series at Carnegie
Kurt Masur is to conduct the New York Philharmonic, the violinist Midori and the pianist Shura Cherkassky in a short series of all-Tchaikovsky programs at Carnegie Hall from July 8 to 16.
The series, which is the Philharmonic's first summer series at Carnegie, is to include four orchestral concerts, three of which are to be preceded by chamber-music performances by some of the Philharmonic's string players.
"I am far away from those who say that Tchaikovsky is not so deep as Beethoven or as philosophical as other composers," Mr.
Masur said at a news conference at Carnegie Hall yesterday afternoon.
Explaining how he decided on his programs, which include three symphonies, two concertos and other orchestral essays, he said he wanted to demonstrate Tchaikovsky's flexibility.


Beggar, Hit by Cab, Giving Up Streets
After years of standing on New York streets with a tin cup, a 64-year-old blind man who was injured two weeks ago when a cab mounted a midtown Manhattan sidewalk and hit him and his dog, said yesterday that it was time to leave.
In short, he said, he was afraid.
The man, Thomas Armstrong, said that although he was thrilled by the kindness of hundreds of people who have written, called and sent money to him and his guide dog, Smokey, who was also seriously injured, the accident had left him feeling vulnerable and afraid of traffic.


Tbilisi Journal; Wistful Blue Bloods Fly Into a Post-Soviet Abyss
It has been 191 years since the Bagrationi family ruled Georgia, but in the Caucasus, people have long memories.
So when three Bagrationis recently made their way back to Georgia after a generation in exile, they were showered at every turn with armfuls of roses, bags of tangerines and dried fruits, bottles of champagne accompanied by flowery toasts -- offerings of an emotional people who are all the more so when it comes to direct descendants of Tamara, Georgia's legendary 12th-century queen.


Results Plus
TENNIS  Sampras Defeated in Second Round
Second-seeded Pete Sampras was eliminated yesterday in the second round of the Monte Carlo Open in Monaco, losing to Carl-Uwe Steeb of Germany, 6-3, 6-4.
Sampras, playing in Monte Carlo for the first time, made progress in his clay play when he advanced to the semifinals of the Nice tournament last week.
But Steeb, playing steadier from the baseline, jumped to a 5-0 lead after 19 minutes in the first set before Sampras finally took a game.
Steeb's next opponent will be the winner of the match between Carlos Costa of Spain and Wayne Ferreira of South Africa.
Costa, who won the last two clay-court tournaments, in Portugal and Spain, won his first-round match easily when Guillermo Perez-Roldan of Argentina had to retire from their match after four games.
Ferreira beat Bjorn Borg in his first-round match Monday.
Two other top-seeded players lost yesterday.
Magnus Larsson of Sweden beat No. 6 Petr Korda of Czechoslovakia, 6-3, 6-3, and Arnaud Boetsch of France beat the seventh-seeded player, Alberto Mancini of Argentina, 7-5, 7-6 (7-3), in the second round.
In other first-round matches, Andrei Chesnokov downed Javier Frana of Argentina, 6-4, 6-2, and Karel Novacek of Czechoslovakia topped Andrei Cherkasov, 6-1, 6-4.
Emilio Sanchez of Spain beat Olivier Delaitre of France, 6-1, 6-0. (AP)


A Decision Is Postponed on a Runway Extension at Long Island MacArthur Airport


People
*
Peter Mackey was named vice president and general manager at Anderson &amp; Lembke Inc., San Francisco.
He had been vice president and management supervisor on the Sprint account at J. Walter Thompson, New York and San Francisco. *
Scott Franks, senior vice president at Ketchum Advertising, Philadelphia, was promoted to executive vice president and director of client services.
Chick Housam, senior vice president, was promoted to executive president and director of operations and planning.


2d Arrest in Priest Assault
A Brooklyn man who the police say drove the getaway car in the assault and robbery of a 69-year-old Roman Catholic priest was arrested yesterday.
He is the second person arrested in connection with the robbery.
The suspect, Leo Owen, 27, of 257 Saratoga Avenue in the Brownsville section of Brooklyn, waited outside the Chemical Bank branch at 401 Flatbush Avenue last Thursday while two other men hit the priest, Msgr.
James J. Haggerty, on the head, said Sgt.
Edelle James, a police spokeswoman.


Charge of Musical Fakery Retracted
The former music director of New Kids on the Block has retracted his charge that the group was involved in musical fakery and dropped a breach-of-contract lawsuit against the group's founder.
The former music director, Gregory McPherson, who also produced the group's records for two years, said in a statement released last week: "The allegations that I made regarding New Kids on the Block lip-synching were untrue. They did sing lead on their albums."


Review/Film; Irish Town Goes Wild In All the Irish Ways
"A woman, a baby and a mystery man for a father," as one villager puts it: those are the elements that drive a small Irish town to distraction.
The year is 1957 and the woman, Tara Maguire (Robin Wright), is uncommonly strong and beautiful by the standard of that time or any other.
At the start of "The Playboys," a lovely and enveloping new film about Tara and her neighbors, Tara gives birth to an illegitimate son.
The townspeople's response is for the most part narrow-minded and petty, but "The Playboys" is anything but small.
Enchanting and lyrical, superbly picturesque, "The Playboys" (which opens today) is another reminder that Irish cinema is suddenly enjoying something of a golden age.
The screenwriter Shane Connaughton, an Oscar nominee for "My Left Foot," comes from the tiny, quaint village where the film was made, Redhills in County Cavan, and has summoned up the villagers' lives with sly and affectionate attention to detail.
From the too inquisitive priest to the watchful children, from Irish Republican Army smugglers to farmers desperately concerned about sick cattle, the residents and their troubles, loves and jealousies are duly noted.
All these ingredients serve to bear out one character's haunting thought that "if the passion of the people could be bottled, we could all of us sail to the moon."


New Line Breaks Off Talks On Buying Orion Pictures
The New Line Cinema Corporation said today that it had ended its negotiations to acquire and revive the ailing Orion Pictures Corporation.
New Line had been negotiating for months with the creditors of Orion, the artistically successful but bankrupt studio that recently won five Academy Awards for "The Silence of the Lambs." But New Line was unable to come to terms with Orion's creditors on a variety of issues, including price, and said today that it was halting its efforts.
Not a Negotiating Tactic
"Ultimately, we were not able to get the kinds of accommodations from the creditors necessary to make the plan fly," said Michael Lynne, the president of New Line.
He said New Line's withdrawal was not a negotiating tactic.


McCallum Mix-Up Means Chance for 2 Others
The World Boxing Association middleweight title used to belong to Mike McCallum.
But late last year, McCallum was stripped of his crown, the same crown that Steve Collins and Reggie Johnson will fight for tonight at Byrne Meadowlands Arena in East Rutherford, N.J.
But why was McCallum stripped of his title?
That depends on whose story you believe.
According to the W.B.A., McCallum's title was taken away because of his refusal to fight Collins, the W.B.A.'s mandatory challenger.


Restaurant's Rebirth: A Breeze Blows in Brooklyn
IT is an eerie experience, to wander through a vast, deserted restaurant where more than 2,000 people once ate at the same time.
More than a million people a year are said to have come to F. W. I. L. Lundy Brothers to inhale lobster, steaks and the best biscuits in the whole world.
Then, Irving Lundy, the owner, died in 1977.
Sputtering efforts by family members failed to maintain the restaurant at Emmons and Ocean Avenues in Sheepshead Bay, Brooklyn.
Whoever was last in charge seems to have just walked away, leaving the place looking as if a neutron bomb exploded sometime around 1980.
Only people were obliterated.


I.B.M. and 9 Cellular Powers Team Up for Data Transfers
Nine of the largest cellular telephone companies and I.B.M. plan to announce today that they are developing methods to send data like facsimiles and electronic mail over the existing cellular telephone network.
The new methods would broadcast the data by radio antennas and would free traveling executives and others from having to plug laptop computers and other devices into hotel telephone outlets, which are often difficult to find or cannot be used.


Corrections
The Business and Health column in Business Day on April 14 misidentified Dr.
David B. Skinner.
He is president of the New York Hospital, not the New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center.


Officials Defend Jails Chief
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and Mayor David N. Dinkins rallied yesterday to the support of New York City's new Correction Commissioner, Catherine M. Abate, after New Jersey law-enforcement authorities said her father had been a high-ranking member of an organized-crime group until three years ago.
In a statement, Mr.
Cuomo praised Ms.
Abate as "one of our finest public servants" and Mr.
Dinkins said he had no intention of dismissing her.
At a news conference in the Bronx, Mr.
Dinkins added, "I don't think the sins or the alleged sins of the parents should be visited upon the children."


Eating Well
MENUS for low-fat eating, menus for health problems that require special diets, recipes from years ago, referrals to physicians or nutritionists, or reading courses to learn the fundamentals of nutrition -- these are just a few of the requests that come in each day.
Unfortunately, we can't help by answering individual letters.


Health Care the Way It Used to Be; Dinkins Idea Is Tried and True. Can It Work Here and Now?
Melissa Lopez sat in the waiting room of the William F. Ryan Community Health Care Center yesterday, waiting for a pediatrician to examine her feverish niece.
She had heard, she said, about the health care plan proposed by Mayor David N. Dinkins on Monday, but she wondered what was new.
The Mayor's proposal that each Medicaid patient have a personal doctor sounded to her like the way care is already provided at the Ryan center, where she has been going for nearly five years.
The Dinkins administration's plan to eventually provide every poor person in the city with a family doctor is not new.
The concept has been discussed for decades in New York and around the country as the ideal approach to preventive health care.
Similarly, the plan, known as managed care, is not untried.
Already there are more than a dozen city clinics like the Ryan Center, on the Upper West Side of Manhattan, which serve as models for the new clinics proposed by the Mayor.


Hockey; Devils Deflate the Rangers and Tie Series at 1-1
Fifty victories and a regular season filled with shiny trophies were rendered meaningless last night in a jumble of defensive errors by the Rangers and three Devil goals in less than three minutes on the unforgiving hockey clock.
The home-ice advantage, the playoff momentum, the enormous psychological edge were all lost by the spaced-out Rangers.
They were all stolen by the mischievous Devils with their convincing 7-3 victory at Madison Square Garden that evened the rivals' Patrick Division four-of-seven semifinal series at one game apiece.


Israeli Couple Disputes Army Account of Shooting
An Israeli couple who witnessed a shooting incident in the occupied West Bank said today that they saw members of an army undercover unit fire without warning at masked Palestinians, wounding two of them.
The report contradicted a statement by the Israeli Army, which said "the soldiers called on the masked men to halt." It was a rare case of Israeli civilian witnesses publicly challenging a military account of a shooting in the occupied territories.


Political Lives in Fiction's Mirror -- Excerpts from three forthcoming novels in an election year; 'Donovan's Wife'
Representative Victor T. Donovan and his spin doctor are running a negative Senate campaign in an unnamed Western state.
The incumbent, Senator O. Mack Bender, must decide whether he should stay on the high road.
The night before the state's voters went to the polls, Theo Keller found it necessary to kill the headline -- Down to the Wire! -- his slot man had penciled in for the Ledger's election-day lead.
Keller subbed different racing slang that put his favorite's name in 72-point type: BENDER IN STRETCH RUN.


Study Suggests Early Prostate Cancer May Be Best Left Alone
Men with early prostate cancer who are not treated for their disease have excellent survival rates that rival those seen in patients who receive aggressive therapy against the malignancy, Swedish researchers have reported.
The finding suggests that for a subgroup of patients with the tumor, doing nothing may be as good or better than surgically removing the prostate gland or blasting it with radiation, the standard treatments in the United States for early-stage prostate cancer.


Ryan Expected Back on Saturday
Texas Rangers pitcher NOLAN RYAN won't be activated off the disabled list until Saturday, Manager BOBBY VALENTINE said last night in Arlington, Tex.
Ryan drew the opening day start on April 6, but was placed on the disabled list the next day with a strained left calf muscle and inflamed right Achilles' tendon.
The 45-year-old pitcher was slated to make his next start today, at home against the Tigers, but now Valentine says he plans to start Ryan on Saturday at Boston against the Red Sox.


Unfair Trade, and Its Victims
There will be $200 billion
a year
at stake when President Bush meets today with President Jacques Delors of the European Commission.
That's what an international trade agreement is worth to the world economy -- and what will be lost if Mr.
Bush and Europe don't stop squabbling about protectionist farm policy.
The Uruguay Round of trade talks, begun five years ago, was designed to forge a grand bargain.
The third world would agree to rules governing foreign investment, services, copyrights and patents.
In exchange, the developed world would open its borders to imports of food and textiles and stop pummeling third world farmers by dumping subsidized food exports.


Review/Film; Forgoing the Flesh For Metallic Pleasures
Early in Shinya Tsukamoto's film "Tetsuo: The Iron Man," a character identified only as a metals fetishist (Mr. Tsukamoto) scours a junkyard, slices open his thigh and sticks a piece of scrap metal into the wound.
Gasping in ecstatic agony, he lurches into the street where he is nearly run over by a car driven by a white-collar worker called the Salaryman (Tomoroh Taguchi).
While shaving the next morning, the Salaryman notices a metal spike growing in one cheek.
It is the first sign of his gradual transformation from a human being into a walking metal scrapheap of rusty metal plates, dangling cables and a rotating metal drill that extends from his groin.


Picture a Men's College Circa '56; That's Wabash
On a campus encrusted with tradition, Wabash College's Phi Delta Theta house is the inner sanctum.
Here freshmen pledges still wear beanies called "pots" and tip them when they pass professors.
They paint their legs green when they try out for the Sphinx Club, a selective society.
And they make a wide berth around General, a waist-high St.
Bernard who was donated by Earl (Punk) Johnson, Wabash '38, as the latest in a long line of St.
Bernards who have lived in Phi Delta Theta house for most of this century.


Affiliates Feeling Pinch of United Way Scandal
United Way organizations across New York, New Jersey and Connecticut are suffering direct repercussions, sooner than expected, from the scandal that has shaken the United Way of America.
As a result, the region's United Way directors -- from the $19,600-a-year single staff member in Sullivan County, N.Y., to the $291,000-a-year New York City chief -- are suiting up to do battle for their personal reputations and the future of their charities.


Mathieu, Donovan On Celestial Account
An agency was named yesterday to handle the creative portion of the account to introduce Celestial Seasonings ready-to-drink herbal iced teas, a venture of Celestial Seasonings in Boulder, Colo., and the Perrier Group of America in Greenwich, Conn.
Mathieu, Donovan &amp; Associates Inc. in Montgomery, N.Y., will create a campaign to introduce the beverages in West Coast markets this summer, a Perrier Group spokeswoman said.
There was a review on the account, she added, declining to disclose the other participants.
Billings have not yet been determined.


Corrections
An article on Saturday about the Republican primary for the United States Senate in Pennsylvania misstated the sum being devoted to advertising by Senator Arlen Specter.
He is spending $200,000 a week on an advertising campaign that is expected to cost $1 million, according to his son, Shanin Specter.
The full primary campaign, including telephone and administrative expenses, is expected to cost $2 million, Mr.
Specter said.


Neck Injury Forces Williams to Retire
After shrugging off a sprained ankle, a parasite infection, an overgrowth of yeast in her blood system, chronic fatigue syndrome and serious back problems, WENDY LIAN WILLIAMS has encountered one ailment too many: a neck injury that has forced her to give up her attempted Olympic comeback.


Federal Home Loan Banks In $1.26 Billion Offering
The Office of Finance for the Federal Home Loan Banks announced yesterday the pricing at par of a three-part debt offering totaling $1.26 billion through various securities dealers.
For $315 million in two-year securities due April 25, 1994, the interest rate is set at 5.48 percent; for $610 million in three-year securities due April 25, 1994, the rate is 6.04 percent.
The remaining $340 million of five-securities, due April 25, 1997, have an interest rate of 6.99 percent.


Supreme Court Roundup; Shield From Pollution Fines Is Upheld
Overturning a lower court ruling, the Supreme Court today shielded Federal agencies from having to pay fines for violations of Federal laws regulating water pollution and hazardous waste.
The Court ruled, 6 to 3, that Congress had not clearly stated its intention to make the Government liable for fines when it passed the Clean Water Act of 1972 and the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, which regulates the disposal of hazardous waste.


Price-Fixing Hurts U.S. Competitiveness; For Retailer Standards
To the Editor:
"When to Wink at Price-Fixing" (editorial, April 4) is certain to receive a barrage of criticism from consumer advocates arguing that price maintenance at the manufacturer's level always hurts the consumer.
As retailers of complex photographic equipment, we are often exposed to would-be customers who take advantage of our informative full-service policy and then elect to make their purchases at a discount mail-order operation that may sell boxes of similar equipment at slightly lower prices.
Perhaps the manufacturers and distributors of these sophisticated products could better serve their network of dealers and the public by insisting that merchants maintain a level of competence to sell their goods.
To retain their franchise, dealers would be required to display and demonstrate their wares to prospective buyers when asked.


Fox Locks In Cameron With a 5-Year Deal Worth $500 Million
In the age of megadeals, one of the biggest of them all was announced today when 20th Century Fox and James Cameron, the director of "Terminator 2" and other films, signed a five-year agreement the studio said was valued at about $500 million.
A buoyant Joe Roth, the chairman of Fox studios, said the amount represented a portion of the costs of the next 12 films that Mr.
Cameron will produce for the studio, 4 of which he will direct.


Man Faces Bias Charge In Canarsie Firebombing
A 20-year-old white man has been indicted on Federal civil-rights charges in the firebombing last summer of a real-estate company that showed homes to black families in the traditionally white Brooklyn neighborhood of Canarsie, prosecutors announced yesterday.
The man, Frank Scire, who works as a baggage handler at Kennedy International Airport and lives with his parents in Canarsie, was also charged with illegal use of explosives.
He pleaded not guilty in Federal District Court and was released on $125,000 bond.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Media; Clinton Moves to Retouch His Image
Hoping to deliver Bill Clinton to the Democratic National Convention with a retouched public image, the Arkansas Governor's staff has devised a two-pronged strategy to counteract the damaging information that has emerged about him so far.
The first part of the strategy is to present the Governor's background in a more flattering light.
The second is to project Mr.
Clinton as a potential President with a series of high-profile policy speeches, including the economics message he delivered last week in Philadelphia and an environmental address scheduled for today.


Theater in Review
Family Portrait  Ubu Repertory Theater 15 West 28th Street Through Sunday  By Denise Bonal; translated by Timothy Johns; directed by Shirley Kaplan; set design by John Brown; lighting, Greg MacPherson; costumes, Carol Ann Pelletier; production stage manager, David Waggett.
WITH: Alice Alvarado, Paul Austin, Alison Bartlett, Robert Kerbeck, Joanna Merlin, Matthew Mutrie and Gareth Williams.
The family in "Family Portrait," a French import by Denise Bonal, consists of a mother who works as a cleaning woman and aspires to the petite bourgeoisie, a pregnant daughter whose live-in boyfriend is a French version of a couch potato, and two sons: one a small-time thief and biker (except his bike has been stolen); the other a misfit whose ineptitude extends to five failed suicides.
There is also a neighbor whose wife went to buy salt one day and never returned, the biker son's Arab girlfriend, and a dog that occasionally barks from offstage.


New Jersey Takes Charge by Being More Aggressive
Going to the net with a little more authority was the theme for the Devils in their preparation for last night's second game of their series against the Rangers.
Coach Tom McVie noticed that aspect of the Devils' game was one of the few elements missing from the opening game and made a couple of moves toward that end last night at Madison Square Garden.


Treasury Securities Finish Mixed
Prices of Treasury securities were mixed yesterday, as dealers and retail accounts responded to the big selloff on Monday by buying short- to intermediate-term note issues.
Bond prices, however, remained under pressure.
Even though all major financial markets were open again after the long Easter holiday break and the Chicago Board of Trade was fully operational for the first time since last week's flood, market participants said the pace of business was only marginally more active than the lethargically slow pace of the last few sessions.


Capitals Put Penguins and Lemieux in a Deeper Hole
Capitals 6, Penguins 2
LANDOVER, Md., April 21 (AP) -- Mario Lemieux's return made a difference, but not for long.
Michal Pivonka and Peter Bondra fueled a comeback as Washington scored six straight goals to beat Pittsburgh tonight and take a 2-0 lead in their Patrick Division semifinal series.


The Emigres Lend a Hand In Homelands
In the last tumultuous days of World War II, when Soviet troops attacked the fiercely nationalistic town in Ukraine that had nurtured his relatives for generations, Orest Baranyk and his family fled, living in refugee camps before coming to the United States in 1950.
Mr.
Baranyk was 6 years old when he arrived, and he grew up in the exile culture that thrived in Chicago, speaking Ukrainian at home.
But Ukraine itself remained alien to him, for the Communist Government would not allow him to return for even a brief visit.


Pat Kelly May Miss a Month
The Yankee infield situation became more muddled today when they placed Pat Kelly on the 15-day disabled list with a sprained ligament in his left thumb and hinted that the second baseman may actually miss a month.
"It could be longer than 15 days," said Manager Buck Showalter, about Kelly's injury.
"It very possibly could be longer."


Big Banks Post Rises In Profits
Citicorp said yesterday that it earned $183 million in the first quarter, thanks to higher profits in its consumer business and to gains on the sale of various investments and subsidiaries.
Its stock rose $1.50, to $18.25, in active trading on the earnings news, even though its loan losses remained high.
Several other leading banks -- including Chemical, Bankers Trust, Wells Fargo and Banc One -- reported strong earnings yesterday, sending their stocks up.


Accounts
*
Zebra Pen Corp., Edison, N.J., to Gigante Vaz &amp; Partners Advertising Inc., Parsippany, N.J., as agency of record for the company's consumer products division.
A trade campaign is now running and a comsumer campaign is expected to begin in late summer.
Billings were not disclosed.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats; Congresswoman Tied to Scandal Loses Party Post
Fearful that the political problems of Representative Mary Rose Oakar of Ohio would swell into a major embarrassment, the Democratic Party has dropped her from the highly visible assignment of heading the platform committee at the party's national convention, party officials said today.
Ms.
Oakar, who represents a Cleveland district, has been linked to both the House bank and post office affairs, and the move by the party chairman, Ronald H. Brown, was clearly intended to limit additional political fallout from those cases.


New Campaigns
*
Nynex Corp. is bringing out four 60-second television commercials that explain communications technology in basic terms for children between 9 and 12 years old.
The "How It Works" campaign, created by Ogilvy &amp; Mather New York, features Nynex employees answering questions like "How do car phones work?" The spots will be introduced during an ABC special on Saturday morning, "Prejudice: Answering Children's Questions," featuring Peter Jennings.


Deacon Lunchbox, 41, A Performance Artist
Timothy Tyson Ruttenber, a songwriter, poet and performance artist who used the stage name Deacon Lunchbox, died on Sunday in an automobile collision near Greenville, Ala.
He was 41 years old and lived in Atlanta.
Mr.
Ruttenber had performed on Saturday night in Pensacola, Fla., with the Atlanta-based rock group Jody Grind.
Two members of the group -- the bassist, Robert Hayes, 24, and the drummer, Rob Clayton, 22 -- were also killed in the collision.
A spokesman for the State Police in Evergreen, Ala., said that the accident was still under investigation.


INSURERS FAULTED ON POLICY SWITCH
Regulators and members of Congress are seeking to restrict an increasingly widespread but little-known practice: the transfer of hundreds of thousands of annuities and life and health insurance policies from one company to another each year.
Concern about the practice, in which consumers are given little or no choice about whether to switch, has risen with the failure of several major insurers.


Defense Lawyer at Beating Trial Asserts Driver Prompted Violence
In his closing argument, a defense lawyer said today that a widely publicized videotape of a police beating was deceptive and asserted that it was the actions of the victim, Rodney G. King, that were to blame for the violence it shows.
The lawyer, Michael P. Stone, said the videotape's view from across the street on March 3, 1991, did not portray the incident from the point of view of the frightened police officers who had to subdue a dangerous suspect.


Weight Lifting; An Olympic Dream Is Deferred
Antonio Krastev almost laughed as he heard the news: Six members of Bulgaria's national weight lifting team were suspended this week for urine tests that contained a substance banned for competition.
Two of the six, Petar Stefanov and Plamen Bratoichev, each a world champion in 1989, were projected as serious contenders for a gold medal in the Barcelona Olympics this summer.
"I know them well, very well," Krastev said.
"What happened, that is why I never want to go back."


Pirates Start Off Fast To Win 8th Straight
Pirates 8, Expos 7
MONTREAL, April 21 (AP) -- Andy Van Slyke's two-run triple highlighted a five-run first inning and the Pittsburgh Pirates held off a late rally to beat Montreal tonight for their eighth straight victory.
Trailing by 8-3 after seven innings, Montreal closed to 8-5 in the eighth on homers by Tim Wallach and Rick Cerone off Jerry Don Gleaton.
Ivan Calderdon hit a two-run homer with one out in the ninth, the first runs given up by Roger Mason in 19 2/3 innings and 14 appearances since the start of spring training.
But after Larry Walker grounded out and Wallach singled, Mason got his third save by getting Marquis Grissom on a flyout.


Steps Consumers Can Take
Insurance companies usually mail notices to customers whose policies or annuities are being transferred.
But the language of the notices often makes it difficult for consumers to figure out that their policies are being switched to a new company.
And they often do not say that the customer has the right to refuse.
Experts advise caution.
If you write a check to the new company, or do not respond to the notice within a certain period, insurance companies in most states can legally assume your consent.


FUJIMORI WEAKENS AS TOP AIDES QUIT
The Government of President Alberto K. Fujimori began to show signs of serious erosion today as officials responsible for vital economic recovery programs and the maintenance of relations with the United States resigned.
At the same time, the Congress, which Mr.
Fujimori dissolved by edict 16 days ago, swore in the First Vice President, Maximo San Roman, as constitutional President.
The ceremony took place in a building surrounded by the tanks and soldiers of an army that is backing Mr.
Fujimori, but the troops made no effort to block the essentially impotent Legislature from installing Mr.
San Roman as a "constitutional," but at the moment powerless, President in a largely symbolic act.


Real Estate; For Swissair, Modernism On the L.I.E.
RENOWNED for his crisp, elegantly detailed modernist compositions -- and best known today for his work on the Getty Center arts complex in Los Angeles -- Richard Meier is not an architect one would instantly associate with a building along the Long Island Expressway.
But Swissair wanted a structure for its North American headquarters that would convey a sense of meticulousness and corporate responsibility.
So the Zurich-based airline chose Richard Meier &amp; Partners as architects of the building near Exit 49 in Melville, L.I., the design of which is to be formally introduced today.


Judge Public Servants On Individual Merits
To the Editor:
Does The New York Times agree with the Mayor of the City of New York and all responsible Americans who believe that individuals should be judged on their merits and not by the accident of ethnicity, race, sex -- or birth?
If so, why would The Times rush to publish hearsay accusing a senile old man of possible mob connections years ago, suggesting that it is relevant because his daughter is a public servant ("Correction Head's Father Tied to Mafia," news article, April 21)?


Yeltsin Gives Parliament a Scolding
President Boris N. Yeltsin brought a long, verbose session of the highest Russian Parliament to a close today with a stern rebuke to the deputies for "outbursts of senseless confrontations" with the executive branch.
Ending a 10-day absence from the Parliament that began when deputies at the Congress of People's Deputies first tried to undermine his reformist Government, Mr.
Yeltsin returned triumphant and severe.


Omnicom Expected To Realign Agencies
The Omnicom Group is expected to announce shortly a realignment among its agencies that would most likely merge Tracy-Locke Inc. into the much larger DDB Needham Worldwide network.
The announcement would follow reports in this week's Advertising Age and Adweek that such a merger of Tracy-Locke, based in Dallas, and DDB Needham, with headquarters in New York, was imminent.


Turkey Protects Its Citizens of Kurdish Origin; Attempted Genocide
To the Editor:
"Double Trouble for Kurds" (editorial, April 1) points out that the Kurds are suffering oppression not only under Saddam Hussein, but also from Turkey.
But you fail to acknowledge that genocide of the Kurds is taking place and do not recognize the legitimacy of Kurdish national aspirations.
Iraq's repression of the Kurds already constitutes genocide.
Article II of the United Nations Convention defines genocide as "acts committed with intent to destroy, in whole or in part, a national, ethnical, racial or religious group." Iraq's cold-blooded murder of approximately 200,000 Kurds, destruction of more than 3,500 Kurdish villages and forced relocation of hundreds of thousands of Kurds to southern deserts certainly seem to fall within that definition.


County Shows a Surplus Of $22 Million for 1991
As Nassau and Suffolk Counties fret over budget deficits, Westchester County announced today that it ended the 1991 fiscal year with a surplus of $22 million.
But county officials said that despite the surplus, they would continue to try to increase the county sales tax by half a percentage point, bringing the total sales-tax rate in most towns to 7.25 percent.


Plans Set for Expanded U.S. Open Tennis Center
New York City would provide up to $11 million for road improvements in and around Flushing Meadows-Corona Park as part of a plan to expand the site of the United States Open tennis tournament, said Queens officials who were briefed on the proposal yesterday.
The United States Tennis Association, the organizer of the Open, would contribute up to $8 million to enhance the park, which is in northern Queens, as part of the project, the officials said they were told.


Recession Leaving State Governments More Efficient
Most states will emerge from the shadow of the recession in the next few years, but when they do their governments will probably be smaller operations that are more efficient but provide less assistance to the middle class and the poor, say budget officials across the nation.
"We are about halfway through the tunnel," said Brian M. Roherty, a budget expert, about the states' financial struggles in the recession.
"As we come out of the tunnel, what we will see are downsized state governments with smaller work forces, new ways of doing business and new priorities. There isn't enough money any more, so states will have to find long-term solutions and make some grim choices."


3 Arrested in Jewelry Theft
The police announced the arrests yesterday of three men in connection with the theft of $500,000 in jewelry last week from a company in midtown Manhattan.
The thieves broke into D &amp; W Central Station Alarm Company, a security company, on April 16 and forced an employee to call the owner of National Jewelry Contractors to tell him that his store had been burglarized, said Sgt.
Edelle James, a police spokeswoman.
The suspects then put on guard uniforms, met the company's foreman at the store, and took the jewelry, the police said.
Two of those arrested were former employees of the security company and one is a current employee, Sergeant James said.
The men were identified as Patrick Hester, 30, Gifford Baker, 26, and Gregory Baker, all of the Bronx.


BRIEFS
*
Boeing Co., Seattle, said Kuwait Airways had ordered three 747-400 Combi jetliners in a deal valued at about $500 million. *
Carter-Wallace Inc., New York, a pharmaceuticals and consumer products company, received shareholder consent for a 3-for-1 stock split previously authorized by its board.


Big Brother Is Watching Your Computer
To the Editor:
Janlori Goldman of the American Civil Liberties Union mentions in "Keeping an Ear on Crime," her March 27 Op-Ed dialogue with William S. Sessions, Federal Bureau of Investigation director, the role of the National Security Agency in putting "a cap on the private development of technology in encryption." She views the N.S.A. attempt to limit electronic encoding of data to guard against unauthorized use as analogous to the F.B.I.'s proposal to roll back advances in digital telephony.
But the chilling effects of N.S.A. policies go far beyond that.
Many leading researchers in cryptography have been "persuaded" to submit their research to the N.S.A. for prepublication reviews.
The agency has also tried to stymie adoption of developed encryption schemes that it considers too difficult for it to decode.


AT LUNCH WITH: Nathan Lane; A 'Guy' Thrives on Broadway
SO.
This piece a cheesecake been on the table awhile now, and the strudel ain't arrived yet, and good old reliable Nathan, he's holding forth at a booth in Lindy's on 45th Street and Broadway.
Not Nathan Detroit, you understand, but Nathan Lane: the guy who plays the jester of the dese, dems and dose world -- er, woild -- of "Guys and Dolls," the hit Broadway revival.
Suddenly, this doll -- um, waitress -- passes by.
But enough already with the Noo Yawk tawk: suffice to say that Mr.
Lane chose that moment to pose a vital question about the delicate balance of cheesecake/strudel ecology on the Great White Way of 1992.
"So, which do you sell more of -- strudel or cheesecake?" he said.


Vive la France!
To The Living Section:
Marian Burros's article "In France, Wine and Pate Days Seem Numbered"  [ Eating Well, March 4 ]  was interesting for what it said as well as for what it omitted.
We should bear in mind that there is a powerful health promotion/industrial complex in this country that vigorously pushes the anticholesterol position for diverse reasons.
Consider that in 1992, Americans will spend an estimated $36 billion on diet programs and products alone.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.25-6.5
6.25-6.5
9.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
6.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.62
3.75
5.92
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.68
3.69
5.70
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.84
3.86
5.74
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.21
7.24
7.98
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.02
8.01
8.26
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.97
8.97
9.32
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.71
6.70
7.29
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Snow in Nebraska Doesn't Deter Student


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-12  U.N. PLEADS FOR AFGHAN PACT
A special United Nations envoy met with Afghan rebel commanders in a northern stronghold and pleaded with them to think of the future of the country.
Many fear an eruption of ethnic warfare.
A1
The U.N. Secretary General vows to protect Afghanistan's borders.  A12
Pakistan's influence over Afghan guerrillas now seems limited.
A12  5 WHITE LAWMAKERS JOIN A.N.C.
The African National Congress effectively gained a beachhead in Parliament when five white lawmakers joined the group.
The legislators switched allegiance from the small Democratic Party, once the political home for white liberals.
A3  SUMO WRESTLER CHARGES RACISM
Konishiki, the 576-pound American who is Japan's biggest sports star, said that "simple racism" explained why he had been denied the highest rank in sumo wrestling.
A3  U.S.
NEEDS ALLIES, BAKER WARNS
Secretary of State Baker spelled out America's approach to foreign policy in the post-cold-war world, saying it must aim to build a "democratic peace" around the globe.
He warned against isolationism and "America first" patriotism.
A6  YELTSIN DRESSES DOWN HIS FOES
President Yeltsin brought a long, verbose session of the highest Russian Parliament to a close with a stern rebuke to lawmakers for "outbursts of senseless confrontations" with the executive branch.
A10
Grueling return for descendants of Georgia's old ruling family.
A4  SUPPORT FOR PERU'S LEADER SLIPS
The Government of President Fujimori showed signs of serious erosion as officials responsible for Peru's economic recovery programs and ties with the United States resigned.
The Congress, which Mr.
Fujimori dissolved two weeks ago, swore in an opposition President.
A7  DAILY HORROR IN SARAJEVO
Serbian guerrillas shelled Sarajevo's old Muslim-Slav center and furious gun battles erupted anew after European truce negotiators failed to halt a three-week offensive in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
A10  'RAY' IN CLOUD OVER LIBYA
President Mubarak of Egypt met with Colonel Qaddafi of Libya and said there was "a ray of hope" in the impasse over Libya's refusal to hand over suspects wanted by the West in an airline bombing.
But he conceded the matter "needs work." A5  After the next round, Mideast peace talks will shift to Rome.
A8  National A14-22  F.B.I.
AND BLACK AGENTS SETTLE
The F.B.I., accused by black agents of discriminating in promotions, transfers and assignments, announced that it had reached an agreement to promote some of them and provide dozens of others new jobs and special training.
A1  CALIFORNIA EXECUTES HARRIS
After a night of legal battling that included one reprieve granted after he had already been strapped into the chair in San Quentin's gas chamber, Robert Alton Harris was put to death.
The execution was California's first in 25 years.
A1  'IT WAS MONEY WE RELIED ON'
Regulators are trying to restrict an increasingly widespread but little-known practice: the transfer of hundreds of thousands of annuities and life and health insurance policies from one company to another each year.
In the worst cases, consumers have bought insurance or annuities from apparently strong companies, only to find that they must try to collect from other, insolvent companies.
A1  TSONGAS'S HEALTH HISTORY
Contrary to their earlier assurances, doctors of former Senator Tsongas now say that he suffered a recurrence of lymphoma in 1987, less than a year after undergoing an experimental bone marrow transplant, and was treated with an additional course of radiation.
A1
Some of Brown's days have been bad, and his nights worse.  A20
A House member was dropped as Democratic platform chief.  A20
Clinton's camp has a two-pronged strategy on negative ratings.
A20  NEW AIDS DRUG GAINS
In a test of a new Federal policy to speed certain drugs to the marketplace, a committee of advisers to the F.D.A. recommended that DDC be given conditional approval for AIDS treatment.
A22  LOW BIRTH WEIGHT ON THE RISE
Although the nation continues to make gains in infant mortality, the number of babies born abnormally small is increasing, the Government said.
A18  NEW FINDING ON PROSTATE CANCER
Swedish researchers reported that men with early prostate cancer who are not treated for their disease have excellent survival rates that rival those seen in patients who receive aggressive therapy.
A18  POLLUTION RULING BY JUSTICES
The Supreme Court shielded Federal agencies from having to pay fines for violations of Federal laws regulating water pollution and hazardous waste.
A16  A DIFFERENT STATE GOVERNMENT
Most states will emerge from the shadow of the recession in the next few years, but when they do their governments will probably be smaller operations that are more efficient but provide less aid to the middle class and the poor, budget officials across the nation say.
A14  Education Page B8  Duluth, Minn., has hired a private company to manage school system.
Men on campus at Wabash College, one of the last three of its kind.
Metropolitan Digest, B1 A SURPLUS AND A TURNABOUT
New York City will end this fiscal year with a substantial surplus and will not have to borrow to help balance next year's budget, the Dinkins administration said.
It represents a turnabout from the budget ills that dominated the first half of Mayor Dinkins's term.
A1  UNITED WAYS GEAR FOR BATTLE
United Way directors across the metropolitan region are getting ready to do battle for their personal reputations and the future of their charities after direct repercussions from the scandal that has shaken the United Way of America.
A1  Business Digest, D1  The Living Section C1-10  Restaurant help often eat well.
C1  At lunch with Nathan Lane.
C1  Health Page C12  Arts/Entertainment C13-20  Fox-Cameron megadeal.
C15  Dance: "Peter and the Wolf." C15  Sports B9-15  Baseball: Mets, Gooden topple Cardinals.
B9  Hockey: Devils even series with Rangers.
B9  Obituaries A23  Editorials/Op-Ed A24-25  Editorials A24  Higher education, or lower?
Unfair trade, and its victims.
The Court's rush to kill.
New York's showdown.
Letters A24  Anna Quindlen: Hearts and minds.
A25  Political lives in fiction's mirror: Joyce Carol Oates: "Black Water." A25  Tom Wicker: "Donovan's Wife." A25  Richard Perle: "Hard Line." A25


New York Spot On 1 Times Square
A commercial that won a contest intended as the first annual competition to promote "the new New York City" can be seen in the heart of Times Square for the next 13 weeks.
The winning 30-second spot -- called "You Live There?!" -- was created by Ron Herzig, a copywriter, and Mary Ann Fisher, an art director, at Young &amp; Rubicam New York.
Their commercial contrasts negative perceptions of New York with positive images of city life; for instance, the words "The shows cost too much" are followed by an image of young men hanging out on a stoop enjoying an impromptu harmonica concert.


Corrections
A brief article by The Associated Press in Business Day yesterday about the first-quarter earnings of the American Cyanamid Corporation misidentified a part of the company's business that has experienced a sales decline compared with last year.
The company reported lower sales for a conjugate vaccine for Haemophilus B, a bacterial meningitis that strikes infants and young children; the sales decline was not for a hemophilia treatment.


Pessimism and Bitterness on Eve of Trade Talks
Anticipating a failure of trade talks on Wednesday between President Bush and European Community leaders, American and European officials laid the groundwork today for blaming each other.
Both sides insisted that further concessions were out of the question while adding that they were eager to negotiate if the other side made a new offer.
But in private, trade officials were gloomy about the likelihood of fresh offers and described an especially poisonous atmosphere on the eve of the talks.


With Springtime Sunshine, a Midtown Park Is Reborn


Higher Education -- or Lower?
Virtually no public service can escape its share of the cutbacks that tough times impose on New York State.
But the reductions imposed on public universities now cut so close to the bone that it's becoming impossible to ask them simply to take the pain.
They cannot keep making cuts this deep and fulfill their assigned mission.
Something has to change.
Either there has to be more money, or less mission.
And it's none too soon for New Yorkers, like responsible citizens of other states, to argue out what it is they expect of higher education, public and private.


Baseball; Another Test, Another Plus For Gooden
For Dwight Gooden, it has been one test after another for months.
The Mets have had radar guns measure his fastball, X-ray machines examine his right shoulder, weight machines gauge his strength.
Test after test, psychological as well as physical, day after day.
Each answer to date has been good, and so each result has been special.
But for pure pitching pleasure, for unqualified personal pride, none quite matched the test he aced last night in the sixth inning of the Mets' 4-2 triumph over the Cardinals at Shea Stadium.


Los Angeles Journal; Wait for Subway Ends. Next Train Leaves in '93.
Far beneath the streets of Los Angeles, a revolution is under way.
In the land of the Little Deuce Coupe, the car culture is being subverted by, of all things, a subway.
Today, the Los Angeles County Transportation Commission, one of the regional agencies behind the project, took a crew of reporters, business people and civic boosters for their first ride through the tunnels.
The wide-eyed Angelenos, apparently unused to any form of transportation lacking seat belts, stumbled whenever the train started moving.
At each stop, a curator gave a short speech about the artwork that adorns the stations.


Wine Talk
YOU'VE been driving your beat-up car for years.
Looks awful but runs fine.
Then your neighbor comes home with a flashy new job, and for the first time you are embarrassed by your old clunker.
That's the way it is with petite sirah.
Long a staple of the California wine scene -- never a star but never exactly a bit player, either -- it was an acceptable grape producing an acceptable, occasionally attractive wine.


Quotation of the Day
"First and formost you are Afghans, then Tajiks and Uzbeks. You are all Afghans. The time is the most critical in history to think and act with authority. There are almost two million dead and two million disabled. Afghanistan has the highest rate of child mortality. For God's sake sit down and talk." -- BENON SEVAN, special United Nations envoy to Afghanistan.  [ A12:1. ]


Public &amp; Private; Hearts and Minds
Today the Supreme Court will hear arguments on a Pennsylvania law that would restrict access to abortion in that state.
Today demonstrators from both sides of the question will face each other across the unbridgeable moat of their disparate beliefs outside clinics in Buffalo.
What about tomorrow?


Rallies Held, Peacefully, Over Abortion
Hundreds of demonstrators stood in pouring rain from dawn until nearly dusk today in the widest and most bitter confrontation over abortion rights that this city has ever seen.
Police officers wearing bright orange rain slickers kept the two sides apart and city streets blocked off as Operation Rescue's "Spring of Life" protest began in earnest.


French Chef Warms to U.S. Ingredients
AS Raymond Blanc, an intense and finicky French chef, saw it, American ingredients had struck out twice.
But the third time he used them, the Yanks hit a home run.
Mr.
Blanc is the chef and owner of Le Manoir aux Quat' Saisons near Oxford, England, a magnificent country house hotel built in the 15th century.
He was in New York recently for a weekend, to cook a promotional dinner with Philippe Boulot, the chef at the Mark Hotel.


Bank Yields Are Lower For Week
Yields on bank money-market accounts and certificates of deposit were down for the week that ends today, according to The Bank Rate Monitor, but the decline was modest compared with that of a week ago.
New York rates were flat, analysts said, compared with yields offered at 20 large commercial banks nationally.
Robert K. Heady, publisher of the interest-rate publication, noted the mixed signals but added that the fair-sized cut in yields at commercial banks outside New York might have resulted from the interpretation of remarks last week by Alan Greenspan, the Federal Reserve chairman.


The Pop Life
Irony, but Not Always
The singer and songwriter Lyle Lovett, who moves into the Bottom Line next Tuesday for five days, looks like something out of a David Lynch movie: tall, angular and with a puff of hair sticking up on top of his head.
When he talks onstage he's epigrammatic or evasive.
He has just released his fourth record, "Joshua Judges Ruth" (MCA), and like his last, it wanders from style to style.
But more important, it wanders from straightforwardness to irony, and it's never quite clear how Mr.
Lovett intends his audience to read his work.
"I would hope an album would reflect not just one point of view," said Mr.
Lovett, talking by telephone as he rode across Texas in a bus.
"Irony in life can be interesting; things are ironic. I just try to show my sense of humor. Regular albums, which keep each tune in the same perspective, are boring. I'm just trying to do something interesting and real, in a human way. I'm trying to present different feelings descriptively and as accurately as I can."


Dallas Builders Get Park Contract
The first construction contract for a new $165 million stadium for the Texas Rangers has been awarded to a Dallas company, the team announced today.
Manhattan Construction Company will begin excavating the stadium site Friday.
The firm will also install the park's utilities and pour most of the concrete, including the foundation, service level and lower seating bowl.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Environment; Clinton Links Ecology Plans With Jobs
Acknowledging his shortcomings on environmental matters as Governor of Arkansas, Bill Clinton said today that states like his have suffered at the hands of Republican administrations that promoted "short-term tradeoffs between jobs and the environment."
In a speech timed to coincide with the annual observance of Earth Day, the Democratic Presidential candidate told an audience at Drexel University here that President Bush had been "reactive, rudderless and expedient" in addressing environmental concerns.


Federal Prisons Offer Education Opportunities
To the Editor:
The picture of Federal prisons as places to warehouse people convicted of crimes, as passed on by Marie Molloy in "For Rehabilitation" (letter, March 20) from the Rev.
Carl Kabat, one of the Plowshares Eight, is inaccurate.
She fails to refer to the value the Federal Bureau of Prisons places on inmate education.
The bureau provides a full range of education opportunities to inmates, including mandatory literacy to the high school level, mandatory English as a second language to the eighth grade, occupational training from introductory through apprenticeship certification, postsecondary classes, adult continuing education courses, library services and training for positive use of leisure time.
Release readiness direction is also provided from arrival to release to help each inmate take advantage of the opportunities available during incarceration.
Inmate tutors are trained and used throughout the Federal prison system and help to provide individualized assistance to many prisoners.


Johnson Wins Decision Over Collins for Middleweight Title
Reggie Johnson of Houston took the vacant World Boxing Association middleweight title when he won a majority decision over Steve Collins at Byrne Meadowlands Arena tonight.
It was as briskly paced fight that had the crowd of 6,042 excited throughout.
Collins was constantly moving forward, but Johnson did not shy from the action as he circled and countered.


Baseball; Kleinman Suit Is Ended
Lawyers for Fay Vincent, George Steinbrenner and Leonard Kleinman are scheduled to meet today to conclude the agreements dissolving the various legal disputes that have served as a roadblock to Steinbrenner's attempt to return to an active role with the Yankees.
For their part, the Yankees will give Kleinman the $1 million he says is owed him under a contract he signed last Jan. 9, approximately six weeks before he was dropped as the club's chief operating officer.
The settlement of that dispute clears the way for Kleinman to withdraw his lawsuit against Vincent.


Vanguard in the Battle for Dwindling Open Space; A Growing Cadre of Private Land Trusts Takes On Developers, and Politicians Too
In the next few days, 81 acres of shady woods and sunny meadows near the center of this tranquil village will be turned over to the local land trust, to be kept as it is -- without houses, apartments or office buildings -- for all time.
Barbara Quigley, who works at her family's bookstore here and looks with horror at the development that surged in nearby Southbury several years ago, praises the efforts of the land trust, a private, nonprofit preservation effort.
"We're a small town," she said, "and we want to stay a small town."


Tennis; The Molding of a Tennis Prodigy
When 10-year-old Anna Kournikova looks in the mirror at her brand-new Florida condo, she doesn't see a blue-chip investment staring her in the face, but everyone else does.
She has an agent, a high-octane coach, a supplier of tennis clothing and equipment and an exotic international travel itinerary that includes Messina, Italy, and Paris, where she'll tackle the French Open's junior division.
Her stunning debut on Florida's junior circuit this month seems a harbinger of shooting-star status: she was unseeded when she won her first event in Largo and then, just a week later, had already been swiftly reclassified as the top-seeded player while annihilating another 14-and-under age division at St.
Petersburg.


Don't Forget What South Africa Inflicted on Winnie Mandela; Isolation and Support
To the Editor:
Emma Gilbey's suggestion that the African National Congress has declared "open season on Winnie Mandela" and that "there is little room for compassion" in the new South Africa (Op-Ed April 14), shows either ignorance or mischievousness.
For years, the relationship between Winnie Mandela, the mass democratic movement and the A.N.C. has been extremely complicated.
Her recent actions generated wide controversy, especially among those who admired her courage and commitment as an independent woman.
It was compassion for the suffering inflicted on her by the apartheid regime that delayed our decision to isolate her politically.
It was compassion that dictated that this isolation should not involve withdrawal of personal support.


New Cabbies Reflect Change In the Mosaic Of New York
Five years ago, Jean Demosthenes, an electrician in his native Haiti, took a job driving a taxi in New York City because his friends from the city of Petionville told him it was the first step on the way to making it in America.
Seven months ago, Iftikhar Khan, a computer scientist from Pakistan, began driving a cab because his friends from Lahore told him the same thing.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
Abbey Healthcare Group Inc., Costa Mesa, Calif., appointed Michael Miller to the newly created post of chief operating officer.
*
Coltec Industries, New York, a manufacturing company serving the aerospace, automotive and other industrial markets, named Laurence Polsky senior vice president, administration.


Review/Ballet; A First for a Major Ashton Work
American Ballet Theater has been performing George Balanchine's "Theme and Variations" for decades while Sir Frederick Ashton's "Symphonic Variations" has just entered the repertory.
The importance of this first American production of a major Ashton work should not be underestimated.
Once considered the Royal Ballet's signature piece, the work has now been meticulously staged by Michael Somes of the original cast.


Gerald Feinberg, 58, Physicist; Taught at Columbia University
Dr.
Gerald Feinberg, a physicist with diverse interests who taught at Columbia University for more than 30 years, died on Tuesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 58 years old.
He died of cancer, his wife, Barbara Jane Feinberg, said.


Stars' High-Flying Contractor
"EXCUSE me," said the lady behind the two-way radio. "Are you waiting for the Navajo?"
The Navajo in question was not of the Window Rock, Ariz., variety but rather the Navajo Chieftain eight-seater with the blue plush seats owned and operated by Ben ("I'll Be There in a Heartbeat") Krupinski, ace East Hampton pilot and Contractor to the Stars.


Gain in Tax-Exempt Yields Reverses a Two-Week Slide
Yields on money market funds monitored by IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report were mixed in the latest week, as institutional and retail investors scrambled for the best returns.
For the week ended Tuesday, tax-exempt money fund yields showed substantial gains after two weeks of declines.
Analysts said the changes might be linked to the movement of money in and out of the funds, with yields increasing to attract investors.


Hospital Told To Hire Man With H.I.V.
The Department of Health and Human Services has ordered for the first time a hospital to forfeit substantial Federal financing unless it hires a health-care worker infected with the AIDS virus without placing restrictions on his duties.
"This is an important precedent," said Michael J. Astrue, the department's general counsel.
"It is the first civil rights enforcement action based on H.I.V. discrimination by any Federal agency."


Gay Comments Prompt Call for Resignation
New York City Councilman Tom Duane called yesterday for Councilman Enoch Williams to resign as chairman of the Council's health committee because of comments that were attributed to him in The New York Post on Monday.
The Post quoted Mr.
Williams, a Brooklyn Democrat, as saying that discrimination against homosexuals would limit sexual activity by homosexuals and curtail the spread of AIDS.
Mr.
Williams, in a statement released yesterday, said the article was "inaccurate and misleading."


Scanner Deal For Mitsubishi
The Mitsubishi Corporation plans to manufacture and market a new type of scanning technology that is more powerful than the current bar code, using a system developed by Veritec Inc. of Chatsworth, Calif.
Although the companies have not yet completed their agreements, Mitsubishi has invested in development of working prototypes of hand-held scanners for the new symbol, called a Vericode.


Corrections
An article yesterday and another on March 5 about cancer treatment given Paul E. Tsongas misstated the number of people who have run for President after being treated for cancer.
Mr.
Tsongas was not the first; Senator Frank Church, an Idaho Democrat who had been treated for testicular cancer in 1947, sought the nomination in 1976.
Mr.
Church died of cancer of the pancreas in 1984, at the age of 59.
A further report about Mr.
Tsongas's medical history appears today on page A22.


Uncovered Short Sales Rise on Two Exchanges
The number of shares sold short and not yet covered rose during the month ended April 8, the New York and American stock exchanges reported yesterday.
Traders took advantage of a spate of secondary offerings, and the pressure they often put on stock prices, to bet against those stocks.
On the Big Board, the figure was 718.7 million shares, up 4 percent, or 27.7 million, from early March.
On the American Stock Exchange, the figure was 62.8 million, up 5.5 percent, or 3.3 million.
The figures are totaled monthly by the two exchanges and the Nasdaq and represent the "short interest" for that period.


Corrections
An article on April 15 about the use of DNA analysis in legal proceedings misstated the affiliation of Randolph Jonakait.
He is a professor at New York Law School.


Essay; Candidates' Health
The last time a dying man ran for President of the U.S. was in 1944.
Franklin Roosevelt was declared to be "in splendid shape" by his doctor, Adm.
Ross McIntire.
When the wartime President's haggard appearance and quaking hands started rumors of his high blood pressure and weak heart, his press secretary prevailed on the F.B.I. to investigate a doctor suspected of leaking the truth.


Not Yet Out of the Woods; For Dinkins, a Projected Budget Surplus Means Good News and New Challenges
While New York City's budget surplus may free the Dinkins administration from having to borrow or make deeper budget cuts in the coming year, it is not the fiscal panacea that it may seem.
In fact, some fiscal monitors fear it will allow the city to put off making more fundamental changes in the way it does business -- changes that might be good for the city in the long run.


CHRONICLE
What do you do if you're up against JOHNNY CARSON on the last night of the "Tonight" show?
ARSENIO HALL intends to stay home watching his competition's farewell on May 22 rather than go on the air.
In fact, he plans to telecast reruns for the whole week.


Stocks Surge In Tokyo
Japanese stock prices rose sharply today, with the Nikkei index of 225 issues gaining more than 500 points to close above 17,000.
It last closed above that level on Monday.
Futures-related program buying led the market, but interest in individual issues kept the undertone firm, brokers said.


Accounts
*
United Distillers, London, to Leo Burnett Ltd., London, to advertise Dimple Scotch whisky across Europe.
Burnett won the account in a review that also included GGK, London, the incumbent; BBDO, Athens, and Lintas, Athens.
Billings were not disclosed. *
Kirshenbaum &amp; Bond, New York, said yesterday that it had resigned the $1 million account of Restaurant Associates Inc., New York, because the agency was "unable to make a profit." The account included restaurants like Mamma Leone's and the American Festival Cafe.


Doctors as Spin Doctors
Just a few months ago Paul Tsongas, who made personal honesty a touchstone of his unsuccessful Presidential campaign, realized that he had to allay public concern over whether he had truly won his bout with cancer.
So he told his doctors to lay his case out candidly for reporters.
Dr.
Tak Takvorian, his physician at the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute in Boston, diligently explained to this newspaper, among others, how Mr.
Tsongas had been treated with a bone marrow transplant in August 1986 and had since remained free of cancer for more than 5 1/2 years.


Braniff Aims at the Infrequent Flier
It has fewer daily departures throughout its entire system than USAir has from Indianapolis alone, and its fleet of 10 planes is hardly a threat to the 485 that fly the friendly skies for United.
But Braniff airlines, by charging passengers $100 or so less than its larger competitors, often manages to fill nearly all the seats on the 50 routes it does fly.
And at a time when the airline industry continues to bleed red ink, Braniff has made an increasingly larger, though still modest, profit in each of the last four months.


U.S.C. Coach Bows Out at Age 71
He says he has enjoyed it every stroke of the way and has no regrets, but at the age of 71, Southern California Coach PETER DALAND knows how to count.
"I've been at U.S.C. 35 years," he said, "and that's enough."


Queens Tennis Center Plan Is Announced and Denounced
With tennis world luminaries to provide glamour and support, Mayor David N. Dinkins, New York City's best-known recreational tennis player, began his campaign yesterday to win approval of plans to expand the site of the United States Open in Flushing Meadows-Corona Park, Queens.
He watched as city officials publicly signed an agreement with the United States Tennis Association, the Open's organizer, setting out the terms under which the National Tennis Center would expand in the park, and he lauded what he said would be the boon to the city created by the improvements that the association says it needs.


Padres Send Braves And Glavine Packing
Padres 9, Braves 4
SAN DIEGO, April 22 (AP) -- The San Diego Padres chased Tom Glavine before running the Atlanta Braves out of town.
The Padres hit Glavine hard, handing the 1991 National League Cy Young Award winner his first 1992 loss, 9-4, today.
Bruce Hurst pitched seven and a third strong innings for his first victory.
Glavine (2-1) gave up 11 hits in 4 innings, the most hits and his shortest outing this season.
Every Padres regular except Darrin Jackson had at least one hit off Glavine, and the top four batters had two apiece.
"I really don't have anything to attribute it to other than I just kept missing up over the plate, and when I do that, I tend to get killed," Glavine said.


Fed Tightens Bank Loans For Directors and Officers
The Federal Reserve Board adopted tighter limits yesterday on the amount a bank is allowed to lend to its directors, executives and large shareholders.
For banks above $100 million in size, total loans to insiders may not exceed the bank's capital, the Fed ruled.
For banks smaller than $100 million, which said the rule could hurt them because their directors were often local business leaders and major customers, loans to insiders must be limited to no more than twice the bank's capital.
The higher limit at small banks must be approved by the board.


When Welfare Tries Fingerprints
To the Editor:
As New York State prepares a pilot program mandating fingerprinting of welfare applicants and recipients in Onondaga and Rockland counties, we should look closer at the fingerprinting experience in Los Angeles (news article, April 6) and its likely ramifications in New York.
Any reduction in welfare fraud to be achieved by fingerprinting is realized by limiting the access of needy people to the welfare system.
From our experience with hundreds of community groups around New York State, we know that recent immigrants, Holocaust survivors, older people, political asylum seekers, psychiatric patients and those frequently most in need of government assistance are frightened by fingerprinting -- frightened enough to forgo needed medical, food and housing assistance if fingerprinting is required.


16 Die in California Crash Of Plane Full of Sky Divers
Sixteen people died and six others were seriously injured today when a plane loaded with American and Dutch sky divers crashed on takeoff from a small rural airport here.
Witnesses at the dusty airfield said that the plane, a De Havilland Twin Otter, climbed to about 15 feet, then seemed to lose power in its right engine at about 11:30 A.M.
The twin-engine turboprop aircraft then dipped to the right, they said, spun sideways and dropped to the ground.


Paring Down For the 90's (Well, Sort Of)
YOU can whisper money, coo money, sing money, talk money, moan money, gurgle money, sigh money, murmur money.
Just please, don't scream money.
"This doesn't scream money," said Stephen Mallory, referring to the neo-Gothic rosewood and ivory console plunked against the wall of the library he designed for the 20th annual Kips Bay Boys and Girls Club Decorator Show House.


I.B.M. and American Air in Aeroflot Deal
I.B.M. and American Airlines, which teamed up 25 years ago to create the airline industry's dominant computer reservation system, are working together again on a deal to build such a system for Aeroflot, the world's largest airline.
For I.B.M. and American, the Aeroflot contract could eventually translate into more than $100 million in revenues and a big foothold for American's Sabre system in the highly competitive international computer reservations business.


Teheran Journal; From the Back Seat in Iran, Murmurs of Unrest
Women in Iran ride in the back of the bus.
They are banned from studying mechanics or electrical engineering, from traveling in the country without their husbands or fathers and from serving as judges because Islamic clerics call them too emotional.
It is nearly impossible for a woman to initate divorce proceedings against her husband or to win custody of her children.
By law, a woman's testimony in court is not given equal weight to a man's, and during the recent Iranian New Year women received 25 percent less than their male colleagues in annual bonuses.


Red Wings Narrow Gap By Toppling North Stars
Red Wings 5, North Stars 4
BLOOMINGTON, Minn., April 20 (AP) -- Yves Racine's unassisted goal 1 minute 15 seconds into overtime capped a three-goal rally tonight, lifting Detroit past the Minnesota North Stars, 5-4.
The Red Wings had lost the first two games of the Norris Division series on their home ice.
Ray Sheppard's power-play goal with 3:32 left in regulation sent the game into overtime and backup goalie Vince Riendeau stopped all 11 shots he faced for the Red Wings, who finally beat a Minnesota team that finished 28 points behind them in the regular-season standings.
Sheppard hit the post a minute into overtime.
Fifteen seconds later, Racine gloved David Shaw's clearing attempt at the left point, placed the puck on the ice and slapped the puck over the glove of goalie Jon Casey.
Blues 5, Blackhawks 4
ST.
LOUIS (AP) -- Brett Hull scored on a slap shot at 3:33 of the second overtime as St.
Louis beat Chicago to take a 2-1 lead in their first-round Norris Division playoff series.
Hull took a drop pass from Bob Bassen in the slot and ripped a 20-footer between Dominik Hasek's pads for his second goal of the playoffs.
Hull led the league with 70 goals in the regular season.
The Blackhawks outshot the Blues, 9-7, in the first overtime, but St.
Louis had the best scoring chances.
Hasek stopped a Hull breakaway with about 4:30 left in the first overtime and on two chances during a three-shot flurry.
Jets 4, Canucks 2
WINNIPEG, Manitoba (AP) -- The Winnipeg Jets built a four-goal lead and threw a defensive blanket over Vancouver as they took a 2-1 lead in their Smythe Division series.
Randy Carlyle, Pat Elynuik, Lucien Deblois and Thomas Steen scored for the Jets, who finished 15 points behind the front-running Canucks during the regular season.
Oilers 4, Kings 3
EDMONTON, Alberta (AP) -- Bernie Nicholls scored his second power-play goal of the game with 7:23 remaining to give Edmonton the victory over Los Angeles and a 2-1 lead in their Smythe Division playoff series.


Review/Dance; Flamenco as a Part of Everyday Life
"Gypsy Passion," which opened on Tuesday at Town Hall (123 West 43d Street) for a two-week run, lives up to its name with fiery dancing and music.
But what makes the two-hour show even more enjoyable is its great charm.
There is hard-driving footwork, deep-rooted singing and guitar music, but be forewarned.
"Gypsy Passion" is a show to lose one's heart to, full of sunny warmth, a sense of family generations and a rare glimpse of flamenco not only as spectacular theater but as a part of everyday life.
The evening gets off to a slow start.
But Tomas Rodriguez-Pantoja, a former diplomat and a writer and director of theater about gypsy life and art, has put together a seamless series of scenes in which dance and music bubble and explode out of a night round a forest campfire and days in village streets, the marketplace and a little outdoor cafe.
All are suggested by means of evocative projections and a few simple props.
In the highlight of the evening, a man works away at a small foundry, his hammer quietly beating out a rhythm that draws two young lovers into a nuanced dance of exquisitely modulated emotions and sexual energy.


Rutgers Phone Building Seized in Tuition Protest
Telephone callers to Rutgers University this morning were greeted by an unfamiliar voice delivering a strange message: "This is the Rutgers Communications Center under student occupation. We're staging a protest over tuition. Where can I direct your call?"
The six students who took over the center at 17 Senior Street about 7:30 A.M. were able to operate the switchboards and deliver their message until about 10 A.M. when the university's main number was switched to the campus police headquarters.


Abortion and the Law; Sketches of 3 Lawyers In Abortion Argument
Kathryn Kolbert  American Civil Liberties Union lawyer
One of three senior lawyers for the A.C.L.U.
Reproductive Freedom Project. . . .
Successfully argued the case of Thornburgh v.
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists before the Supreme Court in 1985. . . .
As state coordinating counsel for the Reproductive Freedom Project since 1989, the 40-year-old Philadelphian assists the A.C.L.U.'s state offices and other local groups in lobbying for abortion rights. . . .
Litigated challenges to Pennsylvania abortion laws for the Philadelphia-based Women's Law Project from 1979 to 1988. . . .
Graduated from Cornell University School of Arts and Sciences and Temple University School of Law. . . .
Two children.
Ernest D. Preate Jr.
Pennsylvania Attorney General


Abortion and the Law: A Day in Court After Years of Skirmishing; Excerpts From Supreme Court Arguments on Pennsylvania Abortion Law
Following are excerpts from the oral argument today before the United States Supreme Court in the case of Planned Parenthood of Southeastern Pennsylvania v.
Robert P. Casey, as provided by Alderson Reporting Company.
KATHRYN KOLBERT  Counsel for A.C.L.U.
MS.
KOLBERT: Whether our Constitution endows Government with the power to force a woman to continue or to end a pregnancy against her will is the central question in this case.
Since this Court's decision in Roe v.
Wade, a generation of American women have come of age secure in the knowledge that the Constitution provides the highest level of protection for their child-bearing decisions.


Panel Opposes Government Policing of Scientific Misconduct Cases
A panel of experts said today that though misconduct in science was a serious problem, it was better dealt with by local universities and scientific institutions than by central authorities like government agencies.
The committee, convened by the National Academy of Sciences two years ago to address concerns raised by highly publicized scientific misconduct cases, said it did not support mandatory guidelines or regulations to police scientific integrity.


INSIDE
For Channel One, Bad News
The news program shown with commercials in high schools did little to increase students' knowledge of current events, a study found.
Page A18.
Israel's Peace Offering
After denouncing elections in the occupied lands as a platform for radicals, Israel is talking about letting Arabs pick their mayors.
Page A8.
Guilty of Day-Care Abuse
The owner of a North Carolina day-care center was convicted of sexually abusing 12 children.
Page A16.
Hiring of H.I.V.
Case Ordered
A Westchester hospital was ordered to hire a worker infected with the AIDS virus or lose aid.
Page B1.


Making Old Stoves Hot Again
TO some people, they are just old stoves, a prosaic kitchen accouterment at best.
But not to David Erickson, who restores and sells vintage cookers at Erickson's Antique Stoves in Littleton, Mass.
"These things are mechanical works of art," he said.
"They're gorgeous."
The old stoves in question range from nickel-plated Victorian coal-burners to huge white 1950's models loaded with chrome.
Cast-iron gas ranges from the 1920's are particularly distinctive, with an exposed, nickel-plated gas pipe on the front and stately Queen Anne legs.
Stoves from the 30's are more streamlined and, with fewer surface details, easier to keep clean.
And boxy 40's stoves look more like today's models.


Abortion and the Law; Court Gets Stark Arguments on Abortion
If there is a middle ground on abortion, it was not much in evidence in the arguments presented to the Supreme Court today in a Pennsylvania case that could determine the future of the constitutional right to abortion.
Broad statements of philosophy and policy marked the hourlong session, which at times appeared to have as much to do with the political world beyond the Court as with the process of constitutional decision-making within it.


QUAYLE AND E.P.A. SPLIT ON EMISSIONS
Vice President Quayle and other senior Administration officials remained deadlocked today with the Environmental Protection Agency over a bitterly contested E.P.A. proposal that the public be notified when companies with pollution permits seek to raise permissible emissions.
As a result of the stalemate, President Bush may be presented with each side's arguments within the next few days and be asked to make the decision himself.
At stake are not only what the White House says is billions of dollars in potential costs to thousands of American companies but the political consequences of having to rule against the interests of either the business or environmental communities.


HOCKEY HEADLINE&gt;Rangers Just Want To Learn From Loss
The Rangers recited a 52-year-old mantra today after their practice, and seemed to believe it: There is no reason to panic.
There is no reason to panic.
"We are not down on ourselves," Mark Messier said. "We are mad at ourselves."
The idea at Rye Playland was to achieve some therapeutic anger over a puzzling performance on Tuesday night at Madison Square Garden, where the Rangers committed a variety of defensive sins and were suitably punished, 7-3, by the Devils.


Books of The Times; A Tragicomic Novel About an Old Family Curse
Very Old Bones By William Kennedy 292 pages. Viking. $22.
A five-generation family tree is printed on the endpapers of William Kennedy's tragicomic new novel, "Very Old Bones." This chart proves useful to the reader not only for keeping straight the story's sprawling cast but also for identifying those family members who appeared in the previous novels of the author's Albany cycle, which are "Legs," "Billy Phelan's Greatest Game," "Ironweed" and "Quinn's Book."


194 Arrested in Protests at Buffalo Abortion Clinics
Almost 200 anti-abortion protesters were arrested here today after they staged a mid-morning march on a clinic, hoping to close it down.
The protesters failed for a third consecutive day to achieve their goal of "saving even one life" by blocking access to abortion clinics in the region.
The target of their protest, a clinic in suburban Amherst, remained open.
Patients were allowed to enter, closely guarded by both the police and escorts provided by abortion-rights groups.
Other clinics in the area also remained open.


New Campaigns
*
Burt Reynolds, in what is being called his first product endorsement, will appear in television commercials for Quaker State Motor Oil.
The spots, created by Grey Advertising Inc., New York, feature Mr.
Reynolds on camera talking about himself in a self-deprecating manner.
Radio spots and print advertisements are also planned.


Brown University Students Protest Admissions Policy


Nuggets Might Give Coach a Fast Break
If you think PAUL WESTHEAD will be back for a third season as coach of the Denver Nuggets after turning in the two worst records in franchise history, you'd better get your bets down in a hurry.
The Nuggets have called a news conference for today, and after a brief meeting yesterday between Westhead and General Manager BERNIE BICKERSTAFF, it was hard to find anybody in or out of the Denver organization who thought Westhead would be back.


U.S. Claims Teledyne Faked Tests On Parts for Missiles and Aircraft
The Justice Department has accused a leading maker of military electronics of systematically falsifying tests on one of the most basic components of sophisticated weapons and spacecraft, according to a lawsuit unsealed here today by a Federal judge.
The civil suit asserts that the company, Teledyne Inc., routinely certified to the Government between 1983 and 1990 that the electrical components had passed rigorous tests of their reliability when in fact they were often failing or when the test results were skewed by faulty test equipment.


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday about a consortium offering standards for a wireless data transfer system misstated the time that the proposed system would take to transmit "Moby-Dick." It is about six minutes, not six hours.


What if Bosnia Had Oil?
When Saddam Hussein sent his divisions plunging into helpless little Kuwait, President Bush proclaimed an inviolable principle: Aggression would not stand.
Hah, cynics said, the issue is not principle but
oil.
If Kuwait were not rich in oil, the West would not have rushed half a million soldiers to the Persian Gulf.
Was the President following a double standard?
The world now looks to the aggression, every bit as cruel and unprovoked, by Serbia's Slobodan Milosevic against Bosnia and Herzegovina.
That newborn state has no oil -- and no defenses.
Will the U.S. and Europe stand up for principle as strongly as they did for petroleum?


A Rolls Corolla? Not Likely; Toyota Declines to Make Bid
The Toyota Motor Corporation said today that it had turned down an offer to buy Rolls-Royce Motor Cars, the loss-making luxury car division of Vickers P.L.C., a disclosure that led the British company to say that it had been holding discussions with a number of international companies, but it gave no details.
Toyota's president, Shoichiro Toyoda, said at a news conference in Osaka that his company had turned down an offer to buy Rolls-Royce because it had had insufficient time to formulate a bid.
"They needed an answer very quickly," Mr.
Toyoda said, without saying when Toyota had been approached.


Bridge
The most successful mixed partnership in the New York metropolitan area in 1991 was that of Roy Welland and Christal Henner, both of Manhattan.
One of their recent successes was in Cromwell, Conn., in February where they won the Regional Swiss Team title.
On the diagramed deal from the Knockout Teams in the same tournament, Welland played neatly to overcome a bad trump split in an aggressive slam contract.
The bidding marked East with a spade-diamond two-suiter, and West chose a diamond lead.
The jack was covered by the king and ace, and South cashed the queen.
When a third diamond was played West ruffed with the five.
This forced South to overruff with the queen and made another diamond ruff impractical.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Tuesday about the pace of executions around the United States referred incorrectly to a Supreme Court ruling in 1972 that led to a temporary halt.
In the decision, Furman v.
Georgia, the Court held that the death penalty laws of several states were "arbitrarily and capriciously applied" because jurors lacked consistent guidelines on when the penalty was to be used; the Court did not find that the death penalty had been unequally meted out along racial lines.


New Microsoft-Digital Accords Expected
The Microsoft Corporation and the Digital Equipment Corporation will announce a series of agreements tomorrow aimed at strengthening their cooperation in computer hardware and software, including operating systems, software applications and electronic mail.
Microsoft will confirm that it is developing a version of its new NT operating system for Digital Equipment's Alpha microprocessor, an industry executive familiar with the deal said.
Microsoft will also announce that it plans to create versions of its most popular applications programs to run on the Alpha chip at some unspecified time.
Finally, the two companies will cooperate on Microsoft's electronic mail standard, making it compatible with Digital's network computer systems.


Review/Pop; Rock-on-Parade Returns to the Ritz
Back in the 1950's and 60's, package tours were big business.
Groups of rock-and-roll or rhythm-and-blues acts would roll from town to town, jamming marquees with long lists of names: Jerry Lee Lewis, Chuck Berry, Buddy Holly, Frankie Lymon and others on the disk jockey Alan Freed's "Big Beat" tour in 1958; Otis Redding, Sam and Dave, Carla Thomas and Eddie Floyd with the "Stax-Volt Revue" in 1967.
Package tours were grand parades of talent, uniting groups through audience appeal and the promoter's financial interest.
Teen-agers had the chance to scream, dance and occasionally riot.
MTV, a kind of corporate, 90's answer to the taste-makers of yore, has revived the package tour in high style with the "120 Minutes" tour.
Sponsored by and modeled on one of the cable channel's most successful and longest-running weekly programs, "120 Minutes," the tour tries to package hipness.
The four bands on the bill -- Big Audio Dynamite II (generally known as B.A.D. II), Public Image Ltd. (known as P.I.L.), Live and Blind Melon -- are more cutting-edge than the average Van Halen video in heavy rotation, yet all have strong appeal to alternative-rock audiences.


Little Help From a School TV Show
Channel One, the news program shown with commercials in high schools, did little to increase students' knowledge of current events, according to a study paid for by Channel One's owner, Whittle Communications..
Channel One began broadcasting in March 1990, touching off a battle between those who saw a cynical effort to make profits from school children and others who saw commercials as a small price to pay for the video equipment schools received if they accepted Channel One.
Whittle Communications requires that the 12-minute program be shown in its entirety, including the two minutes of commercials.


Baseball; After Cone Is Lifted, Murray's Homer Lifts Mets
It was a litany throughout spring training, Jeff Torborg's call to the New York Mets to show character when it would count the most: in their last time at bat of the game.
He had, after all, grown used to seeing dramatics in Chicago, his White Sox having won 29 games in their final time at bat in 1991.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.25-6.5
6.25-6.5
9.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
6.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.62
3.83
5.82
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.67
3.68
5.64
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.83
3.84
5.70
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.21
7.21
7.90
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.03
8.02
8.20
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.98
8.97
9.27
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.71
6.71
7.27
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


William Whiteside; Decorated Leader Of Military Was 90
Rear Adm.
William J. Whiteside, who ferried Allied units across the Rhine in 1945 and then followed Gen.
Dwight D. Eisenhower, his Commander-in-Chief, to Columbia University to manage its physical upkeep, died on Monday in a nursing home outside London.
He was 90 years old.
He died after a lengthy illness, his family said.


Beds With Architecture
AN hour before the opening, people were already milling about inside the Design Gallery Milano in Milan, ogling Ettore Sottsass' "Rovine/Ruins" collection, which made its debut on April 10.
Included were a couple of very large and colorful storage units, about a dozen overscale vases and four monumental beds.
But instead of being full size, the beds were shortened, defined only by their headboards and footboards, in the style of a sheet showroom.
In between the headboards and footboards -- some had built-in lighting, all had architectural overtones (a chrome fence, a plastic laminate brick wall, left) -- were mounds of fresh white linen.


Unwanted Homeless Meet an Unusual Backyard
DRAPED in the garb of the grieving, Angela Mooney rode in a long black hearse to a public hearing five years ago to dramatize her opposition to construction of a shelter for homeless families in her neighborhood.
Such was the fear and anger of citizens in Briarwood, Queens, that the shelter and its 300 residents would despoil their community of winding streets, private homes and apartment buildings.


Penguins Feeling Heat As Cold Front Sets In
When they continue their defense of the Stanley Cup on Thursday night in Pittsburgh, the embattled Mario Lemieux and his rattled Penguin teammates must contemplate what a repeat of Games 1 and 2 would mean for their place in history.
Since the 1952 Toronto Maple Leafs, no defending champion has been swept in the first round.
But if the Penguins' performances back at the Igloo are consistent with their display Tuesday night at the Capital Centre, the champs of last spring could be waving a white flag by May Day.


William Beers, 77, Led Kraft After Start As a Cheese Maker
William O. Beers, who began as a part-time cheese maker and became president and board chairman of Kraft, one of the world's largest food companies, died on Sunday at Scottsdale Memorial Hospital North in Scottsdale, Ariz.
He was 77 years old and lived in Wilmette, Ill.
He also had a winter home in Carefree, Ariz.
He died of respiratory illness, his family said.


Don't Forget What South Africa Inflicted on Winnie Mandela; Nefarious Policy
To the Editor:
Such articles as "De Klerk Is Given Red-Carpet Welcome in Nigeria" (front page, April 10), on the welcome F. W. de Klerk has received throughout black Africa and the black African nations that are establishing diplomatic and trade relations with South Africa, bear testimony to the embarrassing myopia of New York City's anti-South African stand.
While black African nations, including states that directly abut South Africa, join in efforts to benefit from trade with Pretoria and help establish an atmosphere to assure white South Africans that their post-apartheid nation will enjoy peace and prosperity with its neighbors, David N. Dinkins, Ruth Messinger and others treat South Africa as if the dramatic changes of the last few years had never occurred.


Ranger-Devil Fans Can't Get Enough Cable
So you want to watch the
entire
Rangers-Devils playoff series?
You've got to load up on cable because if you want to catch every game you will need the MSG Network for Ranger home games at Madison Square Garden and SportsChannel for Devil home games at the Meadowlands.
The twain does not meet.
An agreement between the teams bars Ranger games played in New Jersey from being shown on MSGN and Devil games in New York from being shown on SportsChannel.


Subway Schedule Cuts Will Alienate Riders
To the Editor:
Can no one save the New York City Transit Authority from itself?
In June, the T.A. intends to chop as much as 25 percent off many rush hour subway schedules.
The message riders receive from this policy is: If you have to wait this long for a train in rush hours, don't even think of taking the subway in off-peak hours.
If the Transit Authority had deliberately embarked on a policy to discourage ridership, it couldn't have picked a better scenario: force people to wait longer, ride on overcrowded trains, provide erratic service and ask people to pay more for it.


New England Now Focus of Bank Inquiry
Federal authorities are investigating more than 230 cases of suspected banking fraud in New England that could amount to more than $1 billion, shifting the chief focus of their banking inquiries from the Southwest.
Officers of financial institutions are suspected in some cases, while the institutions were the victims of outsiders in other cases, the authorities said.


Review/Music; The Melodic Energy And the Textures Of Shulamit Ran
On Tuesday night, just two weeks after the Pulitzer Prize in music was announced (with the jury's recommendation of Ralph Shapey overruled by the Pulitzer board), the music of last year's Pulitzer winner, Shulamit Ran, was presented in concert by the Da Capo Chamber Players at Merkin Concert Hall.
Ms.
Ran was a student of Mr.
Shapey's and is now his colleague at the University of Chicago.
There are, in fact, some similarities in their styles.
Ms.
Ran, like Mr.
Shapey, uses a primarily dissonant musical universe to create impassioned, personal statements.
Like Mr.
Shapey, she tends to use repeating thematic fragments in different contexts; it is as if the same material were being viewed through different emotional filters rather than being constantly transformed by reflection and experience.


Data on Iraq Nuclear Warnings Released by U.S.
Dismissing charges that it silenced an official who warned in 1989 that Iraq had embarked on a major effort to build a nuclear bomb, the Energy Department yesterday took the unusual step of declassifying and publicly releasing important documents in the dispute.
The agency said the documents showed that it had acted in a conscientious manner.


Quotation of the Day
"It is my view that the state can look out and say we, as we have historically, regulate and legislate in the interest of those who will come into being, who will be born." -- KENNETH W. STARR, United States Solicitor General, in support of Pennsylvania's abortion restrictions.  [ B11:2. ]
"To regress now by permitting states suddenly to impose burdensome regulations, or to criminalize conduct, would be incompatible with any notion of principled constitutional decision-making." -- KATHRYN KOLBERT of the American Civil Liberties Union, arguing against the Pennsylvania law.  [ B10:1. ]


PARENT &amp; CHILD
CHILDREN are quick to sense the power and symbolic value of money.
Long before they understand such concepts as saving and borrowing, they see the emotions their parents associate with those actions.
They're also quick to notice their parents' different responses when they spend some of their allowance on a candy bar, or put it in a piggy bank.
By the time they are in elementary school, big differences are seen in the ways children from families with similar finances use their money.


Events: Planting Trees And Saving the Earth
Environmental Programs
New York Botanical Garden, 200th Street and Southern Boulevard
, Bedford Park section of the Bronx; (212) 220-8777.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Independent; Perot Hires a Veteran Journalist To Act as His Press Spokesman
In a move that will further speculation that he intends to run for President, Ross Perot has hired a veteran journalist to act as his press spokesman.
Aides to Mr.
Perot said he had hired James Squires, the former editor of The Chicago Tribune and The Orlando Sentinel Star.
Thomas W. Luce 3d, a Dallas lawyer and a long-time Perot aide who heads the petition drive for the Texas billionaire, said the volume of requests for interviews and personal appearances had grown too large and that a veteran journalist was needed to help sort things out.


At Least 200 Dead as Blasts Rock a Mexican City
A series of powerful explosions flattened homes and tore up streets through a working-class neighborhood of this city today, killing at least 200 people and injuring 600 others, the authorities said.
The chief spokesman for the Jalisco state government, Jaime Avalos, said the explosions in Mexico's second-largest city appeared to have been caused by hexane dumped by a private cooking oil company into the sewer system.
Hexane is a highly volatile liquid used to extract edible oils from seeds.


Lawyer Says One Officer Tried to End Beating
The lawyer for one of four police officers accused in the videotaped beating of a black motorist turned on the others today, calling their actions "a holocaust of batons and boots and blood" and accusing them of orchestrating perjured testimony.
The dramatic clash came on the final day of arguments in the seven-week trial, more than 13 months after the beating of the motorist, Rodney G. King, on March 3, 1991.
Judge Stanley M. Weisberg of Los Angeles Superior Court said he would send the case to the jury Thursday.


Growing
THE spinach and the lettuce are up, and instead of feeling all happy and excited, I'm getting nervous.
I look at the half-pound bag of Tendercrop beans with a sense of dreary fatalism.
Maybe there's no sense in even planting them.
"You should have seen him waddling out there every evening, as if that lettuce patch were his personal garden," my mother said.
"You'd think we planted those string beans last year just for him. He ate every one."


Manhattan Skyscraper Agreement
The enormous 1585 Broadway office tower in Manhattan's theater district, which has been suspended in a state of near-completion while its sole tenant battled the developer, may be finished soon if a settlement announced yesterday goes through.
Under the settlement, the chief lenders would finance the final round of construction at the 42-story skyscraper between West 47th and West 48th Streets, and the tenant, the law firm of Proskauer Rose Goetz &amp; Mendelsohn would begin paying rent, which it has withheld since October.


Reviews/Dance; A Casual Approach to a Taut Style
The Jazz Tap Ensemble is offering amiable entertainment at the Joyce Theater, where it opened an engagement on Tuesday night.
There was plenty of virtuosity in the program by this Los Angeles-based company of three tap-dancers and four jazz musicians.
Yet there were no egotistical displays.
And although everyone adopted a casual manner, no one was listless or sloppy.
Obviously, modesty can get this troupe anywhere, especially when it is combined with skill.
The dancers and musicians were obviously people who loved what they were doing, and they knew that they did not need to fuss or strain to communicate that love.


Meeting On Trade A Failure
President Bush and European Community leaders failed today to resolve their differences in global talks on reducing trade barriers, making it much less likely that an overall deal can be concluded this year.
Even last-minute efforts to find a face-saving compromise on a minor issue were unsuccessful, leaving the leaders here able only to pledge yet again their political commitment to continued negotiations and an eventual compromise.
Previous meetings between the President and various foreign heads of state have produced similar declarations, as have the last two annual economic summit meetings of the leaders of the Group of Seven major industrial nations.


Calendar: Things to See, Make, Learn and Buy
Library Symposium
Pierpont Morgan Library, 29 East 36th Street; (212) 685-0008.


10,000 White Vases By 100 People
IT'S a project that is truly irresistible, especially if you aren't the one who has to organize it all.
Here's how it works: First you take a white porcelain vase, one whose iconic shape has been determined by Alessandro Mendini, the avant-garde designer.


U.S. Reacts Coolly to Peruvian Leader's Program
The United States today kept up the pressure it has maintained on President Alberto K. Fujimori since he assumed near dictatorial powers by holding back any clear endorsement of his proclaimed timetable for restoring constitutional rule.
Margaret Tutwiler, the State Department spokeswoman, said in Washington that the series of referendums and votes that Mr.
Fujimori outlined in a televised address to the nation on Tuesday night would restore democracy more quickly than his earlier proposals, but she added, "In our opinion, it would still leave Peru without constitutional processes for nearly a year."


Baseball; On a Sloppy Night, Yanks Laugh Last
In a game tonight between the Yankees and White Sox that was filled with base-running miscues, missed signs, sloppy fielding, sloppy throwing and enough ugliness to compile a blooper tape, it was fitting that even the deciding run involved a bizarre sequence.
Kevin Maas slapped a single off the glove of a diving Frank Thomas near first base to drive in Roberto Kelly in the ninth inning and power the Yankees to a strange 4-3 victory at Comiskey Park.
Kelly would have scored on the previous base hit -- Mel Hall's 400-foot shot off the center-field fence -- but he missed second base, had to return to touch it and only made it to third.
Hall stayed on first with a single and then Maas, suddenly a force in the lineup, saved Kelly and the Yankees from any further embarrassment with his hit.
It was that sort of odd evening at chilly Comiskey.


Canada Puts Duty on Rugs From the U.S.
In addition to beer, automobiles, lumber and magnesium, a new issue is adding to trade tensions between the United States and Canada: carpets.
Finding that American carpet companies are "dumping" their goods in Canada at unfairly low prices, the Ottawa Government has just imposed a duty averaging 12 percent on virtually all American carpets shipped here.
The trade tensions are causing new strains in the two countries' relationship.


Brian Shaw Is Dead; British Dancer, 63, Known as Classicist
Brian Shaw, a leading dancer with the Royal Ballet in London in the 1950's and 60's, died on April 2 at the age of 63 in a hospital in London.
Mr. Shaw died after an undisclosed illness of several months.


Controversial Spots By Adman Candidate
The Indiana Republican whose television commercials have attracted national attention for graphically portraying dead fetuses has had experience in advertising as well as politics.
Michael E. Bailey, an abortion foe who is seeking to become his party's candidate in Indiana's Fifth Congressional District, said that he had spent about eight years running his own advertising and promotions firm, J. Michael &amp; Associates in Indianapolis.
For the last year, he added in a telephone interview yesterday, he has operated a company called Christian Media Ministries in Lanesville, Ind., creating radio and television commercials with evangelical Christian messages.


For Tyson, a Day in His New Life
After completing his orientation at an Indiana prison, MIKE TYSON began his permanent weekday routine yesterday: attending classes in the morning and working in the recreation area in the afternoon.
The former heayweight champion, who is serving a six-year sentence for rape, will be paid 65 cents an hour.


Slew of Suspensions at Wisconsin
Wisconsin Coach JEFF SAUER will have to sit out his team's next post-season game because of the way some of his players and coaches acted after the last one, the collegiate championship April 4 in Albany.


Priest, 69, Assaulted At Brooklyn Church
A 69-year-old Roman Catholic priest, while making a routine check of the church grounds last night, was assaulted by a man who had been sitting on the steps of the church, the police said.
The priest, the Rev.
James Ryan, the pastor of St.
Fortunata Roman Catholic Church at 2609 Linden Boulevard in Brooklyn, was taken to Jamaica Hospital in Queens with several lacerations on his face.
He was listed in stable condition last night, awaiting the results of X-rays.


Sins of the Father
It's a poignant predicament.
Catherine Abate, New York City's new Correction Commissioner, suddenly finds her career clouded by allegations that her father was linked to organized crime.
The natural instinct is to be sympathetic.
No fair-minded person would visit the sins of a father unfairly on a daughter, least of all one with an unblemished 20-year career as attorney and public servant.
Gov.
Mario Cuomo, understandably sensitive to crude stereotyping of Italian-Americans, attacks the charges as hearsay.
But it carries sympathy too far to dismiss the allegations as gossip and to insist that they are not relevant.
The issue here, apart from the real or imagined sins of the father, is the candor of the daughter, and how that bears on her fitness for a high law enforcement position.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  UNIONS DEMAND PIECE OF THE SURPLUS
Leaders of New York City's municipal unions demanded a share of the budget surplus announced by the Dinkins administration and accused Mayor Dinkins of distorting the budget picture in the past to win labor concessions.
The unions were among many contingents that came forward to claim a bigger piece of the budget pie, as word spread that the city will end the fiscal year with a substantial surplus.
A1.
What the surplus means.
News Analysis, B4.
A REVERSAL ON RUSH-HOUR CUTS


Abortion and the Law; Sketches of 3 Lawyers In Abortion Argument
Kathryn Kolbert  American Civil Liberties Union lawyer
One of three senior lawyers for the A.C.L.U.
Reproductive Freedom Project. . . .
Successfully argued the case of Thornburgh v.
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists before the Supreme Court in 1985. . . .
As state coordinating counsel for the Reproductive Freedom Project since 1989, the 40-year-old Philadelphian assists the A.C.L.U.'s state offices and other local groups in lobbying for abortion rights. . . .
Litigated challenges to Pennsylvania abortion laws for the Philadelphia-based Women's Law Project from 1979 to 1988. . . .
Graduated from Cornell University School of Arts and Sciences and Temple University School of Law. . . .
Two children.
Ernest D. Preate Jr.
Pennsylvania Attorney General


Rush-Hour Subway Cuts Reversed by M.T.A. Chief
The chairman of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority yesterday scuttled plans to reduce rush-hour service on nine subway lines because of declining ridership.
He urged transit officials instead to work aggressively to entice more people to ride the subway.
The action of the chairman, Peter E. Stangl, followed several weeks of intense lobbying against the service reductions by consumer advocates, Mayor David N. Dinkins and dozens of state legislators.
They had argued that to reduce service now would increase crowding on rush-hour trains and ultimately drive more riders away from the subway.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
WORN-OUT stair carpeting not only looks terrible, it can also be dangerous.
But replacing it is not too difficult.
The first step is to remove the old carpeting.
If tacks are visible, pry these out with a flat pry bar to free the material.
If you can slide the tool beneath a flap of loosened carpet, the job will be easier.


G.E. Inquiry Into Diamonds Charge
The General Electric Company said yesterday that it had begun an internal investigation into charges that some of its officials conspired with the De Beers cartel to fix the price of industrial diamonds, as asserted by a former vice president in a lawsuit.
The unusual suit was filed on Tuesday in Cincinnati by Edward J. Russell, who until November was a corporate vice president in charge of the abrasives division, which handles the industrial-diamond business.


Welfare Plan Linked to Jobs Is Paying Off, a Study Shows
Four years after Congress passed major legislation aimed at moving welfare recipients into jobs, the first study of its effect shows it has raised the earnings of people on welfare and reduced the amount they receive in public aid.
But analysts are already at odds over whether to deem the gains large or small, and whether they hold much of an answer to the nation's welfare problems.


Cavs Hope to Make a Lasting Impression in Playoffs
The last time the Cleveland Cavaliers advanced beyond the first round of the National Basketball Association playoffs was 1976, and their coach was Bill Fitch.
What does this remind us of, besides the 57-year-old Fitch's longevity?
That the Cavaliers, while obvious favorites to defeat the Nets, have some playoff baggage of their own to carry into the first-round series, which begins tonight at the Coliseum in Richfield, Ohio.


At Highest Level, A Trade Stalemate
President Bush and European Community leaders failed yesterday to resolve their differences on reducing trade barriers.
Both sides said they now hoped a breakthrough on the main sticking point, Europe's farm-subsidy system, might come before the July economic summit in Munich.
But they cautioned that no deadline had been set.
Business Day, page D1.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Garland Jeffreys Bottom Line
Midway in his solo concert on Tuesday evening, the veteran singer and songwriter Garland Jeffreys prefaced his song "Racial Repertoire" with a true story about being the target of racial abuse not long ago while riding on a New York subway.
Although ethnic self-consciousness has been a theme in Mr.
Jeffreys's music during the two decades he has been making records, his newest album, "Don't Call Me Buckwheat" (which includes "Racial Repertoire"), is his first to make it the focus of almost every song.


Parking Rules
Because of Orthodox Holy Thursday, Orthodox Good Friday and the seventh and eighth days of Passover, alternate-side parking rules are suspended in New York City today, tomorrow and Saturday.
Other regulations remain in effect.


Mysterious White Lights
THERE'S nothing like the work of Andrea Branzi to remind the world that poetry can be an ingredient in modern design.
Mr.
Branzi, one of the leaders of the Italian avant-garde design movement, has introduced a series of lamps called "Luoghi" (Italian for "places").
The lamps are part of a collection called "Amnesie." "We can't trust our memories but can't rely on total forgetfulness either," Mr.
Branzi explained.
Maybe he meant that the lamps -- each a disparate series of elements that include a cone of stiff paper, a feather, a crumpled piece of black and white checked paper -- are both familiar and mysterious.


Kang Keqing, 80, Women's Aide And Veteran of the Long March
Kang Keqing, a veteran of the Communists' Long March and one of the best-known women in China, died today in the capital.
She was 80 years old.
The official New China News Agency praised Ms.
Kang as "an outstanding leader of the women's movement in China" and said she had died of an unspecified illness.


Simple Design That Fits
REMEMBER when everyday household objects looked just like they were supposed to: nice and shiny and straightforward?
Giulio Cappellini, an Italian furniture manufacturer, thinks minimal design is still the way to go.
At his factory in Carugo, outside Milan, Mr.
Cappellini assembled Progetto Oggetto, a display coordinated by Jasper Morrison and James Irvine, English designers.
There are about two dozen ordinary objects: things like a bottle-green vase, a medicine chest in the shape of a red cross (right) and a chrome toilet-paper holder.
Mr.
Cappellini called the designs "simple, clear and human."


Demands Rise in P.L.O. for Wider Leadership
Two weeks after Yasir Arafat's brush with death, demands are growing from various factions in the Palestine Liberation Organization for a collective leadership.
The P.L.O. chairman was missing for 15 hours before a search party found him after his plane crashed in the Libyan Desert on April 7, killing three of the people aboard.
Mr.
Arafat escaped with minor injuries, but the incident sent shock waves among Palestinians and throughout the Middle East.


Vaino Linna, Novelist, 71
Vaino Linna, author of "The Unknown Soldier," a novel dealing with Finland's 1941-44 war with the Soviet Union, died on Tuesday at a hospital in Kangasala, a small town in central Finland.
He was 71 years old.
As is customary in Finland, hospital officials would not disclose the cause of death.


233 Jobs Cuts At Tropicana
Tropicana Products Inc. cut 233 jobs as part of a cost-control program, giving layoff notices to 145 workers and cutting other vacant positions.
Tropicana, a unit of the Seagram Company, terminated 105 workers at its Bradenton headquarters, and another 40 jobs were eliminated at distribution plants in Jersey City and City of Industry, Calif.


European Travel &amp; Life Magazine Is Closed
European Travel &amp; Life, a magazine aimed at affluent and sophisticated Europhiles, ceased publication yesterday, a victim of declining tourism and advertising.
Conde Nast Publications Inc. bought the magazine's list of 367,000 subscribers in hopes of luring them to its Conde Nast Traveler magazine.


America Lurches to the Left
Who would win a three-way race for President among George Bush, Bill Clinton and Ross Perot?
Regardless of the vote totals in November, the correct answer is Lefthanders International, based in Topeka, Kan.
Its delighted members have discovered that all three candidates or near-candidates are left-handed.
That is true for 10 percent of the adult public, including the writer of this left-handed political analysis, and for them the striking coincidence may be the most heartening development since Leonardo painted "Mona Lisa" and Michelangelo carved "David," left-handedly of course.


Home for Adults Criticized Over Suicide
A New York State watchdog agency blamed a Bronx adult home yesterday for failing to take steps that might have prevented the suicide of a patient in September.
The State Commission on Quality Care for the Mentally Disabled issued a report criticizing the Parkview Home for Adults at 6585 Broadway in Riverdale for giving the patient improper medication and for failing to provide adequate security.
The patient, Wayne Thomas, 34 years old, jumped from the roof of the home.


Outcry Over Commercials Joking About Mental Illness
ORGANIZATIONS that seek to help the mentally ill are becoming increasingly critical of advertising campaigns that, they assert, portray mental illness in an insensitively jocular fashion.
The organizations object to broadcast commercials, print advertisements and outdoor signs that use words like "crazy," "nuts," "madman" and "committed," as well as images of straitjackets, padded cells and actors portraying insane people being led away by guards.


Baseball; Tartabull May Be Put On the Disabled List
The injury news continued to be alarming for the Yankees today when they revealed that Danny Tartabull might be placed on the 15-day disabled list Friday because of a pulled hamstring in his left leg.
The $25.5 million player has already been restricted to designated-hitter status this season because of a sprained right wrist.
Tartabull injured the hamstring in the seventh inning against Cleveland Monday as he raced from first to third on Randy Velarde's single.
He will be examined in New York Thursday and will most likely have a magnetic resonance imaging procedure to determine the extent of his most recent injury.


Abroad at Home; Life and Death
All the countries of the Western world save one have stopped executing criminals.
Why is the United States the exception?
Why are most Americans enthusiastic supporters of capital punishment?
The questions, longstanding ones, are raised again by the execution of Robert Alton Harris in California.
At 6:10 Tuesday morning, after a night of judicial orders and counter-orders, cyanide filled the San Quentin gas chamber.
At 6:21 Mr.
Harris was pronounced dead.


Arrest in Slaying at Hotel
A 32-year-old parolee from the Bronx was arrested yesterday in the killing last month of a 67-year-old maid who was found with her throat cut in a bathtub in the midtown hotel where she worked, the police said.
The parolee, Nelson Rodriguez of 1230 Spofford Avenue, was charged in the killing of the maid, Dazilyn Williams of Brooklyn, on March 21 in a room of the Hotel Lexington at 511 Lexington Avenue, a police spokesman, Lieut.
Robert Nardoza, said.
"The squad isn't sure of the motive but they think he was burglarizing the place when the maid walked in," Lieutenant Nardoza said.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Tori Amos Bottom Line
From the moment she came on stage on Monday night, Tori Amos exuded sex.
The young singer and songwriter sat down at her piano, her flame-red hair falling over her shoulders, her legs spread and torso twisted so that she faced the audience, her left foot in a red spike heel pumping the pedals.
As she performed "Little Earthquakes," the title song from her debut album "Tori Amos" (Atlantic), her clear, piercing voice began making strange swoops and turns, perhaps following the invisible "yellow bird flying/get shot in the wing" of her lyrics.
Her every intake of breath was an audible hiss, and she quivered and tensed as though she were on the brink of some physical implosion.
Suddenly she broke: "ee-yi-yi-yi-yi!" she screamed, again and again; then as the song ended she buckled and groaned with exhaustion.


The East Still Lags in Nuclear Safety, U.S. Finds
Despite years of Western efforts to help make nuclear plants safer in the former Soviet Union and Eastern Europe, progress toward that goal is slow and the chance of a serious accident remains too high, the chairman of the United States Nuclear Regulatory Commission said today.
Staff members told the commission that three reactors with safety problems in the former Soviet lands would be closed.
But two in once-Soviet Armenia, shut down since the 1988 earthquake, might be reopened because of electricity shortages, even though no more work has been done on protecting them from quakes.


CHRONICLE
With all the weighty international matters on his mind, one would hardly expect Secretary of State JAMES BAKER to be concerned with chimpanzees.
But tonight he will be honored for his assistance to JANE GOODALL in her work protecting chimpanzees in Africa.
Mr.
Baker and EDWARD P. BASS of the Texas oil family will receive the first Jane Goodall Institute International Conservation awards at a dinner at the National Geographic Society in Washington.


Afghan Refugees Prepare to Go Home
Fultanzari has never seen Afghanistan.
She was born in a mud refugee camp near Peshawar nine years ago.
Now, with 25 members of her family, she is returning to a village that she knows only from hearsay.
She is finally going home.
"I am happy, it is my home," she whispered shyly as she stood near her family's possessions -- dusty burlap bags, rope beds, dented steel trunks, mud-caked quilts and chickens and goats.
And then she smiled: "I know the name of my village."


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Ad Campaign; Clinton: The Candidate's Biography


Treasury Securities Fall Slightly
Prices of Treasury securities eased slightly in fairly active trading yesterday, as dealers bid on $14.75 billion worth of new two-year notes.
As expected, demand for the new securities was strong, and the notes were sold at an average yield of 5.43 percent, down sharply from the average 5.85 percent yield at the last two-year note sale on March 24.


Market Place; Looking Beyond Caterpillar Strike
THROUGHOUT the five-month strike by members of the United Automobile Workers union, Caterpillar Inc. insisted that the labor dispute was having little impact on the company's financial performance.
Demand for construction machinery had deteriorated and inventories remained far from depleted, the company said, so the absence of more than 12,000 hourly workers hardly disrupted its sales.
After the giant maker of bulldozers and excavators reported yesterday that it had lost $132 million in the first quarter, some analysts and investors pointed to the effects of the strike, which ended last week.
Still, most analysts seem to agree that the strike's end has left Caterpillar ready to capitalize on a pickup in domestic demand.


Corrections
A picture caption on Saturday about a radar station of the North American early-warning system in Canada's Northwest Territories misattributed a quotation about the continued need for the system.
It was made by Richard Bless, superviser at the Fox Main station, and not by Desmond Kelly.


Yale Names Baptist Pastor As Chaplain
Yale University today named the Rev.
Frederick J. Streets, the pastor of a Baptist church in Bridgeport, as its new chaplain.
Mr.
Streets will be the first black and the first Baptist to hold the post, which was filled by the Rev.
William Sloane Coffin, the outspoken Vietnam War critic, in the 1970's and by Timothy Dwight, the Yale president and patriarch, in the 1790's.


Corrections
The weekly ratings chart on the television page yesterday misstated the dates of the period covered.
The ratings were for April 13 to 19.


Garden Q. &amp; A.
Summer Bulbs
Q.
I would like to plant summer bulbs.
Where can I buy them, and what do you suggest? -- Lucille Ishikawa, Queens.


Taiwan Lifts Gold Curbs
Taiwan's Cabinet has decided to lift a 43-year ban on gold exports to help the island become one of Asia's major financial centers, officials said today.
"This is part of efforts to internationalize our financial markets," Susana Chang, deputy director general of the Bureau of Monetary Affairs, said in an interview.


Homeless Man Set on Fire; 3 Bronx Youths Are Held
Three Bronx teen-agers, overheard laughing as one shouted, "We're going to kill somebody tonight," set a homeless man on fire in a subway stairwell in lower Manhattan early yesterday, the transit police said.
But the sleeping 60-year-old victim escaped injury because of two subway riders who put out the fire and then led the transit police to the suspects.


Earth Day: Making the Planet a Cleaner Place to Live


Miscellany
*
Bowes Dentsu &amp; Partners, a joint venture of Young &amp; Rubicam Inc. and Dentsu, has transferred assets of the Muldoon Agency, a New York shop specializing in catalogue marketing, to Chapman Direct, New York, a unit of Y.&amp; R. Muldoon will remain a separate company.
Rosemary O'Brien, formerly director of client services at Chapman, will become executive vice president and general manager at Muldoon.


UNIONS DEMANDING SHARE OF SURPLUS IN DINKINS BUDGET
Leaders of New York City's municipal unions yesterday demanded a share of the budget surplus that the Dinkins administration disclosed a day before, and angrily denounced Mayor David N. Dinkins, saying he had previously distorted the budget picture to elicit labor concessions.
The Dinkins administration, which has vowed not to grant wage increases without productivity gains, sought to quell the clamor, and not just from the unions, as many contingents came forward yesterday to claim bigger pieces of the budget pie.


New York State Is Offering $2.3 Billion in Spring Debt
The State of New York went to market yesterday with a three-part, $2.3 billion offering of tax and revenue anticipation notes and tentatively priced the short-term issue through an underwriting group led by Bear, Stearns &amp; Company.
The so-called spring borrowing is the largest debt sale in the municipal bond market each year, but its importance to New York is being phased out.


America3 Breezes Past Stars &amp; Stripes
It isn't often that Dennis Conner finds himself looking up the stern of another boat.
But it's something else again when the stern is so far ahead he can barely see it.
Such was the case today when Conner lost his America's Cup defense finals match to America3 by 4 minutes 20 seconds.


Duke and Brown Together, Briefly
It looked like just another late night US Air connection between Pittsburgh and Washington.
Then David Duke, the former Ku Klux Klan leader and failed candidate for the Republican Presidential nomination, got on board.
Then former Gov.
Edmund G. Brown Jr., Democratic Presidential candidate, walked down the aisle.
They met.
They talked.
The other passengers, already glassy-eyed as befits the 9:50 out of Pittsburgh on a rainy Tuesday night, looked like involuntary extras in an episode of "The Twilight Zone." As Jacques Barzaghi, Mr.
Brown's semi-mystical adviser, put it, "It was a moment."


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION -- Announced that the Charlotte Knights will join the International League in 1993.
American League
CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Activated Chuck Finley, pitcher, from the 15-day disabled list.
Placed Don Robinson, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list.


Many in Former Soviet Lands Say That Now, They Feel Even More Insecure
People in the newly sovereign republics of the former Soviet Union report greater fear and insecurity than they felt before they became independent, a series of four recent public opinion polls there show.
The polls also imply that people in the new nations feel more concerned about foreign investment than invasion by foreigners, and more afraid of other former republics than they are of foreign powers.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Personal Health; Tsongas Says He'd Give Full Medical Disclosure if a Candidate
Paul E. Tsongas, who received an experimental bone marrow transplant for lymphoma in 1986 and additional radiation treatment after suffering a relapse in 1987, said yesterday that he would make his medical records available for an independent medical review if he became a Presidential or Vice-Presidential candidate.
If questions or concerns remain after such a review, Mr.
Tsongas said he would ask his doctors to arrange for tests by independent cancer experts.
The former Senator from Massachusetts outlined the plan in a letter to Dr.
George P. Canellos, the head of oncology at the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute in Boston, where he received treatment for lymphoma, a cancer of the immune system.


Hoping Players Will Be Open Fans
It won't have Wimbledon's greenery or cachet, nor will it boast the cozy, rose-trimmed clay courts of Roland Garros Stadium.
And although it's going to cost $180 million, it won't even be able to turn turtle with a retractable roof the way the Australian Open's stadium can.
But if biggest means best, the proposed National Tennis Center, which yesterday received the blessing of the city's politicans, is going to reign supreme as the undisputed Big Apple of the four Grand Slams.


Nationsbank to Sell 3% of Stock to Staff
Nationsbank, whose directors and top officers already own nearly 10 percent of the company -- an unusually high amount for a large bank -- said yesterday that it planned to sell about 3 percent of the company's shares to 55,000 employees.
The offering, to full- and part-time employees below the rank of senior vice president, would be the first of its kind for a leading banking company, Nationsbank said.
The company said 39,000 employees own about 10 million shares, or 4.3 percent of its 231.2 million shares outstanding, though the company's retirement savings plan or as independent investors.


The Silence That Kills
To the Editor:
Re "U.S. Erases Section on Sex From Child-Rearing Book" (news article, April 11): It appears others in President Bush's Administration are embracing his code of "Silence Is the Best Policy," begun with his decision to limit discussion of abortion in federally financed clinics and continuing with canceled surveys on sexual attitudes and behavior.
Explaining the decision to delete a chapter on contraception and adolescent sexuality from the Special Federal Employees Edition of "Taking Care of Your Child," Curt Smith of the Office of Personnel Management said: "I felt silence would be best. I felt silence would have the best chance of avoiding controversy." He suggested Roman Catholics might be offended.


McGwire Stays on a Tear As Two Homers Lift A's
A's 10, Angels 4
OAKLAND, Calif., April 22 (AP) -- Mark McGwire proved again his memory -- by his own choosing -- is a short one.
"This is a new year," said the Oakland first baseman, after hitting two home runs off California starter Chuck Finley today to spark a 10-4 Athletics rout of the Angels.
With thoughts of a .201 season in 1991 further behind him, McGwire leads the majors with eight homers.
If he has figured out how to make adjustments to counterattack American League pitchers who had their way with him last season, he is not telling.
"I'll keep that to myself," said McGwire, who had a four-homer week to start the season.


Jordan Back With Bulls After Treatment
Michael Jordan returned to a Chicago Bulls practice yesterday after treatment for a back injury.
The injury had sidelined the guard Tuesday when the Bulls began preparation for tomorrow night's playoff opener against Miami in Chicago.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
The Justice Department has accused Teledyne of systematically falsifying tests on one of the most basic components of sophisticated weapons and spacecraft, according to a lawsuit.
The civil suit asserts that Teledyne routinely certified to the Government between 1983 and 1990 that the electrical components had passed rigorous reliability tests when they had not.  [ Page A1. ]
Mobil said its earnings plunged 82 percent, while Amerada Hess said it lost $23.4 million.  [ D2. ]


Barkley Takes One for the Team
After finishing a turbulent season at 35-47 and failing to make the playoffs, the Philadelphia 76ers could obviously use some restructuring next season, and one 76er has a blueprint all mapped out.
"If we're not one or two in the draft lottery," said CHARLES BARKLEY, "I'd trade me. That's the only way to build for the future."


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-12  VICTORIOUS MOOD NEAR KABUL
Hundreds of rebels marched toward Afghanistan's capital, exuding the cool confidence of victors.
A mood of foreboding hung over the city, Kabul, which the guerrilla factions have so far chosen not to attack while coalition talks among them go on.
A1
Dozens of Afghan refugee families head home from Pakistan.  A6  DEADLY BLASTS IN MEXICO
A series of explosions flattened homes and tore up streets in a neighborhood in Guadalajara, killing more than 200 people and injuring 600.
An official said a company had apparently dumped a highly volatile liquid, hexane, into the municipal sewer system.
A1  IMPASSE ON EUROPEAN TRADE
President Bush and European Community leaders failed to resolve their differences in talks on reducing trade barriers.
D1  EX-SOVIET LANDS FEEL JITTERY
People in the newly sovereign republics of the former Soviet Union report feeling greater fear and insecurity than before independence, public opinion polls show.
A3
A potential for accidents at nuclear plants in the ex-Soviet lands.
A5  CLASHES ON SARAJEVO'S STREETS
Militiamen fought street to street in Muslim sections of Sarajevo as Serbs stepped up their drive to carve out a piece of Bosnia and Herzegovina's capital for themselves.
A10  UNIMPRESSED BY PERU'S PLEDGES
Sustaining the pressure it has maintained on President Fujimori since he assumed near-dictatorial powers, the United States held back from endorsing his new timetable for restoring constitutional rule.
A12  ISRAEL TALKS OF VOTE IN GAZA
Ten years after Israel abolished local elections in the occupied territories, officials are talking to West Bank and Gaza Arabs about once again choosing their own mayors and town councils.
A8  U.S.
ISSUES FILE ON IRAQI BOMB
Seeking to refute charges that it silenced an official who warned that Iraq was trying to build a nuclear bomb, the Energy Department declassified and released documents in the dispute.
A7  IRANIAN WOMEN START TO REBEL
Women in Iran ride in the back of the bus, are banned from studying electrical engineering, and are forbidden to travel without their husbands or fathers.
But they are beginning to challenge the system.
A4  CHINA'S LINGUISTIC DIVIDE
Decades of effort by China to promote Mandarin as a unifying force have made little impression in Guangdong Province, where most people still speak Cantonese.
A11  National A16-23, B10-11, D25  JUSTICES HEAR ABORTION CASE
The Supreme Court heard arguments in a Pennsylvania case that could determine the future of the right to abortion.
And if there is a middle ground on the issue, it was not much in evidence.
A1
Excerpts from the arguments.  B10  GAINS FROM WELFARE LAW
Four years after enactment of a Federal law aimed at moving welfare recipients into jobs, a study of its effects shows it has raised the earnings of people on welfare and reduced the amount they receive in public aid.
A1  FRAUD LAID TO CONTRACTOR
A suit filed by the Government accused Teledyne, a leading maker of military electronics, of falsifying tests on one of the most basic components of sophisticated weapons and spacecraft.
A1  BAD NEWS
Channel One, the news program shown with commercials in high schools, has done little to increase students' knowledge of current events, according to a study paid for by Whittle Communications, the program's owner.
A18  VERDICT IN LITTLE RASCALS CASE
In the longest and costliest criminal trial ever held in North Carolina, the owner of a day-care center was found guilty on 99 of 100 charges of sexually abusing 12 children.
A16  16 DIE IN PLANE CRASH
Sixteen people were killed and six were badly injured when a plane loaded with sky divers crashed on takeoff from an airport near Los Angeles.
A16  HE'S THEIR GUY
It is a rule of politics that voters respect their own representatives even while vilifying Congress as a whole.
That is doubly true when the voters are those of a district in eastern Washington State, whose representative is Speaker Thomas S. Foley.
A16  CLINTON ON THE ENVIRONMENT
Speaking in Philadelphia on Earth Day, Governor Clinton said President Bush had been "reactive, rudderless and expedient" in addressing environmental concerns.
A22
The Democratic chairman set off more party infighting.  A22
Tsongas responded to the new questions on his medical history.  A22
Perot hired a veteran journalist to act as his spokesman.  A23
TV Critic's Notebook: Perot's on-the-air performances.
A23  The Government revised its policy on detaining asylum seekers.
A17  Experts opposed mandatory guidelines on scientific integrity.
A20  Metropolitan Digest, B1 UNIONS DEMAND A SHARE
Saying Mayor Dinkins previously distorted New York City's fiscal picture to elict labor concessions, municipal unions demanded a share of the budget surplus that the Dinkins administration has disclosed.
A1  Business Digest, D1  The Home Section C1-12  Paring down for the 90's (well, sort of) C1  Surrounded by stuff?
Call a clutter buddy!
C1  At Work With: Ben Krupinski, stars' high-flying contractor.
C1  Arts/Entertainment C15-22  Networks' sweeps strategies.
C15  Theater: "The High Rollers Social and Pleasure Club." C15  Music: Da Capo Chamber Players in works of Shulamit Ran.  15  Sports B12-18  Baseball: Murray's homer lifts Met over Cardinals, 3-2.
B13  Tennis: Molding of a prodigy.
B13  Obituaries D26  Editorials/Op-Ed A24-25  Editorials A24  What if Bosnia had oil?
Doctors as spin doctors.
America lurches to the left.
Sins of the father.
Letters A24  William Safire: Candidates' health.
A25  Anthony Lewis: Life and death.
A25  Ann E. W. Stone: A way out for Republicans on abortion.
A25  Milos Forman: Czechoslovakia's political knot.
A25


Citing Rift With Board, Head of Sealy Resigns
Malcolm Candlish, the executive hired to run the Sealy Corporation after its leveraged buyout in 1989, said yesterday that he was resigning.
Mr.
Candlish, chairman, president and chief executive of the nation's largest mattress company, said that "differences in management philosophy and style have developed" since the First Boston Corporation took control of the company and its board last year.
He said the differences "have impacted my ability to fully and actively manage the company."


President of Reynolds To Become Chairman
The Reynolds Metals Company said yesterday that Richard G. Holder would become chairman and chief executive on May 1, replacing William O. Bourke, who is retiring.
Mr.
Holder is now president and chief operating officer, and those posts will remain unfilled.
The Richmond, Va., company also announced several other executive changes, including the creation of two vice chairman positions.


A May Of Murder, Mayhem And Moms
For the executives who run CBS, NBC, ABC and the Fox Broadcasting Company, the month of May means mini-series, movies, marriage, maternity, milestones and motherhood.
Not to mention money.
The May sweeps month, the last of the three most important ratings periods of the year, actually starts tonight. (The May sweeps period is starting in mid-April so it can be over before the Memorial Day weekend.) Networks use their highest concentration of programming firepower in sweeps periods to help their affiliated stations, which sell commercials to advertisers based on ratings from sweeps months.


I.M.F. Trims Global Growth Forecast
The International Monetary Fund sharply reduced its forecast for the world economy today, saying growth would be only a sluggish 1.4 percent this year.
Last October the I.M.F. predicted 2.7 percent growth for 1992.
Fund officials said today that they cut that forecast largely because the United States had taken longer than expected to begin its climb from recession.


T.W.A. Expansion
Carl C. Icahn, the chairman of Trans World Airlines Inc., said that the carrier would expand its service in Atlanta and that it would offer some discount fares that would undercut the lower fares announced by American Airlines on Monday.
He said T.W.A. flights from Atlanta would be expanded from three to seven.
T.W.A. has been seeking to lure more business travelers by offering more frequency at hubs like John F. Kennedy International Airport in New York.


Review/Theater; Making a Virtue of Eclecticism In New Orleans Song and Dance
"The High Rollers Social and Pleasure Club" is a Broadway excursion into the mood and street sounds of the city of New Orleans.
There is a Mardi Gras party going on here.
Whether or not one feels like an invited guest will depend on how much one enjoys the music, a gumbo of diverse ingredients, and what demands one makes for art to go hand in hand with entertainment.
"High Rollers" is principally the creation of Allen Toussaint, who wrote a half-dozen of the more than 40 songs and is onstage as pianist, leading a tuneful combo.
As the composer of songs like "Mother-in-Law" and as a successful record producer, Mr.
Toussaint has made a considerable contribution to New Orleans rock and soul.
But one can get the drift of a revue that opens with a garishly costumed jester standing atop a bar promising "a big powwow in the sky." He then introduces "the legendary Allen Toussaint," a description that may have been written by the aforesaid composer.


Alexander's Talks on Sales
Alexander's Inc., the budget department store operator, has been seeking to sell its stores to stave off bankruptcy, participants in discussions with possible buyers said yesterday.
Several stores occupy valuable real estate, like the flagship store on Lexington Avenue at 59th Street and the store in Rego Park, Queens.
Real estate experts said the value of those assets far exceeds the company's liabilities.


Israel Revives Idea of Local Palestinian Voting
Ten years after Israel abolished local elections in the occupied territories, denouncing them as a platform for Palestinian radicals, Israeli officials are talking to Arabs in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip about again choosing their own mayors and town councils.
In a move apparently tied to the Middle East peace talks that resume next week in Washington, ranking Defense Ministry officials are publicly telling groups of Arabs here in Hebron and elsewhere that they are willing to replace Israeli-appointed municipal administrators installed in the early 1980's with popularly elected Arab councils.
The new councils would deal with roads, school construction and other services in their areas.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Terence Blanchard Village Vanguard
The trumpeter Terence Blanchard's first set on Tuesday night started out with a set of extremes: two nervously fast tunes, followed by a ballad that crept along so slowly that it seemed to stop.
Mr.
Blanchard was putting on a show calculated to bring the audience in, and it worked.


Cantonese Spoken Here (Beijing Is Wincing)
When Beijing officials, the important and the self-important, visit this bustling southern Chinese city, also known in the West as Canton, they have one major complaint: people here don't talk right.
Most Chinese here in Guangdong Province speak Cantonese, which is unfathomable to Chinese from other parts of the country.
Decades of effort by the Communist authorities to promote the Mandarin dialect as a national unifying force have made little impression here.


From Jewelry To Furniture
WORKING things by hand is Kris Ruhs's credo.
Mr.
Ruhs is a New York artist who became known for his masterful hand-wrought jewelry that was the perfect complement to Romeo Gigli's highly imaginative, Renaissance-inspired clothes.
Mr.
Ruhs has now added furniture to his repertory.
Included in the collection, which was introduced during the Milan Furniture Fair at the Carla Sozzani Gallery, were Mr.
Ruhs's cutout tin room dividers or mobile curtains, bent steel stools, mosaic-topped tables and a rather mysterious, wild-looking chair.
"That's just made out of pieces of old rope wound round and round," he said.
"It's taken on a bit of a personality -- a friendly one, I hope."


Marching on Afghan Capital, Rebels Find the Road Is Clear
Columns of guerrillas armed with rockets and automatic weapons and backed by tanks moved along roads leading to the Afghan capital today.
Less than five miles from Kabul's northern edges, hundreds of them marched in brilliant sunshine against a backdrop of the snow-tipped Hindu Kush mountains, forming a long, undisturbed file on the main road to Kabul.


Tuition at SUNY to Rise $500; Increase Is the Third in 2 Years
Trustees of the State University of New York today approved the system's third tuition increase in the last two years, raising the annual charge for attending a four-year campus to $2,650 -- nearly twice what students had to pay in September 1990.
The $500 increase, which will take effect in the fall, continues the erratic tuition changes for the 400,000 students in the SUNY system.
Flush fiscal years and student pressure had kept the tuition frozen at $1,350 for seven years, from 1983 to 1990, but the gravity of New York's budget troubles have more recently caused tuition to skyrocket.
Tuition went to $1,650 in January of 1991 and to $2,150 last fall.


Results Plus
TRACK AND FIELD  Guthrie Repeats in Penn Heptathlon
Diane Guthrie of George Mason won the Penn Relays heptathlon championship in Philadelphia yesterday for the second straight year.
Kanon Vanderhoff of Louisiana State, last year's runner-up in the men's decathlon, was this year's winner.
Guthrie, a sophomore from Santa Cruz, Jamaica, finished the two-day, seven-event competition with five victories, a second place and a 10th for 6,041 points.
Guthrie took the long jump at 21 feet 4 inches and the javelin at 143 feet.
Vanderhoff, who finished with 7,177 points, showed strength yesterday in field events and finished 215 points ahead of Ryan Werner of Liberty. (AP) TENNIS  Seles Coasts to Victory in Spain  Monica Seles coasted to a 6-3, 6-1 victory over Nicole Muns-Jagerman of the Netherlands yesterday to advance to the quarterfinals of the international women's tennis championships of Spain at Barcelona.
Seles, who had a first-round bye, will next face Mary Pierce, an American who plays out of France.
Pierce scored a 6-2, 6-1 victory over Fetra Thoren of Finland. (AP) Becker Advances: Top-seeded Boris Becker, playing streaky tennis, moved into the third round of the $1.2 million Monte Carlo Open in Monaco with a 6-2, 3-6, 6-2 victory yesterday over a qualifier, Tom Nijssen of the Netherlands.
Becker started by winning four games in a row.
He then dropped the second set, but rebounded from the second-set loss by winning the first five games of the third set before finishing the match.
The defending champion, Sergei Bruguera of Spain, was sent to an early exit, losing to Goran Prpic, 4-6, 6-4, 6-0. (AP)


BRIEFS
Debt  *
Bell &amp; Howell Inc. has filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for $160 million in senior subordinated notes and 5.4 million shares of senior exchangeable preferred stock.
Common  *
Riverwood International Corp. has filed for an initial public offering of 11 million common shares through J. P. Morgan Securities.
*
Sportstown Inc., Atlanta, a chain of retail sporting goods mega-stores, is making an initial public offering of 1.9 million common shares through Prudential Securities.
*
Stein Mart Inc., Jacksonville, Fla., is making an initial public offering of 3.25 million common shares at $13 a share through First Boston.
Ratings  *
Great Atlantic and Pacific Tea Co.'s senior long-term debt rating has been downgraded to Baa-1, from A-3 by Moody's.
*
Security Pacific Corp.'s senior debt rating has been raised to A, from A-, and subordinated debt to A-, from BBB+ by S.&amp; P., following Security Pacific's merger with BankAmerica Corp.


UNIONS DEMANDING SHARE OF SURPLUS IN DINKINS BUDGET
Leaders of New York City's municipal unions yesterday demanded a share of the budget surplus that the Dinkins administration disclosed a day before, and angrily denounced Mayor David N. Dinkins, saying he had previously distorted the budget picture to elicit labor concessions.
The Dinkins administration, which has vowed not to grant wage increases without productivity gains, sought to quell the clamor, and not just from the unions, as many contingents came forward yesterday to claim bigger pieces of the budget pie.


If It's Spring, It Must Be Show Time
DESIGNER decor, private gardens, historic houses and modern penthouses are features of this spring's show-house and house-tour season.
New York City
Flatbush, Sunday -- A guided bus tour of houses featured in films, including "Sophie's Choice" and "Malcolm X," will be held from 1 to 5 P.M.
Tickets $15, at the Flatbush Tompkins Church, East 19th Street and Dorchester Road.
Information: (718) 469-8990.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Cranes and Belly Limelight
A woman who sings and three men on drums and guitars: that was the lineup for both Cranes and Belly, bands that performed Tuesday night.
The two bands also share a basic musical strategy; in their songs, a serene, girlish vocal is swathed in noise.
Sometimes the singing grows harsher to match the swelling chaos; sometimes it remains lost in its own reverie.
Either way, the performers show little emotion, staying calm and deadpan, barely moving to the beat.


Don't Forget What South Africa Inflicted on Winnie Mandela
To the Editor:
I am disturbed beyond measure by "Winnie Mandela's Rise and Fall" (Op-Ed, April 14), Emma Gilbey's assault on Mrs.
Mandela, and by the disparaging and mean-spirited illustration that depicts her wearing snakes on her head (no doubt venomous), brass knuckles, a spiked bracelet and other symbols associated with coldheartedness, extremism, militancy, violence and death.
It is regrettable that Nelson and Winnie Mandela are separating.
For ordinary married black South African couples, strong bonds might be a consequence of the country's abject system of apartheid.
However, Nelson and Winnie Mandela are not an ordinary couple.


U.S. Revises Detention Policy for Asylum Seekers
Immigration officials have issued a new policy on handling requests for political asylum that could spare thousands of refugees detention.
Until now, those seeking asylum who arrived in the United States without proper documentation were automatically detained, pending the results of their applications, if there was space in detention centers.
But where the centers were filled, illegal aliens were not put in detention.


Sports of The Times; The Devil Who Makes You Do It
IN the first Stanley Cup playoff series to be blamed for Lincoln Tunnel traffic jams, Claude Lemieux has been the shadow of Mark Messier, the pebble in the Rangers' skates, the agitator in their washing machine.
But more than anything else, he's the Devil who made the Rangers do it: lose their cool.
During the final minutes of the Devils' stunning 7-3 victory Tuesday night that squared their Patrick Division semifinal series at one game each, some of the Rangers were more concerned with slamming or slashing Lemieux than with justifying their reputation as the National Hockey League's best team.
He responded by smiling.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats; A Wary Party Chief Cancels Speech
The Democratic Party Chairman, Ronald H. Brown, set off another round of party infighting today when he abruptly canceled an appearance before a group of major fund-raisers, fearing they would voice doubts about Gov.
Bill Clinton.
Mr.
Brown was scheduled as the principal speaker on Thursday at a meeting of Impac, a group of more than 60 Democratic fund-raisers from around the country.
But in a letter to Impac's chairman, Nathan Landow, he asserted that he "read with alarm" a copy of the invitation announcing the meeting.


Pistons Plan To Contain Knicks' Man In the Middle
As the Knicks ended practice today, Patrick Ewing walked casually across the empty court toward the team bus.
When Ewing steps onto the court Friday night, however, he won't have nearly as much room.
Controlling Ewing is the Detroit Pistons' top priority, as they prepare for their playoff series against the Knicks that begins Friday night at Madison Square Garden.
The Pistons will double-team Ewing for certain, and triple-team him if they feel they must.
Will Ewing become frustrated?
How adept will he be at finding open teammates?
Can Ewing still be effective despite the Pistons' swarming defense?
And if Ewing's scoring output drops, can the Knicks still win?
Ready for Answers


Pro Bono
*
Gay Men's Health Crisis is introducing a public service television commercial publicizing the seventh annual AIDS Walk New York on May 31.
The spot features Patti LaBelle singing "You'll Never Walk Alone." Johnny Reid produced and directed the spot; Tom Corwin handled musical production.


Many in Former Soviet Lands Say That Now, They Feel Even More Insecure
People in the newly sovereign republics of the former Soviet Union report greater fear and insecurity than they felt before they became independent, a series of four recent public opinion polls there show.
The polls also imply that people in the new nations feel more concerned about foreign investment than invasion by foreigners, and more afraid of other former republics than they are of foreign powers.


Home Video
How fast can a hit film move from the theater to the video store?
The prevailing wisdom in the business says the passage requires a couple of months for distributors to promote titles and for stores to order videocassettes.
Now, however, Warner is halving that with its release of "J. F. K.," which is to appear in video stores on May 20.
If other studios follow Warner's lead with their top movies, some big hits could virtually step from theater to store.
Instead of releasing "J. F. K.," which opened in theaters in December, in a summer already crowded with big titles (including "Cape Fear" and "The Addams Family" in June and "Bugsy," "The Hand That Rocks the Cradle" and, possibly, "The Prince of Tides" in July), Warner suddenly circled "J. F. K" back to late spring and jumped into a time slot where there is no competition.


Portland General In Talks on Plant
The Portland General Electric Company said it was in preliminary talks on paying the Westinghouse Electric Corporation to assume responsibility for daily operations at the Trojan Nuclear Electric Plant.


Gian Carlo Wick Is Dead at 82; Detected Symmetries of Universe
Gian Carlo Wick, a theoretical physicist whose work contributed to understanding of the symmetries underlying the universe, died on Monday in a hospital in Turin, Italy, his native city.
Dr.
Wick, who was 82 years old, had returned to Italy after retiring as professor of physics at Columbia University in 1977.


10-Year Notes Sold By Merrill Lynch
Merrill Lynch &amp; Company, the didersified financial services company, yesterday priced $150 million in 10-year notes through its own underwriting unit.
Because of strong investor demand, the size of the offering was increased from the originally planned $100 million.
The 8.3 percent notes due 2002 are priced at 99.03 to yield 8.44 percent, or about 90 basis points more than Treasury securities with a similar maturity.


A Matisse Show To Set a Record
Q.
What long-awaited cultural event will cost more to see than a movie and less than a Broadway show?
A. The "Henri Matisse Retrospective" at the Museum of Modern Art in the fall.


3 Indicted in Plot to Influence A Juror In Racketeering Trial
A Federal indictment was unsealed yesterday charging a reputed Gambino crime-family associate and two other men with a plot to tamper with the jury in a major racketeering trial last year involving the window-installation industry.
The indictment said the target of the tampering was a juror, Kaaren Williams.
It said that after the tampering was discovered, she was dismissed and replaced by an alternate before the jury's deliberations began in the trial in Federal District Court in Brooklyn.


Back Home, Foley Defends Himself, and Wins
Touring the wheat fields and farm towns of his home district, Speaker Thomas S. Foley was giving his most passionate defense yet of Congress when he inadvertently brought his audience to fits of laughter.
"We have eliminated the House bank," he told a Rotary Club lunch in the Snake River town of Clarkston.
"We have raised the gym fees. Members now have to pay to get their cars washed. And, we are stopping the practice of issuing drugs to members."


Riding the Rails: Excursion for Police
There is a local police force with a beat 13,000 miles long and about 100 feet wide, and its officers want people to remember an adage as old as industrial America: stop, look and listen.
As the Conrail police explained it today to a group of New Jersey local police officers from communities along the freight line's right of way, the railroad police do not spend all of their time rousting hobos out of boxcars.
They concentrate on chasing thieves who break into rail cars, stopping motorists who regard crossing gates as obstacles to be evaded, and waving off children who seem to find no playground as inviting as the tracks that run through town.


Baseball; Elster Set for Surgery Again
The worst fears of the Mets and Kevin Elster are about to be realized.
The shortstop, stopped in his attempt to come back from arthroscopic surgery on his right shoulder, must now undergo open surgery to prepare the residual damage.
The club announced that Elster would undergo surgery on May 7.
It was a decision reached yesterday after Elster was examined by Dr.
Frank Jobe, the team physician for the Dodgers and the noted orthopedic surgeon consulted with Mets team physician, Dr.
David Altchek.


COMPANY BRIEFS
*
Allied-Signal Inc., Morristown, N.J., received a five-year contract from Grumman Corp., Bethpage, L.I., to develop engine components for the U.S. space propram.
The contract is valued at $43 million. *
British Aerospace Inc., Herndon, Va., a unit of British Aerospace Holdings Inc., said AMR Eagle Inc., a commuter airline unit of AMR Corp., would buy 15 more Jetstream Super 31 planes.


Surrounded by Stuff? Call a Clutter Buddy!
AFTER a three-hour workshop on "Letting Go of Clutter," Marilyn Vondra, an opera singer, returned to her Manhattan apartment vowing to "de-clutter." She telephoned her clutter-support person a week later to say that, for the first time in some years, she had glimpsed the top of the coffee table.
"It's glass," she said.
The bookcase, buried under sheet music and concert programs, came into view the next week.
Again, she phoned her clutter buddy to report progress.
This week finds Ms.
Vondra under the dining room table, winnowing through hundreds of yellowing newspaper clippings -- recipes, mostly -- stashed in shopping bags.


Mobil's Profit Falls 82%; Amerada Posts Deficit
The Mobil Corporation said today that earnings plunged 82 percent in the first quarter, while the Amerada Hess Corporation said it lost $23.4 million.
Recession, lower prices for crude oil and natural gas crimped profits for most global oil companies in the quarter, and analysts expect that the industry will report profit declines of 50 percent or more from operations in the period.
The Amoco Corporation, for instance, said Tuesday that its operating income declined 52 percent.


Public Service Ads By Produce Group
In what seems like a trend to promote eating fruits and vegetables, the United Fresh Fruit and Vegetable Association has become the latest group to produce public service advertisements touting the virtues of produce.
The campaign for the association, based in Alexandria, Va., features a group of anthropomorphic fruits and vegetables called the Frugies, created by the cartoonist Mort Drucker, best known for his celebrity caricatures in Mad magazine, and Mitchell Erick, an Orlando, Fla., copywriter.


Judge Won't Intervene In Disputed S.E.C. Case
A Federal judge decided late Tuesday not to intervene in a Securities and Exchange Commission case that is becoming a political embarrassment to Richard C. Breeden, the S.E.C. chairman.
Last week Federal District Judge Louis F. Oberdorfer disclosed that a former commissioner, Edward H. Fleischman, had written two extraordinary letters, strongly implying the case was mishandled.
Even so, the judge ruled, he would not intervene, because a Federal court would be able to review the commission's final decision in the case, which is expected within six months.


With Giants' Offense 'Redefined,' Carthon Gets Blocked Out
For seven seasons with the Giants and three seasons before that with the New Jersey Generals of the United States Football League, Maurice Carthon was one of the best-blocking fullbacks in pro football.
But the Giants are changing the role of the fullback, and they punctuated that today when General Manager George Young announced they had waived Carthon.
The decision was not surprising.
Carthon will turn 31 years old Friday, and the Giants did not protect him during the recent Plan B free-agency period.
Last year, their first-round draft choice was a fullback, Jarrod Bunch, and in this year's Plan B they signed another fullback, Greg Amsler.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: TV Critic's Notebook; In a 'Lone Ranger' Role, Perot Builds an Audience
Since Ross Perot notified Larry King in February that if his admirers could get him on the ballot in all 50 states he would run for President, the electorate has been able to watch the candidate presumptive on many channels.
Those appearances have constituted his entire campaign so far.
What is it about him that seems to appeal to an audience of millions?
What is it that accounts, as Mr.
Perot puts it, for "all these everyday folks that make the world go round writing me in longhand?"


CHRONICLE
At just about the same time that King Ferdinand and Queen Isabella were dispatching Christopher Columbus on his famous voyage, they were also expelling Jews from Spain.
Some of the refugees found their way to the Ottoman Empire, where they were well received.
On Monday, TURGUT OZAL, the President of Turkey, will join more than 500 guests at the Plaza to commemorate the arrival of those Sephardic Jews in Turkey, and to call attention to the peaceful existence of the Jews in Turkey since that time.
About 20,000 Jews now live in Turkey.


Bill Would Smooth Perot's Path to Ballot
State Assembly Speaker Saul Weprin introduced legislation today aimed at making it easier for Ross Perot, who is considering running for President as an independent, to get on the ballot in New York State.
But the Senate majority leader, Ralph J. Marino, an Oyster Bay Republican, scoffed at the proposal immediately, saying that Mr.
Perot could easily get on the ballot under the existing law.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Pennsylvania; Pennsylvania Governor Criticizes Process That's Turning to Clinton
With Pennsylvania's primary only days away, the state's Democratic Governor today criticized his party's Presidential primary process -- and its likely nominee, Bill Clinton -- saying the process had produced a front-runner who could not win.
He urged the party's uncommitted delegates to remain neutral so that a stronger nominee could be selected at the convention this summer.
"We have to recognize reality," Gov.
Robert P. Casey said in an interview today.
"The primary process is not producing someone who has a good crack at winning in November." Pennsylvania Democrats hold their primary next Tuesday.


Review/Theater: Shimada; Facing Old Enemies In a New World Order
"SHIMADA," a new Australian play at the Broadhurst Theater, opens with a secretary receiving a Federal Express envelope and ends with the secretary answering her phone. ("Beaumont Bicycle Company, can I help you?" is the evening's exact curtain line.) The most important plot twist in between is delivered by fax.
Yet as drama "Shimada" moves at the pace of bulk mail, and its content is somewhat less scintillating than the typical missive from, say, Publishers Clearing House.
One had expected so much more!
This is the play that New York radio listeners have been hearing about for weeks through advertisements that darkly promise a night of Japan-bashing to rival Michael Crichton's novel "Rising Sun." In these commercials, an announcer sounding rather less lighthearted than a prophet of doom implies that "Shimada" would rip open a world in which "we" sit around like lazy bums in front of our VCR's while "they" buy up Columbia Pictures, downtown Los Angeles and anything else "they" can get their dirty hands on.
In reality, however, "Shimada" has a Japanese co-producer, and its xenophobia is not significantly greater than that to be found in other Broadway shows with Japanese co-producers, like "The Will Rogers Follies," "A Streetcar Named Desire" and "Guys and Dolls."


Health-Care Companies' Profits Rise
Two large health-care companies reported double-digit increases in their profits for the first quarter yesterday, but both said drug sales had declined in the critical United States market.
Johnson &amp; Johnson, the world's largest maker of diversified health-care products, said its net income rose by 11 percent in the first quarter.
The company's worldwide sales rose by 6.6 percent, to $3.35 billion.


Redistrict Talks at Impasse With Deadlines Looming
With a pair of critical deadlines fast approaching, New York's Congressional and legislative redistricting processes were both bogged down today in negotiations that seemed to be headed nowhere.
More than a month after passing a legislative redistricting plan, the State Legislature finally sent the bill to Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo on Wednesday night.
That gives the Governor until May 4 to sign or veto the bill.


How to Save Clients 50% of Their Legal Costs
To the Editor:
Nine Democratic senators, you report April 7, have denounced legal fees of $900 million paid last year by the Resolution Trust Corporation and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation in savings and loan cases linked to Michael R. Milken, former head of junk bond trading at Drexel, Burnham, Lambert (Business Day, some editions).
Fees of up to $600 an hour for senior partners give lawyers a bad name.
Skyrocketing legal fees are an important issue in the legal community.
More and more firms, realizing that business as usual is no longer acceptable, are making changes.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo; Why Perot Could Pose a Threat With $100 Million: It's His Own
If he runs for President this fall, which seems more likely with each passing day, Ross Perot says he would be willing to spend up to $100 million of his own money on the effort -- much more than the major-party nominees could spend on their own account.
He would be free to do so, whereas the major-party candidates would not, because he would not accept any Federal campaign money, and they would.
In its decision in Buckley v.
Valeo in 1976, the Supreme Court ruled that candidates could spend as much as they liked as long as they took no money from the Government.


Samuelson Ponders The Trials, and Errors
For Joan Benoit Samuelson, the good news tonight was that she qualified, more or less, for the United States Olympic track and field trials in June.
The bad news was that she said she would not go to the trials unless her racing mechanics straightened out.
Samuelson became an American heroine when she won the women's marathon in the 1984 Los Angeles Olympics.
But back problems have slowed her in recent years, and now, three weeks short of her 35th birthday, she is not satisfied with the way she is running.


The Part-Time Education President
President Bush says he'll make education his top domestic priority in his second term.
Second term?
He pledged that en route to election in 1988.
Yet from the start his ideas have lacked conviction and scope.
His latest proposal focuses on only one slice of the problem and seems derivative, too.
As part of what appears to be a "theme of the week" re-election campaign, Mr.
Bush said he would give all Americans a $25,000 line of credit for education through the Student Loan Marketing Association.
The credit would be available to anyone, from the student taking full-time courses to the retired worker taking a single class.
The interest rate and repayment schedule would be determined on the basis of income.


Louise Speers Croix, Chemist, Is Dead at 72
Louise Speers Croix, a chemist who worked on anesthetics, died on Monday at the King James Care Center in Chatham Township, N.J.
She was 72 years old and lived in Summit, N.J.
The cause of death was cancer, said a friend, Walter Mac Williams of Bernardsville.


Foreign Affairs; Trashing the Saudis
Where there's a juicy news leak, there's usually fire. But sometimes there isn't.
The juicy leak in question was a Los Angeles Times article.
It said the Saudis had been trafficking in illegal transfers of U.S. arms to Iraq and Syria.


Market Place; New Tandy Chain Attracts Analysts
THE Tandy Corporation's announcement last week of its plans for a chain of electronics superstores called Incredible Universe piqued the interest of many analysts.
They say the format could invigorate the fortunes of Tandy, best known now for its Radio Shack stores, and pin back the ears of some competitors.
After effortlessly riding the growth of VCR's and compact-disk players in the 1980's, consumer electronics retailers have more recently had to fight for their share of a flat market.
Given this period of "maturation and saturation," as one analyst called it, those who follow the industry are seldom roused to feel much more than indifference about the retailers' stocks.


Parting From No-Growth Orthodoxy, Seattle Mayor Plans 'Urban Villages'
Political heresy, in this city of fierce regional chauvinists, is an admission that allowing more people into Seattle might actually be a good thing.
This month, Mayor Norman B. Rice did just that and found to his surprise that he was not immediately tagged a California sympathizer.
Unveiling his vision for Seattle in the year 2010, Mayor Rice broke with the no-growth orthodoxy that has governed this city's politics for more than two decades.
"This may not be a popular view in some circles," he said, "but I do not believe we should try to stop growth."


No Arrests at Abortion Clinics In Buffalo as Clashes Subside
Clashes between anti-abortion and abortion-rights activists here took on a more subdued tone today, with only one scuffle and no arrests, offering residents and demonstrators a chance to reflect on whether the protests would prove more curse or opportunity for their city.
Just one day after 194 anti-abortion protesters were arrested outside a clinic in suburban Amherst, 600 people, split almost evenly between anti-abortion and abortion-rights groups, lined the streets of downtown Buffalo for a fourth day of protests.
And while the rhetoric remained heated, only one brief skirmish occurred outside the sole downtown clinic where a doctor was performing abortions today.
Despite pledges by anti-abortion leaders to close the clinic, it remained open.


American Sumo Star Denies Accusing the Japanese of Racism
Reports that an American sumo wrestling star said he was being denied the highest rank in the sport because he was not Japanese touched off a furor in Japan today, prompting arguments and apologies, and leading the Prime Minister and other national leaders to deny that racism was at play.
Tonight, in an extraordinary hourlong interview in the sumo stable where he lives, the 576-pound wrestler, Konishiki, tried to calm the uproar, saying he had been "misinterpreted" by the Japanese newspaper that originally printed the accusations.
He also said one of his young apprentices, also a Hawaiian, impersonated him in a telephone interview with The New York Times on Tuesday.
During that interview, the assertions of discrimination were repeated.


U.S. to Seek Forfeiture Of Assets In G.M. Case
A Federal prosecutor in Brooklyn said yesterday that the Government would move to seize most of the known assets of John McNamara, the Long Island car dealer who is accused of defrauding General Motors of $436 million.
The action, which could come within days, would be the first public indication that Mr.
McNamara may have funneled at least some of the G.M. money to his real estate and financial holdings, which are estimated to be worth $330 million.


Vehicle Sales Climbed By 10.3% in Mid-April
Sales of cars and light trucks built in North America rose 10.3 percent in mid-April over the period a year earlier, when sales were depressed, auto makers reported yesterday.
But industry analysts said they saw few optimistic signs in the sluggish seasonally adjusted selling rate of 5.5 million cars.
"The question is, where is the recovery?" said Ronald A. Glantz, an analyst with Dean Witter Reynolds in San Francisco.
He noted that industry sources had told him that both showroom traffic and closing rates were down in the period.
"Normally you have a lot of discretionary buyers in spring, but we're not getting the discretionary buyers," he said.


At the Movies
Swamped With Offers
When Chazz Palminteri writes, the stars come out.
How's this for a response to his efforts: Elizabeth Taylor returning to the big screen in the fall in Mr.
Palminteri's "Faithful." Robert De Niro starring -- and making his directing debut -- in "A Bronx Tale," by Mr.
Palminteri.
And Danny DeVito planning to star in yet another screenplay by Mr.
Palminteri.


Dinkins Calls Higher Taxes Still Crucial
Mayor David N. Dinkins struggled yesterday to squelch any impression that New York City's fiscal condition did not warrant the kind of help in higher taxes or labor concessions that he has been seeking from Albany and the municipal labor unions.
A day after city officials projected a $455 million budget surplus for the fiscal year that ends on June 30, anger only intensified.
Legislators said the city's request for $115 million in higher taxes, already on the ropes, was all but dead, while union leaders repeated their demands for a share of the money.


Books of The Times; Taking the Plot From the News, Even Old News
Black Water  By Joyce Carol Oates 154 pages. A William Abrahams Book/Dutton. $17.
Remember Chappaquiddick?
Senator Edward M. Kennedy and Mary Jo Kopechne?
The car careering off a little bridge and sinking into the murky water?
The Senator managing to struggle free from the car and leaving the scene, while the young woman remained trapped in the wreckage and drowned?


Offering in Asia By Fannie Mae
The Federal National Mortgage Association, known as Fannie Mae, said yesterday that it had issued the first U.S.
Dragon Debenture, a dollar-denominated debt security issued in the United States and reoffered by an independent underwriter to non-Japanese Asian investors in the Pacific Rim.
Fannie Mae is the federally chartered, shareholder-owned company that invests in home mortgages.


Review/Theater; Voltaire's Optimist With a Few New Slants
In "Candide," Voltaire defined optimism as a "mania for maintaining that all is well when things are going badly." In other words, the novel could be considered instructive advice for contemporary politicians campaigning for re-election and for theater companies embarking on a stage version of the 18th-century classic.
"Candide" is an imperishable work of philosophy and satire, one that reached its theatrical peak in the Leonard Bernstein musical.
Ten years ago, the playwright Len Jenkin wrote a new adaptation, which was presented at the Guthrie Theater in Minneapolis.
Now, for her parting production as artistic director of the CSC Theater, Carey Perloff is offering the New York premiere of the Jenkin version.
The production is co-directed by Ms.
Perloff and her CSC successor, David Esbjornson.
While one must give the show points for ambition, it does not have the inventiveness that can make it seem anything more than high-minded.


A Reform Plan In California
A commission appointed by Gov.
Pete Wilson to study California's deteriorating economy issued a stark warning today that the state faces a long-term decline in its competitiveness unless it undertakes sweeping reforms.
The bipartisan commission, which was headed by Peter V. Ueberroth, concluded that California "has real problems, and they are only going to get worse."


BRIEFS
*
American Biogenetic Sciences Inc., Vancouver, British Columbia, signed an agreement to acquire worldwide rights to a genetic screening technique to be developed to detect susceptibility to breast cancer. *
Computer Sciences Corp., El Segundo, Calif., a computer services concern, signed a contract with WCI Steel Inc., Warren, Ohio, to take over operation of the company's data processing facilities.


Sarajevo Comes Out for Air, Briefly
A muzzein's call to morning prayer pierced the eerie silence of Old Sarajevo's streets early today as a lull began in the Serb bombardment that has for days ripped through the city.
Gradually the streets filled with people emerging from their basement shelters to take in sunshine and fresh air and stock up on food.


Yankees Accept Notable Substitutes
Injury updates glide easily out of Buck Showalter's mouth because he is now accustomed to the Yankees' painful roll call.
Danny Tartabull is doubtful to play soon because of a pulled left hamstring.
Mike Gallego is still down with a bruised right heel.
Pat Kelly is wearing a splint on his left thumb.
And Showalter?
Mark the manager down with a headache.
The litany of sprains, strains and unwanted pains continued yesterday, when Tartabull and Gallego were examined at Yankee Stadium and neither received a glowing diagnosis.
Tartabull still has tightness in his hamstring and may be put on the 15-day disabled list today.
Gallego has difficulty running, and his debut with the Yankees remains clouded.
Both will be examined again today, and then the club will decide if it needs to make a roster move with Tartabull.


Not With a Whimper, but a Bang
For more than a quarter of a century, the "Big Bang" has been the creation theory favored by nearly all scientists.
In the beginning, according to the theory, the universe was infinitely hot, infinitely dense.
Its exact nature then is unknown.
The age of the universe is also unknown, but it has been estimated at 20 billion years.


Car Plows Into Park, Killing 4 and Injuring Many
A car driven by a 74-year-old woman careered out of control yesterday afternoon and plowed into crowds of people enjoying the first clear spring day in Washington Square Park in Greenwich Village.
Four people were killed, including one who died last night after surgery.
As many as 27 others were injured, some critically.
The idyllic scene was suddenly and violently transformed, witnesses said.
The park, packed with sunbathers, street musicians and mothers pushing strollers in the warm afternoon, gave way to a chaos of people screaming as the speeding car jumped a curb, knocked down a fence and plowed into the crowd, stopping only after banging into another fence 200 feet into the park. 'Bodies All Lying There'
Two victims were trapped beneath the car when it finally came to a stop, and a group of onlookers lifted the vehicle to free them.


Suns to Change Coaches
With your team starting the playoffs the last thing your players need is distracting speculation about whether you'll be back as coach next season.
So figured COTTON FITZSIMMONS of the Phoenix Suns, who took pains yesterday to squelch such speculation.
He announced that he would indeed return to the front office after the playoffs, leaving the head coaching job to an assistant coach, PAUL WESTPHAL.


Parking Rules
Because of Orthodox Good Friday and the seventh and eighth days of Passover, alternate-side parking rules are suspended in New York City today and tomorrow.
Other regulations remain in effect.


Peru's Fugitive Ex-President Tells of Escape From Troops
Alan Garcia, the currently fugitive former President of Peru, sat back in a safehouse here Wednesday night and described how he was able to evade the tanks and troops encircling his home on the night that his successor, Alberto K. Fujimori, moved to disband Parliament and curb the judiciary.
Speaking to one American and six Latin American reporters, Mr.
Garcia said that when he saw the tanks and soldiers approaching his home on April 5, he was sure that they had come to kill him.
He had been warned by an officer earlier that day that he had been marked for attack, he said.


Notes and Bonds Narrowly Mixed
Prices of Treasury notes and bonds staged a late recovery to close narrowly mixed yesterday.
Bond prices fell as much as half a point early in the session after the Government issued economic reports that were seen by traders as further evidence of a recovery.


Ditto for Westhead
Forty-four victories is nothing to sneeze at in the National Basketball Association, or wouldn't be, anyway, except for one thing.
It took the Denver Nuggets two years to win 44 games (while losing 120) under PAUL WESTHEAD with predictable results.
He was also fired yesterday. (AP)


Transit Union Chief Agrees to Arbitration, but With Conditions
The head of the transit workers' union yesterday offered the Metropolitan Transportation Authority a possible way to avoid a threatened shutdown of New York City's subway and bus system.
Sonny Hall, the president of Local 100 of the Transport Workers Union, said for the first time that he would agree to binding arbitration for a new contract for 32,000 subway and bus workers if the M.T.A. met certain conditions.
Mr.
Hall's remarks represented a subtle but potentially significant shift from his previous opposition to arbitration.


Pacers Get Long Shots but Celtics Open With Victory
Celtics 124, Pacers 113
BOSTON, April 23 (AP) -- Reggie Lewis scored 36 points and Kevin Gamble led a 15-2 fourth-quarter run tonight as the Boston Celtics withstood Indiana's long-range shooting for a 124-113 victory in their National Basketball Association playoff opener.
With two injured starters, Larry Bird and Dee Brown, watching in street clothes from the bench, the Celtics outdueled the Pacers down the stretch with the help of clutch defense in taking a 1-0 lead in the three-of-five-game series.


Chief of Monetary Fund Tells Russia Not to Ease Reforms
The head of the International Monetary Fund warned Russia today not to slacken its reform program, asserting that any backtracking could delay efforts to provide foreign aid and set up a $6 billion fund to stabilize the ruble.
With Russia expected to join the I.M.F. over the next few days, the officials expressed concern that Russia's plans to ease credit and otherwise slacken reforms could fuel inflation.


British Aerospace Hires Chairman From Outside
British Aerospace P.L.C., the ailing military and industrial conglomerate that is Britain's largest manufacturing exporter, has named John C. Cahill chairman.
On May 1, he will succeed Sir Graham Day, 68, who became interim chairman in September 1991 after the ouster of Sir Ronald Smith.
Sir Graham will remain on the board for a year.
Mr.
Cahill, 62, was chief executive of BTR P.L.C., an international industrial engineering group, from 1987 to 1991 and remains a director of BTR as well as chairman of BTR Inc., the holding company for its North American operations.


CHRONICLE
After weeks of fashion-world guessing games, Harper's Bazaar will hire PAUL CAVACO as its fashion director.
One or more additional fashion directors, who supervise the selection and photography of clothes for the magazine, may be hired later, said Sean Sullivan, a spokesman for Hearst Magazines, which owns Harper's Bazaar.


CHRONICLE
Maria Shriver will have company as a television correspondent in the Kennedy family.
KERRY KENNEDY CUOMO, a daughter of Senator Robert F. Kennedy, will be the host of a segment of the program "Network Earth," on TBS, a cable channel of the Turner Broadcasting System.
The program is about the ways human rights are compromised by the destruction of the environment.


The Nets Are Valiant, But Cleveland's Victorious
They could have played this one in a schoolyard, on cracked cement, with a rattling rim and a shredded net.
Two-on-two, big man and small man, Mark Price and Brad Daugherty versus Drazen Petrovic and Derrick Coleman, as cinematic a confrontation as anything currently on film.
But the climax of this story would've featured a fifth man, John Williams, stepping into the picture in a supporting role to ask: "Can I play too?"


Art in Review
Peter Nagy  Jay Gorney Modern Art 100 Greene Street SoHo Through May 2
Peter Nagy fell under the Neo-Conceptualist category in the 1980's, and even more than many of his colleagues he stresses ideas over visual appeal in his work.
The single mural-size piece in his current show includes dozens of photographically enlarged black-and-white floor plans of ancient monuments, and it reads at first like an illustrated mini-lecture in architectural history.


De Klerk Makes New Transition Offer
President F. W. de Klerk today refined his Government's offer to bring black leaders into a transitional government and proposed that his presidency be replaced with an executive council popularly elected by South Africans of all races.
His proposal, made during a speech in Parliament in Cape Town, sounded like a variation on the collective rotating presidency that he held out as a model at a conference of his governing National Party last September.


The Art Market
Budget Cuts
The Philadelphia City Council on Wednesday approved a plan to cut $560,000 to the Philadelphia Museum of Art -- half the museum's annual support from the city.
It could force the institution to close 60 percent of its major galleries and drastically reduce its educational programs, museum officials say.
"This affects all aspects of our institution," said Robert Montgomery Scott, the museum's president.
"If the gash is too deep, we'll never be able to patch it up."


An Unusual Court Nominee, Judging by His Family
His father, Leonard, like his great-uncle, Louis, was a prominent civil liberties lawyer.
His uncle, I. F. Stone, was a legendary liberal muckraker.
His sister and only sibling, Kathy, was a militant leftist who is now serving 20 years in prison for the murders of a Brink's guard and two policemen during an armed robbery that was to finance her revolutionary activities.
Michael Boudin, too, has been a nonconformist, but only within his illustrious and iconoclastic family.
In a twist that might perplex Mendel and fascinate Freud, Mr.
Boudin emerged from one of America's most famous radical households, a place frequented by Benjamin Spock and Paul Robeson, to become a conservative lawyer in Washington, more comfortable representing American Telephone and Telegraph than the International Workers of the World.


Not All Broadway Theaters Turn Away the Wheelchair-Bound
To the Editor:
"Limited Seating on Broadway" (Op-Ed, April 13), in which John Hockenberry describes the Virginia Theater's refusal to let him see "Jelly's Last Jam" because of his wheelchair, is disheartening and also unfair to other theaters on Broadway.
I am a paraplegic, confined to a wheelchair and cannot walk.


Corrections
A table in Business Day on Wednesday with an article about new fares at American Airlines misstated the number of days in the advance-purchase requirement for American's new lowest fares.
It is 14 days, not 21.


Royals Continue to Assist Others
Orioles 8, Royals 1
KANSAS CITY, Mo., April 23 (AP) -- Mike Mussina pitched a six-hitter tonight as Baltimore, off to its best start in 21 years, pinned an 8-1 defeat on a Kansas City team off to its worst start ever.
The Orioles' seventh consecutive victory left them 10-5 after 15 games for the first time since 1971.
Kansas City's seventh loss in a row plunged the Royals to 1-14, the worst record in the major leagues.
Their 1-8 homestand was the worst in the franchise's 24-year history.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
MINNESOTA TWINS -- Placed Mike Pagliarulo, third baseman, on the 15-day disabled list.
Activated Kent Hrbek, first baseman, from the disabled list.
National League
MONTREAL EXPOS -- Assigned Miguel Batista, pitcher, to Indianapolis of the American Association.
PITTSBURGH PIRATES -- Activated Don Slaught, catcher, from the disabled list.
Returned Rule Five draft selection Miguel Batista to the Montreal Expos.
Basketball  National Basketball Association
DENVER NUGGETS -- Fired Paul Westhead, coach.
MILWAUKEE BUCKS -- Announced Frank Hamblen will not return as coach for the 1992-93 season and will remain with the club in basketball operations.
PHOENIX SUNS -- Announced Cotton Fitzsimmons will relinquish his duties as coach to serve as director of player personal, effective at the end of the playoffs.
Named Paul Westphal coach, effective at the end of the playoffs.
Football  National Football League
NFL -- Named New England Patriots Chief Executive Officer Sam Jankovich chairman of the NFL college relations committee.
WASHINGTON REDSKINS -- Announced the retirement of Russ Grimm, offensive lineman, and named him assistant tight ends coach.
Hockey  National Hockey League
MINNESOTA NORTH STARS -- Signed Jeff Levy, goaltender.
TAMPA BAY LIGHTNING -- Named Terry Crisp coach.


Manufacturing Revival: A Shade Below Glorious
The revival of United States manufacturing, one of the brightest spots in the 1980's economic landscape, may have been less spectacular than Government data have been showing.
New estimates from the Commerce and Labor Departments show that on three fronts manufacturing performance from 1977 to 1989 was more modest than previously thought.
The output of American factories grew only two-thirds as fast; manufacturing's share of the economy is smaller, and the glorious gains in factory productivity previously reported now look less glorious.


Empty Trains Collide at Grand Central and Cause Delays


George F. Dales Jr. Is Dead at 64; Archeologist Studied Indus Ruins
George F. Dales Jr., an archeologist who helped unlock the mysteries of the ancient Indus River Valley civilization, died last Saturday at his home in Berkeley, Calif.
He was 64 years old.
He died from cancer, said an official of the University of California at Berkeley, where Dr.
Dales was a professor of archeology.


For Children
Movies: 'Paper Boy' and 'The Secret Life of Trees'  Walter Reade Theater 165 West 65th Street Lincoln Center (212) 875-5600 Tomorrow and Sunday Recommended ages: 5 and up
While building a career as a film maker in Australia, Paul Cox hasn't forgotten what a child likes to see on the screen.
Two of his three movies for children, made for Australian television, will be shown as part of a Paul Cox retrospective this weekend at the Walter Reade Theater at Lincoln Center.


This Space for Rent: Red Square on May Day
Red Square is getting ready for a new May Day look.
Posters of happy workers and peasants are out of fashion, as are giant portraits of Lenin, the founder of the Soviet state.
This year, for its first post-Communist spring holiday, the city of Moscow is offering Red Square as a giant backdrop for Western advertisments, which will run from walls of the Kremlin to the airspace over the mausoleum where Lenin's body still lies in state.
The idea is just a week old and already an American company has expressed an interest in one-day monopoly rights to Red Square, for the round sum of $1 million, said an official at the Itar-Tass news agency, which is handling the account.


Executive Must Sell Stores on Debit Cards
After years of false starts, Arthur D. Kranzley, the newly named president and chief executive of Maestro U.S.A., says the day is fast approaching when consumers will routinely pay merchants with plastic debit cards -- ones bearing the Maestro name, he hopes.
Mr.
Kranzley, 41 years old, spent seven years helping to develop a global network of automatic teller machines that accept Mastercard, which owns Maestro, and he guided the early experiments with debit cards.


3 More Convicted in Subway Slaying of a Tourist From Utah
Three defendants were convicted yesterday in the murder of Brian Watkins, the 22-year-old Utah tourist stabbed to death while trying to protect his family from a gang that attacked and robbed them in a midtown subway station in September 1990.
The verdict, which was reached after less than two days of deliberation, caused the families of two of the defendants to sob quietly in State Supreme Court in Manhattan.
But it stirred little reaction from the defendants themselves, Yul Gary Morales, Anthony Anderson and Ricardo Lopez, all 20 years old.


The Spoken Word
READING, Fifth Avenue Presbyterian Church, at 55th Street, Manhattan.
Works by Shakespeare, Oscar Wilde, Toni Morrison and Gertrude Stein will be read by Lynn Redgrave and her daughter Kelly Clark, an actress.
Today at 1 P.M.
Free.
Sponsored by the Free Theater Project.
Information: (212) 874-5935 or (212) 247-0490.
TALK, 92d Street Y, at Lexington Avenue, Manhattan.
Larry King, television and radio host and author.
Sunday at 7:30 P.M.
Tickets: $15.
Reservations: (212) 996-1100.


Yes, Virginia, There Is a Supergirl
FIRST, as we shall reveal below, Nora Mitchell is not a perfect teen-ager.
There is no such thing, according to an expert who asked to remain unidentified because he's outnumbered by obnoxiously fit teen-agers in his own house.
And, anyway, the first person singular is not approved for the news pages.
There are some perfect parents, of course, though not many of us.
While frustratingly slow and difficult, the continuing quest to perfect teendom has produced some, like, really awesome spinoffs such as Clearasil, electric hair dryers that dim entire city blocks, headsets that block the sound of whining adults, and Call Waiting, which prevents the Social Security contributors of tomorrow from missing a vital communication from someone they haven't seen in a whole hour. ("Watson, come here. Betsy said Tanya likes you.")


Queens Board Bars Curriculum On Gay People for 1st Graders
A Queens school board has rejected a first-grade curriculum by the Board of Education that urges the schools to teach children to respect and appreciate gay people.
The action of District 24 is not likely to result in a standoff with the Board of Education, since curriculums are advisory documents, fashioned with advice from a variety of political and social groups, and the 32 local districts use or ignore them as they wish in making lesson plans.


Afghan Rebel Factions Equals in Eyes of U.N.
The United Nations Secretary General, Boutros Boutros-Ghali, said today that he would treat all rebel factions in Afghanistan as political equals, even if some were militarily stronger to others, in efforts to defuse the crisis there.
"We are not interested in reinforcing the position of A at the expense of the position of B," Mr.
Boutros-Ghali said at a news conference here, referring to the rivalry that has erupted between groups led by Ahmad Shah Masood of the Jamiat-i-Islami and the Hezb-i-Islami of Gulbuddin Hekmatyar.


Afghan Guerrilla Radios Form a Rebel Party Line
When an Afghan guerrilla commander captured the Afghan city of Gardez and began moving columns of tanks toward Kabul, his party leaders and other commanders both in Peshawar and in Afghanistan knew about the events within hours.
Ten years ago, in the early period of the Soviet-backed Government in Kabul, it took days for battle reports to get to Peshawar, where most Afghan rebel groups have headquarters.
Now, as frantic negotiations for a new government in Kabul continue in both the Afghan capital and in Peshawar, 150 miles away, radio has become king.


Mass for Sammartinos
A memorial Mass will be offered for Dr.
Peter and Mrs.
Sylvia Sammartino at 11 A.M. on Tuesday at St.
Mary's Roman Catholic Church, at Home and Ames Avenues in Rutherford, N.J.
Dr.
Sammartino, founder and chancellor emeritus of Fairleigh Dickinson University, died together with his wife at their home in Rutherford on March 29.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
Bush announced that the U.S. had loosened some controls on militarily sensitive exports and that he believed a free-trade pact could be concluded with Mexico before the elections.  [ D1. ]
High, punitive duties on imports of Canadian beer are close, Administration officials said.  [ D2. ]


Dr Pepper Files a Plan To Sell Stock
The Dr Pepper/Seven Up Companies filed a registration statement yesterday with the Securities and Exchange Commission to issue stock publicly.
The Dallas-based maker of soft drinks said it planned to sell 29.8 million shares at $20 to $23 a share, raising between $600 million and $685 million.
The sale of the stock, which is expected to trade on the New York Stock Exchange, is planned for the fall, a spokesman said.


TEST WAS HALTED BEFORE EXPLOSION
As rescuers sifted for more bodies in the rubble of the sewer explosions that cut huge trenches through the streets of Mexico's second-largest city, the Governor acknowledged today that inspectors had abandoned an emergency check of the area hours before the blasts.
The Governor of Jalisco state, Guillermo Cosio Vidaurri, said the inspectors had decided after investigating residents' complaints of gas leaks that the danger was receding and went home to sleep because they were very tired.
The explosions began more than seven hours later, about 10:30 A.M.
Wednesday, and killed at least 212 people and injured more than 1,000 others, according to the Mexican Red Cross.


Big Business and Labor Join to Oppose Citizen Laws in New Jersey
Despite broad opposition by powerful lobbies, a bill to allow citizen lawmaking will be ready for a floor vote by mid-May, a committee chairman said today, making it possible to have the measure appear on the ballot in the general election in the fall.
A parade of opponents ranging from big labor unions to the state Chamber of Commerce to Roman Catholic bishops -- all major lobbying groups fearful of laws drawn by ordinary citizens -- lined up to oppose the bill at a committee hearing today.


Quotation of the Day
"Now, who is buying whom? I'm putting my money squarely on the table for the American people." -- ROSS PEROT, offering to spend millions on a Presidential campaign.  [ A20:6. ]


Review/Music; A Gala Farewell for Riccardo Muti
In this country, music directors of major symphony orchestras are the closest thing we have to leaders of municipal musical life.
Directing an orchestra like the Philadelphia, the New York or the Chicago carries with it influence beyond the walls of the concert hall.
Just as the names of cities often refer to orchestras, the names of conductors come to stand for a city's esthetic taste and style.
Here in Philadelphia, for the past 12 years, that style and taste have been embodied by Riccardo Muti, who expanded the musical traditions that Eugene Ormandy had defined during his 44-year tenure as music director of the Philadelphia Orchestra.
Ormandy turned the Philadelphia into a virtuoso ensemble, giving it a robust sleekness, an unpretentious directness.
Mr.
Muti, who is leaving at the end of this season to devote his energy to opera (he has been director of La Scala in Milan, Italy, since 1986), has added a pointed and ardent lyricism to the orchestra's character.
He will be replaced next season by a conductor with still different tastes, Wolfgang Sawallisch, but a gala concert on Wednesday night at the Academy of Music offered exceptional testimony to the impact Mr.
Muti has had.


Survey Shows Number of Rapes Far Higher Than Official Figures
A Government-financed survey released today estimated that 683,000 adult women were raped in 1990, a figure more than five times as high as the number of sexual assaults reported for the same year by the Justice Department.
The National Women's Study estimated that at least 12.1 million women have been the victims of rape at least once in their life and found that 61 percent of the victims said they had been raped as minors.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11  PERU'S FORMER LEADER A FUGITIVE
In a safehouse in Lima, former President Garcia told of how he evaded the troops and tanks that surrounded his house the night that President Fujimori seized broad powers.
A1  THE DAY AFTER IN GUADALAJARA
As rescuers searched for more bodies from the sewer explosions that killed more than 200 people, an official said inspectors abandoned an emergency check of the area hours before the blasts.
A8  HOW BIG WAS THE IRAQI ARMY?
A Congressional report on the Persian Gulf war says that the United States and its allies may have vastly overestimated the size of Iraq's forces at the start of the 100-hour ground campaign.A6  BRIEF CEASE-FIRE IN BOSNIA
After a month of mounting civil war, the leaders of the republic's three main ethnic groups signed a cease-fire agreement.
But the fighting that has raged in the capital for the last three days began again.
A10
For residents of Sarajevo, a brief respite from violence.
A10  LANDMARK CASE IN SOUTH AFRICA
In the first legal confirmation of police involvement in politically motivated violence, five policemen were convicted of murdering 11 black villagers.
A3
President de Klerk refined his offer to share power.  A3  WAITING IN KABUL
With rival guerrilla forces poised outside Afghanistan's capital, the city's residents hope for peace but fear a battle.
There are small signs that revolutionary change is about to come to the city.
A8
Among Afghan rebels based in Pakistan, the radio is king.  A8  SUMO FUROR IN JAPAN
Reports that an American sumo wrestling star said he was being denied the sport's highest rank because he is not Japanese prompted arguments and apologies.
The wrestler said his comments had been "misinterpreted." A11  RED SQUARE FOR RENT
For the first post-Communist May Day celebration, the city of Moscow is offering Red Square as a backdrop for Western advertisements.
A7  MISS MUSSOLINI'S SEAT
The 30-year-old granddaughter of the Italian dictator took her seat in Parliament, but not her grandfather's chair, which was already occupied by another member of her neo-Fascist party.
A6  Beijing Journal: Thousands pour in as McDonald's opens.
A4  National A12-21  SUPPORT FOR THE BIG-BANG THEORY
Astronomers looking back toward the beginning of time have detected broad wrinkles in the fabric of space, the first evidence of how an initially smooth cosmos evolved into a panorama of stars and gigantic clusters of galaxies.
A1  PEROT'S PERSONAL POCKETBOOK
Political Memo: Ross Perot's commitment of $100 million of his own money in an independent campaign for President would give him some advantages over the major-party nominees.
And then there are the disadvantages.
A1
Perot leveled his sharpest attack yet against Bush.  A20
The White House was brushed by a coerced-contribution case.  A20
A Kemp aide will challenge a lawmaker loyal to Bush.  A20  CASEY SAYS CLINTON CAN'T WIN
The Democratic Governor of Pennsylvania criticized the party's Presidential primary process, saying it had produced a front-runner who could not beat President Bush.
He urged uncommitted delegates to remain neutral.
A1
Clinton angrily defended his character and assailed the press.  A21
The question logically arises: What does Jerry Brown want?  A21  ALL OR NOTHING
News analysis: The strategy that the abortion-rights side brought to the Supreme Court for arguments on Wednesday had every appearance of a high-stakes gamble.
It was a strategy resulting from a calculation that was partly legal, the rest political.
At its roots was the judgment that on the abortion issue, there is no middle ground worth fighting for.
A1
Kansas enacted a law restricting abortions.  A17  CALIFORNIANS ARE JOLTED
A strong earthquake centered in the remote high desert east of Los Angeles caused only minor damage and injuries.
But it stirred deep concern, because its epicenter was only five miles from the dangerous San Andreas Fault.
A12
The quake brought a new warning about the "big one." A12  NEW STUDY ON RAPE
A Government-financed survey estimated that 683,000 adult American women were raped in 1990, a figure five times as high as the number reported for the same year by the Justice Department.
A14  SENTENCE IN DAY-CARE CASE
The owner of a North Carolina day-care center was sentenced to 12 consecutive lifetime prison terms for sexually abusing children.
A14  BARRY IS RELEASED FROM PRISON
After completing a six-month sentence for cocaine possession, the former Washington Mayor emerged from a Federal prison in Pennsylvania and began confidently listing the City Council seats for which he might decide to run this fall.
A12  HERESY IN SEATTLE
The Mayor of Seattle has broken with the city's no-growth orthodoxy and found, to his surprise, that he is not immediately being branded a California sympathizer.
A14  A sightseeing plane with nine aboard crashed in Hawaii.
A14  Law Page B7  A Federal appeals court nominee who departs from family tradition.
At the Bar  Metropolitan Digest, B1 DEATH AND CHAOS AFTER CAR CRASH
A car drived by an elderly woman careered out of control and barreled into crowds of people enjoying the first clear day of spring in a Greenwich Villge park.
Three people were killed, another was left on life-support and as many as 24 others were injured.
A1  Business Digest, D1  Weekend C1-35  Lesser Central Park splendors.
C1  Theater: "Shimada." C1  Film: "A Midnight Clear" C1  Obituaries A24-25  George Dales Jr., archeologist.
A24  Satyajit Ray, film maker.
A25  Sports B8-15  Baseball: Mets win in 13th.
B9  Basketball: Cavaliers top Nets.
B9  Hockey: Devils beat Rangers.
B9  Editorials/Op-Ed A34-35  Editorials A34  Ross Perot, one-way wizard.
Premature goodies.
Education President?
David C. Anderson: S.R.O.'s.
Letters A34  A. M. Rosenthal: Tale of one city.
A35  Leslie H. Gelb: Trashing the Saudis.
A35  Gary Milhollin and Diana Edensword: Iraq's bomb, chip by chip.
A35  Flora Lewis: Europe's last-minute jitters.
A35





MCI Shows Rise in Profits Of 8.5% in the First Quarter
The MCI Communications Corporation, the nation's second-largest provider of long-distance telephone service after the American Telephone and Telegraph Company, said yesterday that earnings in the first quarter rose 8.5 percent, to $141 million, or 51 cents a share, from $130 million, or 48 cents a share, a year earlier.
Quarterly revenue rose at a faster rate, 9.4 percent, to $2.22 billion, from $2.03 billion a year ago.
Charles W. Schelke, a telecommunications analyst with Smith Barney, Harris Upham, said MCI's earnings were within expectations but at the lower range of most Wall Street forecasts.
Mr.
Schelke had projected 53 cents a share for the first quarter and is expecting 51 cents a share for the second quarter.


Diner's Journal
Jewel of India
One of the better new lunch deals in midtown Manhattan -- that is, if you don't mind fetching the food yourself -- is offered at Jewel of India, the tasteful Indian restaurant at 15 West 44th Street.
The $11.95 daily buffet offered in the upstairs dining room may not be as refined or varied as ordering a la carte, but in general Indian food stands up well to a steam table.
On a recent weekday, the buffet included rogan josh, cubed leg of lamb in a mildly spicy sauce; a spinach-and-potatoes combination with a hot undertone; tandoori chicken (the breast meat was dry but the legs were succulent); rice; three vegetable curries, and nan, the Indian flatbread.


At the Bar
They have names like Mabel, Juliana, Beatrix, Isabel, Cecily and Margaret.
They lived, became pregnant, and died six or seven centuries ago, and they presumably lie forgotten in English country churchyards.
But they all made history, and as the Supreme Court weighs the future of abortion rights, that history is being reconsidered.
If Planned Parenthood of Southeastern Pennsylvania v.
Casey is any indication, the High Court is not just liked but well liked.
A total of 25 "friends of the court" filed briefs in the case, which was argued Wednesday.
Two came from clashing sets of legal historians, each of whom found support for their positions by poring over parchment.


Not All Broadway Theaters Turn Away the Wheelchair-Bound; Public Toilets
To the Editor:
I was very sympathetic to John Hockenberry's plight at being unable to attend the theater because it was not accessible to his wheelchair (Op-Ed, April 13).
However, I wish to correct his misinformation about the Public Toilets Project, which for four months, beginning this summer, will install in New York City six attractive, well-maintained, automatic public conveniences of the type found in 750 cities all over Europe.
The toilets and their maintenance are a gift to New York City from the JCDecaux Company of France, and indeed an agreement has been reached with the city to test these units and see how they fare in New York.
If they work and New Yorkers like them, it will set the stage for a wide-scale installation of public toilets in all five boroughs.


Corrections
The weekly ratings chart on the television page on Tuesday misstated the dates of the period covered, and displayed rating and share figures incorrectly for the three networks; a correction in this space yesterday supplied the data incompletely.
The rating for ABC was 10.4, and its share was 19; for NBC, 10.2 and 18; for CBS, 10.1 and 18.
For the season, ABC's rating was 12.1 and its share was 20; NBC's was 12.2 and 20, and CBS's was 13.7 and 22.
The ratings were for April 13 to 19.


Art in Review
Cindy Sherman  Metro Pictures 150 Greene Street SoHo Through May 9
A sign posted by the door of the Metro Pictures gallery warns parents that they might want to view the works inside before letting their children see them.
The warning is understandable.
In her latest work, Cindy Sherman, renowned for her stagings of media-derived scenes in which she herself appears as a kind of contemporary Everywoman, veers sharply away from the pseudohistorical personages she has enacted in recent work.
Ms.
Sherman arranges plastic and rubber body parts, ordered from medical-supply companies, in a series of sexually explicit poses.
She then paints and applies cosmetics to these figures to make them more lifelike before photographing them.


Cheers as Ex-Mayor of Washington Leaves Prison
The former Mayor of Washington, Marion S. Barry Jr., emerged from prison today and strode straight into the capital's politics by casually and confidently listing the City Council seats for which he might decide to run this fall.
In the course of his serving six months for cocaine possession, there has been wide speculation that Mr.
Barry would run for the City Council this fall.
Though he said that he had no specific plans, he immediately pointed out, "There are a number of seats open in the district."


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows, performances and art exhibitions in the New York metropolitan region that will be closing soon: Closing This Weekend
"THE MASTER BUILDER," Belasco Theater, 111 West 44th Street, Manhattan.
Tony Randall, artistic director of the National Actors Theater, directs Henrik Ibsen's play.
Final performance: Sunday at 3 P.M.
Show times: Today at 8 P.M. and tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M.
Tickets: $35 to $40.
Information: (212) 239-6200.


No Clue to 3 Babies' Deaths in Hospital Nursery
Health Department investigators have found no problems with infection control in the neonatal intensive care unit of a New Jersey hospital where three premature babies died earlier this month.
Dr.
John H. Brook, senior public health physician for the New Jersey Health Department, said the infection of three unrelated babies from the same Klebsiella oxytoca bacterium was "very unusual" but added that the cause of the outbreak in Livingston, N.J., might never be known.


Corrections
An article on the Health page on Wednesday about efforts to regulate the use of individuals' genetic information gave an outdated affiliation for Dr.
Paul Billings.
He is chief of genetic medicine at the California Pacific Medical Center, formed last year by the merger of Presbyterian Medical Center in San Francisco, where Dr.
Billings was chief of genetic medicine, and Children's Hospital of San Francisco.


Economic Scene; The Crucial Issue Politicians Ignore
EVERYBODY, Republican and Democrat, wishes the Federal budget deficit would just go away.
But it gets worse.
The latest monthly Treasury statement shows that during the first six months of fiscal 1992, which began Oct. 1, the deficit widened to $196.88 billion, from $152.19 billion in the first half of fiscal 1991.
For all fiscal 1991, the deficit was $268.7 billion; this year the Administration projects it to climb to about $400 billion.
That estimate reflects an anticipated on-budget deficit of $449.1 billion, offset by an off-budget surplus of $49.4 billion.


CHRONICLE
QUEEN ELIZABETH II named EDWARD HEATH, the former prime minister, to the highest British order of knighthood yesterday.
Mr.
Heath, 75 years old, was prime minister from 1970 to 1974.
He will be made a Knight Companion of the Most Noble Order of the Garter in ceremonies at Windsor Castle on June 15.
The Queen also named LORD SAINSBURY, the philanthropist and founder of the supermarket chain, and VISCOUNT RIDLEY, the Lord Lieutenant of Northumberland, to the order, which is limited to 24 knights.
It was established by King Edward III in 1348.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.25-6.5
6.25-6.5
9.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
6.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.62
3.72
5.95
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.66
3.67
5.60
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.83
3.83
5.70
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.20
7.21
7.93
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.04
8.03
8.23
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.97
8.98
9.30
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.73
6.71
7.27
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Plea by Cornhusker
After reviewing two psychiatric reports, a prosecutor in Lincoln, Neb., said he would probably not challenge the insanity plea entered on behalf of SCOTT BALDWIN, the Nebraska-Lincoln football player who was charged with beating a Lincoln woman in January.


Who's That Neo-Fascist In Her Chair?
The history of the world's politics is dotted with disputes about empty chairs -- those abandoned when people walked out or never even turned up at gatherings of moment and let their absence speak their volumes.
Italy's newest Parliament opened today with a tiff about an occupied chair.
And it was no ordinary one at that.
The parliamentary seat had once been sat upon by Benito Mussolini, who occupied it for a year before he became Prime Minister in 1922 and turned Italy into a one-party Fascist state that endured until 1943.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Finances; Fitzwater on Donations: No to Arm-Twisting, Yes to Elbow-Rubbing
The White House today condemned attempts by business executives to coerce their employees to donate to political campaigns, but insisted that there was nothing improper in luring big donors with picture-taking sessions with President Bush and other benefits.
Marlin Fitzwater, the White House press secretary, was responding to a lawsuit filed this week by an employee of an Illinois marketing company who accused his superiors of pressuring him.
The employee said he was told to contribute at least $1,500 to a dinner at the Washington Convention Center next Tuesday on behalf of Republican candidates for Congress.
Mr.
Bush will be the host.


Amount of Cut Is Reduced In Dinkins Capital Budget
New York City will cut its capital budget for long-term construction by 15.6 percent over the next four years, a move that will mean less money for jails, sanitation, parks and street repairs, Mayor David N. Dinkins announced yesterday.
But the $2 billion spending reduction was not as deep as the 30 percent cut of $3.7 billion that the Dinkins administration proposed in January as necessary to reduce the soaring debt service that the city pays on bonds used to finance the rebuilding.


Bucks' Hamblen Out
When he took over as head coach of the 8-9 Milwaukee Bucks last December, FRANK HAMBLEN knew the score.
As he put it yesterday: "I knew that we would have to play extremely competitive basketball for the remainder of the season for me to remain as the head coach."


More Oil Companies Report Sharp Declines in Earnings
Three large oil companies, Exxon, Texaco and Occidental Petroleum, reported sharply lower quarterly earnings today.
A large refiner, Ashland Oil, said it lost $9 million in the period.
Exxon's profit declined by 39.7 percent, while Texaco's plunged by 51.8 percent and Occidental's by 27.9 percent.
Results at Exxon and Occidental were bolstered by special one-time gains unrelated to business operations.


Abortion Rights Strategy: All or Nothing
The strategy that the abortion-rights side brought to the Supreme Court on Wednesday had every appearance of a high-stakes gamble.
Addressing a Court on which support for Roe v.
Wade has dwindled to the vanishing point, Kathryn Kolbert, the lawyer for a group of abortion clinics challenging Pennsylvania's abortion regulation law, argued fervently for the one result this case is least likely to produce.
She asked the Justices to reaffirm their 1973 landmark ruling and to declare that the constitutional right to abortion is broad enough to invalidate every restriction in the Pennsylvania law.


Art in Review
Thomas Lanigan-Schmidt  Holly Solomon Gallery 724 Fifth Avenue (near 57th Street) Through tomorrow
The high point of Thomas Lanigan-Schmidt's small show is the reconstruction of "The Summer Palace of Czarina Tatlina," an installation originally exhibited in the artist's East Village apartment in 1970.


TV Weekend; Sons Who Kill, Moms Who Mambo
Quarterly sweeps and sociopaths.
The two go together like, well, television entertainment and blatant exploitation.
For the next few weeks, prime-time ratings will determine how much networks can charge advertisers in coming months.
Competition heats up and among the more popular programming tactics called into play are the inevitable movies based on true crime stories.
Once again, television will look under the rock of daily life in the nation and find all sorts of dreadful creatures scurrying underneath.
Tops on the list this weekend are overprotective mothers and murderous sons.


Afghans in Kabul Hope For Peace Amid Anxiety
Sayeed Alahuddin squatted before a basin of gray water, swooshed a leafy head of lettuce through the murky liquid, shook the water off, and then picked another from the mound at his feet.
"We hope peace will come," he said, as fellow vegetable merchants clustered around.
"It belongs to all the people. I don't know what will happen. It's God's will."


Playoff Question for the Knicks: Can Ewing Stand the Pressure?
After a week of preparing, waiting, and talking, the Knicks and the Detroit Pistons finally begin their first-round, three-of-five-games playoff series tonight at Madison Square Garden.
Some things about this series are obvious.
It will be low-scoring.
It will be physical.
And both coaches, Chuck Daly and Pat Riley, will be extremely well-dressed.


Satyajit Ray, 70, Cinematic Poet, Dies
Satyajit Ray, the versatile and prolific Indian film maker whose "Apu" trilogy of a childhood, youth and manhood in Bengal was one of the most luminous series in film history, died yesterday in Calcutta.
He was 70 years old.
Mr.
Ray (his name was pronounced satya-JIT RAY) received an honorary Academy Award last month for lifetime achievement in cinema.
He had been suffering from a heart ailment compounded by breathing problems, and was admitted to Belle Vue Hospital in Calcutta on Jan. 29.
A three-member delegation from the Oscar committee visited him there on March 16 to present him with the golden statuette.
The occasion was filmed, and Mr.
Ray's acceptance speech was shown as part of the Academy Awards broadcast on March 30.


Watch This Space


Art in Review
Grace Knowlton  M-13 Gallery 72 Greene Street SoHo Through tomorrow
Grace Knowlton's big faux boulders make an elegant show, an ensemble that at first seems too naturalistic, like a rock garden taken inside, and then becomes increasingly deliberate and artistic.
Ms.
Knowlton has worked with the spheres, as she calls them, since the early 1970's, making them first in clay, then in Fiberglas, concrete and steel.
In those years her pieces often seemed like simplistic enlargements of forms already made much more evocative by the artist Eva Hesse in the late 1960's.


Mugging of East New York Pastor Is Met With Bitter Resignation
Parishioners, priests and staff members at the St.
Fortunata Church in Brooklyn seemed bitter but unsurprised yesterday about the mugging of their pastor, the Rev.
James Ryan, who was attacked as he patrolled the grounds of his church late Wednesday night.
They said that Father Ryan believed his collar, his God and his long experience in East New York would guard him on his nightly stroll, even as the neighborhood deteriorated during his nine-year tenure as pastor.


Review/Ballet; Spring Reawakens 'Sleeping Beauty'
Tchaikovsky and his collaborators set their ballet "The Sleeping Beauty" in the era of Louis XIV, a king whose architects at Versailles virtually rejected the then-fashionable Baroque in favor of a classical style.
The enduring values of classicism in ballet also lie at the heart of Peter Martins's staging of "The Sleeping Beauty" for the New York City Ballet.
In his own century, characterized more by excess than by true grandeur, he has avoided the grandiose without sacrificing anything to the spectacular.


Accounts
*
Quaker Oats Co., Chicago, to Bayer Bess Vanderwarker, Chicago, for Cycle dog food's professional and veterinarian advertising account, previously handled by Arthur E. Wilk Communcations, Chicago.
Billings were estimated at $2 million to $3 million.
Bayer also handles Cycle's consumer advertising. *
Book-of-the-Month-Club Inc., New York, to Ogilvy &amp; Mather Direct, New York, as its direct-marketing agency of record, previously handled by Wunderman Worldwide, New York.
Billings were not disclosed.
Ogilvy also handles the Quality Paperback Book Club, which, like Book-of-the-Month Club, is owned by Time Warner Inc.


Afraid of Jean Harris on a Dark Street?
To the Editor:
Using the example of Jean Harris to buttress an argument for deterrence, as Edward L. Glaeser does in "To Let Jean Harris Go Sends Wrong Message" (letter, April 9), is ridiculous.
Does he really believe society is safer with the convicted murderer Jean Harris in prison?
If someone would come face to face with her on a dark street, would it be wise to run?
There are offenses committed under extreme duress that are unlikely to be repeated against society at large.
Many such incarcerated offenders are women.
Mr.
Glaeser's position, that the early release of Jean Harris would send a dangerous message about society's willingness to punish, appears to be retaliation, rather than crime control.


Review/Film: A Midnight Clear; War Recalled as a Surreal Muddle
THE place is the Ardennes Forest, somewhere near the French- German border in December 1944, when World War II is lurching toward its climax in Europe.
This particular landscape is untouched.
The fighting is still elsewhere.
The trees are heavy with snow, but even the whiteness looks dark.
The light is feeble and withdrawn; there's no longer any intensity to it.
Seen in the center of a broad clearing in the woods is an apparently abandoned country house, elegant but not quite a chateau.
Nearby is the weathered stone figure of a martyred Christian saint, its severed head held to its chest like a chalice, evoking thoughts of sacrifice, salvation and life everlasting.


Satyajit Ray Dies


Money Fund Assets Up
The assets of the nation's 592 money market mutual funds increased by $10.15 billion, to $502.78 billion, for the week that ended on Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
Those of the 216 institutional funds increased by $10.52 billion, to $179.42 billion.
The assets of the 285 general-purpose funds were up by $224.3 million, to $178.75 billion.
The 91 broker-dealer funds decreased by $595.1 million, to $144.61 billion, the institute said.


Lendl the American
After 32 years as an eee-VAHN, IVAN LENDL is about to be come an EYE-van.
The Czechosolvak tennis star is turning in his green card for red, white and blue American citizenship.
At a citizenship hearing in Hartford on Tuesday, Lendl, who has lived in Greenwich since 1984, breezed through a personal interview and American history quiz.
He will take the oath of allegiance in New Haven on July 10.


Longtime Executive at Mead Is Selected for the Top Posts
The Mead Corporation, the large paper, wood products and electronic-publishing company, named Steven C. Mason, a 35-year employee and Mead's vice chairman, to be chairman and chief executive yesterday.
Mr.
Mason will replace Burnell R. Roberts, who has been chairman since 1982 and who plans to retire on May 6, when he becomes 65.
Mr.
Mason, 56, came to Mead in 1957 in the company's white-paper division and worked in a number of engineering and manufacturing positions.
For many years, he was general manager of Schoeller Technical Papers, which was a Mead subsidiary.


U.S.O.C. Candidates
The United States Olympic Commitee said it had selected four candidates for the nation's open position on the International Olympic Commitee.
They are WILLIAM HYBL, the U.S.O.C. president; MICHAEL LENARD of Los Angeles, a former Olympic handball player who is a U.S.O.C. vice president; ROBERT SMITH of Greenville, Ill., the president of the International Baseball Association, and ROSS WALES of Cincinnati, the honorary secretary of the international federation for aquatic sports.


Art in Review
Betye Saar, Bennie Lusane and Angel Suarez-Rosado  Intar 420 West 42d Street Through May 1
This very moving show consists of installations by three artists.
Betye Saar's "Of Matter and Spirit" is a kind of walk-in version of the shadow-box environments that have long been her specialty.
A blue silk curtain, painted with constellations, hangs in a darkened room.
In front of it is an Art Deco bridge table with four sets of hands outlined on its top.
It is surrounded by a circle of bones, animal skulls and flowers.
A seance is clearly in progress, and in one corner a child's chair is spotlighted and suspended in midair as if levitated.
The effect is charming and poetic, combining the two components of the title with unusual delicacy.


Bush Eases Cold-War Trade Curb
President Bush announced this evening that the United States had loosened some controls on militarily sensitive exports and that he had ordered an acceleration of negotiations for a free trade agreement with Mexico, believing a pact possible before the November elections.
The Commerce Department disclosed three changes today in its export control regulations, to take effect next Tuesday.
The changes allow more high-technology products with specific or potential applications in the operation and detection of aircraft and submarines to be shipped to Western Europe and Japan without export licenses.
They would also impose fewer controls on re-exports of American high-technology goods from these countries.


Judge Upholds Distribution Of Condoms in High Schools
New York City's pioneering, five-month-old program of making condoms available on request to public high school students as a means of combating AIDS withstood its first court challenge yesterday in a ruling that could have broad implications for similar programs in other cities.
The ruling by a state court held that the condom program did not violate parents' religious freedom or their rights to raise children as they see fit because participation is not mandatory.
It also held that the program is not a "health service" under state law and thus did not require parental consent.


Mahoney's Hook Shot
He already has LOU CARNESECCA's endorsement, and yesterday BRIAN MAHONEY got a chance to make his pitch where it counts.
The St.
John's assistant was the first candidate interviewed by the committee seeking a successor to Carnesecca as head coach.


A Sure Sign of Spring on Long Island


Bosnia Factions Sign New Truce Accord
After a month of mounting civil war in the former Yugoslav republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina, the leaders of the republic's three main ethnic groups signed a new cease-fire agreement today and agreed to resume negotiations under European Community sponsorship in Lisbon on Monday.
But the European Community leaders who negotiated the new accord had barely left Sarajevo, the republic'scapital, before the fighting that has raged there for the last three days began again.
The resumed talks would discuss the republic's future.


Restaurants
If cute is supplanting conspicuous in 1990's restaurant design, then the oversize doll house called Fishin Eddie is a thriving paradigm.
Since this Upper West Side fish house opened last fall, the crush of customers makes those Caribbean fish that travel in big schools look like insouciant individualists.
Fishin Eddie has more than a beguiling setting going for it.
The restaurant is owned by Vincent Orgera and Ed Schoenfeld, who also tapped a rich vein several years ago with the American restaurant Vince and Eddie's on West 68th Street.
This piscatorial facsimile looks like the kind of place you would happen upon while driving to a vacation in Maine.
It has a little bar up front with shaker pegs for coats, a partly exposed kitchen in the middle, and a neighborly back room with a skylight, a big iron chandelier, yellow-green faux antique chairs, winsomely painted furniture and blackboards on the wall for daily specials.


Marinovich Is Cleared
A California judge dismissed drug charges against TODD MARINOVICH yesterday after concluding that the Los Angeles Raiders quarterback had successfully completed a six-month program for first-time offenders.
Marinovich, who had been charged with possession of marijuana and cocaine in January 1991, was not in court in Newport Beach as Judge SUSANNE S. SHAW seemed to go out of her way to refute a recent report by ESPN that Marinovich had failed a confidential National Football League drug test three months ago.


Officials Urge State To Buy a Water Utility
Three days after the corporate parent of the largest water utility in Queens and western Nassau County said it would sell the company, several officials have urged New York State to make a bid.


Blissful Day in the Park Becomes a Nightmare
It was finally the first sweet day of spring, and for city dwellers the only place to greet its tardy arrival was at the park.
As the temperature nudged into the high 70's yesterday and a refreshing breeze wafted over the city, Washington Square Park, never a quiet place, teemed with humanity.
Everyone seemed to be out.
Neighboring New York University was staging its annual clean-up day in the park, planting flowers and painting benches and railings.
The project was supposed to have been on Tuesday, but was rained out.
By early afternoon, Wet Paint stickers were taped to many of the dark green benches and low-slung black railings, and the park just sparkled.


Review/Film; An Odyssey Southward With Coffin, Occupied
Pokey Jones (Don McKellar) and Jackie Bangs (Valerie Buhagiar), traveling companions who transport a coffin from Canada to New Orleans atop the roof of Pokey's car, are one of the more intriguing couples to be paired in a modern road movie.
An innocent lad who secretly practices the trumpet, Pokey makes his living cutting hair in a bleak little northern Canadian town named Pickerel Falls.
Until the day a body turns up in a bathtub in the backyard of his shop, his life seems to be on a permanently dreary treadmill.
Jackie, a fugitive rock roadie who has absconded with her band's stash of drugs, coincidentally turns up in the same little town at the same moment.
On a whim, she claims to be the dead man's sister, hides the drugs on his body and persuades the local authorities to let her return the body to New Orleans for burial.
Pokey impulsively seizes his opportunity to turn his back on Pickerel Falls and volunteers to be the chauffeur.


Dr. Feza Gursey, 71, A Decorated Physicist
Dr.
Feza Gursey, an award-winning physicist and a retired Yale University professor, died April 13 at Yale-New Haven Hospital in New Haven.
He was 71 years old and lived in Hamden, Conn.
He died of cancer, a family friend said.


Mets Get Two Signs Of Better Days Ahead
For the New York Mets, the 13-inning victory was sweet.
The fact that a fielding play and a pitching performance produced a feeling that two of their players were coming of age in new roles, made a long afternoon of baseball all the more special yesterday.
The fielder in question was Dave Magadan, a first baseman turned third baseman who tries to win a bigger portion of the job as well as win over skeptics every time he steps onto the field.
Yesterday, he took huge leaps toward the latter goal in the Mets' 1-0 victory over St.
Louis.
Turning in an exemplary performance, Magadan especially took charge in the 11th, making two key plays as the Mets wriggled out of a no-outs, bases-loaded jam.


Sunken Tug Is Refloated in the Arthur Kill


Review/Film; Carefree Look at Death Reveals Family Conflicts
"Passed Away," an affectionate comedy written and directed by Charlie Peters, uses a wake and a funeral as the occasion for highlighting the conflicts within a large Irish family.
Though the large cast is impressive and the results are sometimes ruefully funny, audiences are less likely to appreciate Mr.
Peters's artistry than his insistence upon whistling past the grave.
The dead patriarch is Jack Scanlan (Jack Warden), whose warm presence in the film's opening scenes makes his demise harder to take than it otherwise would be.
It does not help that Mr.
Peters, previously known as the screenwriter of films including "Paternity" and "Three Men and a Little Lady," kills Jack off with a heart attack at a surprise party in his honor.
When the Scanlan children are told of their father's death, their grief is meant to seem real, and yet the film insists on a blithe, breezy tone throughout.
That it works even a little is remarkably lucky, under the circumstances.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Front-Runner; Questioned About Trust, Clinton Turns Angry
Bill Clinton, agitated and visibly frustrated by questions raised at a college here about whether he is truthful enough to be President, railed against the press and a system in which he said that "it is easier to tear down than build up."
The Arkansas Governor offered the rambling, insistent defense of his own character at a question-and-answer session at Florida A &amp; M University here.
As he dismissed the questions about his use of marijuana, his marital problems and his draft record, students in the room cheered him and booed the questioners.


Jocklock Season: A Rap Song
Lincoln Tunnel gridlock, ice the puck.
Has Mark the Messiah skated out of luck?
Is Derrick Coleman running amuck?
Whose gonna manage us, Jeff or Buck?
Time-out.
Gotta have some answers, A call for reason.
Too much happening, it's Jocklock Season.
Nets 'n' Mets, Knicks 'n' Rangers, All my lovers will be strangers.
You won't see me on the town, Till way past the Triple Crown.
Till Koch and Conner slip their berths.
Till Tartabonilla hit their worths.
Time-out.
Jocklock, in the paint, 12-meter, high stick.
Who's gonna be the number one draft pick?
Who's that Coryatt?
You a fan of Emtman?
Go with  Any Smith Don't get stung.
Buy Gene Chung.
Time-out.
Jocklock, blue-line, foul pole, zone.
Bet the rent on Julie Krone.
Squeaky little big-mouth hardboot iron pants Chase Arazi back to France.
To stud.
This rap's for Bud.
Time-out.
Jocklock, cut-off, back door, button-hook.
When you gonna read Darryl's new book?
After he does.
Time-out.
Jocklock, 'roid cycle, EPO, Olympians are juiced to go!
Double-check their chromosomes, logos, passports, Here comes Mr.
Jordan and the full courts, All-pro, all-stars, all bran stands full Maybe next time Sabregooden, Bonibull.
Time-out.
Jocklock, double-steal, cross-check, spike.
In a jailhouse laundry Ironing Mike.
Time-out.
Jocklock, power-play, slamdunk, big bat.
Knicks beat Pistons Ewing gets it down pat.
Nets whip Cavs Bill Fitch backs down.
Then Tark spurs Robinson to snatch the crown.
Time-out.
Jocklock, power serve, double-bogie, tack.
Yes or no, Fay, is Steinbrenner back?
Time-out.
Jocklock, split finger, left jab, sky hook Little Mike Richter, John Vanbiesbrouck One of them better make more saves.
And Domi's homey, Adam Graves, Must board Claude.
Time-out.
Jocklock, A &amp; M, USC, SMU How come Laetner's in GQ?
Talks trash.
No cash?
There is .....no way NC.....double A Will nuke Duke.
Time-out Jocklock, Everlast, Reebok, golf glove.
Stop.
In the name of Love.
And Couples.
Jocklock, dinger, three-point, slap.
Your turn now to do the Jocklock Rap.


Protesters Demand the Resignation of a Councilman Over Remarks About Homosexuals


Du Pont to Trade Units With British Company
E.
I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Company has agreed to exchange its acrylic business for the nylon fiber unit of Imperial Chemical Industries P.L.C. and will pay I.C.I. about $443 million in the deal, the companies said today.
"It is a nice little plus for Du Pont," an Oppenheimer analyst, George Krug, said.
"It gives them a much stronger presence in Europe, where they were weak, particularly in textiles."


Quake in California Desert Puts Authorities on Guard
Millions of Southern Californians were checking their supplies of batteries and bottled water today, waiting nervously to see if the strong earthquake they felt Wednesday night was only a warning of something bigger to come.
The earthquake's epicenter was in the remote high desert 110 miles east of Los Angeles in Riverside County, and the quake caused only minor damage and injuries.
But it stirred deep concern because it occurred only five miles from the dangerous San Andreas Fault, which scientists have long said could produce the feared Big One that is almost inevitable in California some day.


La Guardia Closed as Jet Catches Fire While Landing
The nose gear on a Delta Air Lines jet briefly caught fire as the plane touched down on a runway at La Guardia Airport, shutting down the airport for nearly six hours yesterday afternoon and evening, the Port Authority police said.
The fire was extinguished in 45 seconds and there were no injuries to the 297 passengers and 11 crew members on the Lockheed L-1011, which was coming from West Palm Beach, Fla., Port Authority officials said.


Union Coalition Supports Plan for Averting Layoffs
A coalition of unions representing Connecticut state employees approved a plan yesterday that would avert 3,200 layoffs by permitting the state to postpone $150 million in pension-fund contributions due this year.
In addition, the state will retrain and rehire many of the 336 workers who received layoff notices earlier this month, said Robert J. Krzys, the chief negotiator for the coalition, which includes teachers, office workers, health-care workers and state troopers.
About $3 million will be set aside for training this year, with $2 million set for fiscal 1993.


Japan Stocks Move Higher
Japanese stocks rose today with a spurt in the last half hour of trading today, buoyed by bargain-hunting.
At the close of the session, the Nikkei average of 225 issues was up 140.40 points, or 0.81 percent, to 17,542.45.
Prices opened higher but quickly retreated in the morning session after program selling and profit-taking erased some of the gains from Thursday's strong rally.


Ross Perot, One-Way Wizard
Millions of Americans fed up with drift, deficits and overdrafts think they've found a savior in Ross Perot, the $2.5 billion man who'll run for President if enough people ask him.
Mr.
Perot's sudden notoriety springs partly from public disaffection with traditional politics.
But it also owes much to the fact that not much is known about Ross Perot.
Like the Wizard of Oz, he has been an amplified one-way voice, untested and unchallenged.
True, it's hard to turn on the TV and not find Mr.
Perot.
But as Bill Clinton told reporters the other day, "You all haven't had the chance to put him through the meat grinder." The tough questions are sure to come when Mr.
Perot formally announces, transforming the idea of Ross Perot into a living candidacy.


McDonald's Net Up 11%
The McDonald's Corporation said yesterday that its first-quarter earnings rose 11 percent, fueled by strong growth overseas.
McDonald's earnings rose to $187.4 million, or 51 cents a share, from $168.5 million, or 46 cents a share, a year earlier.
Quarterly revenue grew 4 percent, to $1.62 billion from $1.55 billion.
Systemwide sales, which include franchises as well as company-owned stores, were up 9 percent, to $4.9 billion from $4.5 billion.


Libya Case Shows Need for Terrorism Court; Binding Resolutions
To the Editor:
The reactivation of the United Nations after the cold war has made the role of the Secretary General particularly important to world peace.
As a human rights activist, I am concerned at remarks by the new Secretary General, Boutros Boutros-Ghali, at his first news conference March 19.
Questioned about Security Council resolutions on the Palestinian and Kashmir issues, Mr.
Boutros-Ghali said that these resolutions were not "binding." This is not the place to discuss the merits of these issues, what adjustments should be made, how negotiations should be held or how the spirit of the United Nations resolutions should be fulfilled.
The authority and the binding nature of Security Council resolutions, however, transcend these issues and are a matter of principle of utmost importance to the United Nations system.


In Legal Terms, It Ain't Over
Moving at a slower-than-snail's pace, the lawyers in the legal disputes touched off by George Steinbrenner's banishment as managing partner of the Yankees crept closer toward resolution of the disputes yesterday, but they did not, as they had been expected to do, take all of the steps necessary to complete their effort with finality.
Lawyers for Commissioner Fay Vincent and Leonard Kleinman signed papers that, when filed in United States District Court, presumably today, will discontinue Kleinman's lawsuit against Vincent.
That step would clear the way for Steinbrenner to request a meeting with the commissioner in his effort to be restored to active duty with the Yankees.
The lawyers had expected to file the papers yesterday, but they could not because the lawyers for Kleinman and Steinbrenner did not complete their part of the agreement.


Let's Play 1 1/2! Mets Win Dazzler on Sun-Soaked Day at Shea
Esthetically, it was an imperfect ending to an otherwise perfect game.
But don't try telling that to the New York Mets, whose own definition of perfection always contains more than a hint of victory.
Such was the case yesterday, when a sparkling afternoon of sunshine at Shea Stadium seemed to inspire the participants, Cardinals and Mets alike.
And for 12 innings, half-frame after half-frame, the National League East rivals, bringing out more and more of the best their pitching and defenses had to offer, battled to a scoreless draw.


Premature Favors From the Mayor
Graced with a modest budget surplus, Mayor David Dinkins now promises to keep New York City libraries open longer and build new health clinics.
It's hard to quarrel with his impulse to provide these and other worthy programs.
He has been plagued from the beginning with nothing but bad economic news.
And the city could use a lift.
Even so, the Mayor's generosity sends the wrong signal.
The city is still in recession and must have the cooperation of its unions and the Legislature to balance next year's budget.
By hinting now that good days are here, Mr.
Dinkins undermines his own efforts to enlist the help he needs.


Canadian Beer Duty Expected
Administration officials said today that they were close to announcing high, punitive duties on imports of Canadian beer, although the sanctions might not take effect immediately.
The United States and Canada have been squabbling for several years over rules in each nation that discourage imports.
The United States is protesting regulations in some Canadian provinces that allow locally brewed beer to be sold in grocery and liquor stores, while beer brewed in other provinces or abroad may be sold only in liquor stores.


Review/Film; A Writer Lacks Talent But Not Pals
Only someone close to the production might know whether "Little Noises," the first feature directed by Jane Spencer, is inept, unrealized or some combination of both.
Whatever the reason, the film is an astonishingly inert comedy about an untalented young New York writer and his pals.
Its only distinguishing feature is that a mature Tatum O'Neal appears in it, just barely, along with Crispin Glover, whose dreadfully mannered performance may be an attempt to fill the void.
The film opens today at the Cinema Village 12th Street.
Little Noises
Directed by Jane Spencer; screenplay by Ms.
Spencer and Jon Zeiderman, based on a story by Ms.
Spencer and Anthony Brito; director of photography, Makoto Watanabe; edited by Ernie Fritz; music by Kurt Hoffman and Fritz Van Orden; production designer, Charles Lagola; produced by Michael Spielberg and Brad M. Gilbert; released by Monument Pictures.
At the Cinema Village 12th Street, 22 East 12th Street, Manhattan.
Running time: 80 minutes.
This film has no rating.
Joey Kremple . . .
Crispin Glover Stella Winslow . . .
Tatum O'Neal Aunt Shirley . . .
Carole Shelley


Iraq's Bomb, Chip by Chip
The U.S.
Commerce Department licensed the following strategic American exports for Saddam Hussein's atomic weapon programs between 1985 and 1990.
Virtually all of the items were shipped to Iraq; all are useful for making atomic bombs or long-range missiles.
United Nations inspectors in Iraq are still trying to find most of them.
The list is based on Commerce Department export licensing records; the dollar amount of each transaction is as claimed by the exporting company.
It was compiled by Gary Milhollin, a law professor at the University of Wisconsin and director of the Wisconsin Project on Nuclear Arms Control, and Diana Edensword, a research analyst at the project.
Atomic Bomb Builders  Sales to: Iraqi Atomic Energy Commission, the main atomic research laboratory; Badr and Daura sites, where bomb fuel was made; Al Qaqaa site, where detonators were made.
Canberra Elektronik: computers for measuring gamma rays and fast neutrons -- $30,000
Cerberus Ltd.: computers -- $18,181
Hewlett Packard: computers; electronic testing, calibration and graphics equipment -- $25,000
International Computer Systems: computers useful for graphic design of atomic bombs andmissiles -- $1,600,000
Perkin-Elmer: computers and instruments useful for quality control of bomb fuels -- $280,000
TI Coating Inc.: equipment for coating metal parts, useful for bomb production -- $373,708 Atomic Bomb and Missile Builders
Sales to: Ministry of Industry and Military Industrialization, which ran the atomic bomb, missile and chemical weapon factories; Nassr state enterprise, where equipment for enriching atomic bomb fuel was made; Salah Al Din site, where electronic equipment for missiles and atomic bombs was made; Ministry of Defense, which oversaw missile and atomic bomb development.
Axel Electronics: capacitors -- $84,000
BDM Corporation: computers; computer-assisted design equipment -- $52,000
Canberra Elektronik: computers for computer-assisted design -- $21,552
Carl Zeiss: microcomputers for mapping -- $104,545
Consarc Corporation: computers to run machine tools capable of manufacturing atomic bomb parts (this sale was stopped by Presidential order in June 1990) -- $525,550
Data General Corporation: computers for mapping -- $324,000
Gerber Systems: computers to run machine tools capable of manufacturing atomic bomb and missile parts -- $367,428
Hewlett Packard: computers for making molds; frequency synthesizers and other equipment useful for operating secured military communications systems -- $1,045,500
Honeywell Inc.: computers -- $353,333
International Computer Systems: computers for manufacturing, tool design and graphics -- $4,497,700
International Computers Ltd.: computers -- $687,994
Leybold Vacuum Systems: computer controlled welder used by Iraqis to produce centrifuges for making atomic bomb fuel -- $1,400,000
Lummus Crest: Radio spectrum analyzers; design computers; computers for factories producing mustard gas ingredients -- $250,000
Rockwell Collins International: equipment for navigation, directional finding, radar communications or airborne communications -- $127,558
Sackman Associates: computers and instruments capable of analyzing metals and powders for atomic bomb and missile manufacture -- $60,000
Siemens Corporation: computers and instruments capable of analyzing metals and powders for atomic bomb and missile manufacture -- $78,000
Spectra Physics: lasers; detection and tracking equipment for lasers -- $19,000
Unisys Corporation: computers -- $2,600,000
Wild Magnavox Satellite Survey: computers for processing satellite images that are useful for military mapping and surveillance -- $270,000
Zeta Laboratories: quartz crystals for military radar -- $1,105,000 Missile Builders
Sales to: Saad 16, the main missile research site; State Organization for Technical Industry, the procurement organization for missile sites that bought most Scud missile parts and equipment.
BDM Corporation: computers; superconducting electronics -- $29,405
Carl Schenck: computers -- $10,228
EZ Logic Data: computers -- $27,800
Finnigan MAT: computers that U.N. inspectors believe monitored uranium enrichment for atomic bomb fuel -- $483,000
Hewlett Packard: electronic testing equipment; computers; frequency synthesizers; radio spectrum analyzers -- $599,257
International Computer Systems: computers -- $1,375,000
International Imaging Systems: computers for processing satellite data; infrared equipment capable of aerial reconaissance and military surveillance -- $988,000
Lummus Crest: computers to aid factory design -- $44,320
Perkin-Elmer: computers -- $24,560
Scientific Atlanta: equipment for producing radar antennas -- $820,000
Semetex Corporation: computers -- $5,155,781
Spectral Data Corporation: satellite data processing equipment -- $26,880
Tektronix: high-speed electronics useful in developing atomic bombs and missiles; radio spectrum analyzers for developing microwave equipment -- $102,000
Thermo Jarrell Ash Corporation: computers for testing materials -- $350,898
Unisys Corporation: computers for production control -- $7,796
Veeco Instruments Inc.: computers for factory design -- $4,640
Wiltron Company: equipment for making radar antennas -- $49,510


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Krickstein Defeats Becker  Aaron Krickstein upset top-seeded Boris Becker, 6-4, 6-1, in the third round of the $1.2 million Monte Carlo Open yesterday when Becker's famous serve failed him.
Krickstein, seeded 16th and the last American in the tournament, eliminated Becker in 72 minutes in a match that had the crowd sometimes whistling in discontent because of Becker's poor play.
Becker lost six of the eight games he served.
After closing to 2-1 in the first set, he did not win another game until the third game of the second set. (AP)
Sanchez Vicario Advances: Second-seeded Arantxa Sanchez Vicario breezed to a 6-1, 6-4 victory over Radka Zrubakova of Czechoslovakia yesterday in the second round of the women's international championships of Spain at Barcelona.
Third-seeded Conchita Martinez, another favorite of the Spanish crowd, also won easily, beating Nathalie Guerree of France, 6-1, 6-0. (AP) GOLF  Six in Greensboro Lead  The undeclared duel between Davis Love 3d and Fred Couples played second lead yesterday to the cast of players fighting for first place in the Greater Greensboro Open in North Carolina.
Holding shares of the lead with 67's were Phil Blackmar, Brian Claar, Jeff Maggert, Robert Gamez, Kenny Perry and Bill Britton.
While Love and Couples have won two tournaments each this year, the six leaders have won six tournaments among them in their careers, and Gamez and Blackmar have two apiece.
Love, winner last week of the Heritage Golf Classic, struggled to an opening-round 71, in part because of consecutive bogeys on the back nine.
Couples, playing for the first time since winning the Masters two weeks ago, came in at two-under-par 70. (AP) Legends Team Tournament: The team of Bobby Nichols and J. C. Snead shot an 11-under-par 61 to share the first-round lead with Chi Chi Rodriguez and Dave Hill in the Legends of Golf team competition today at the Barton Creek Country Club course in Austin, Tex.
The defending champion, Lee Trevino, and Mike Hill were among the groups tied at 62 in the two-man, better-ball tournament.
Also at 10 under were Jim Colbert-Tommy Aaron and Butch Baird-Gay Brewer. (AP) Woosnam Flails Again: Anders Forsbrand shot a seven-under-par 65 yesterday for a one-stroke lead over a fellow Swede, Per-Ulrik Johansson, in the first round of the Cannes Open in France.
Ian Woosnam's problems continued as the former Masters champion shot a 74.
Peter Taravainen, who is based in Singapore, was the top American.
He tied for eighth with 69.(AP) Pernice Leads in Dunlop: Tom Pernice of the United States shot a five-under-par 67 to take a two-stroke lead after the first round of the Dunlop Open at Ina, Japan.
Pernice one-putted seven times on the back nine of the 7,163-yard Ibaraki course.
Masashi (Jumbo) Ozaki of Japan opened with a 69.
Seve Ballesteros of Spain shot a five-over 77. (AP)


SCIENTISTS REPORT PROFOUND INSIGHT ON HOW TIME BEGAN
In a momentous discovery supporting the "Big Bang" theory for the birth of the universe, astronomers looking back toward the beginning of time have detected broad wrinkles in the fabric of space.
Their discovery is the first evidence revealing how an initially smooth cosmos evolved into today's panorama of stars, galaxies and gigantic clusters of galaxies.
The scientists detected faint temperature fluctuations in microwave radiation echoing from the supposed instant of creation.
Though the temperatures fluctuate by no more than a hundred-thousandth of a degree, they signal primeval variations in the universe's topography a mere 300,000 years after its explosive birth.
Creation of Gravity
The variations in topography were large enough, scientists said, to create the gravity needed to attract more and more matter into increasingly expansive clumps.
These variations had been predicted by theorists but were never observed until now.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Challenger; Brown Still Sees Himself as a Savior
Bill Clinton is largely ignoring him.
The "black hole of media obscurity" he once complained of is looming once again.
Less than a month ago, after his upset victory in Connecticut, Edmund G. Brown Jr. was tormenting Mr.
Clinton, the Arkansas Governor who is the Democrats' presumed nominee, and driving much of the party's establishment to the brink of distraction and beyond.


On Stage, and Off
Zaks Is Booked
Jerry Zaks is the big news on Broadway now, after directing the wildly acclaimed revival of "Guys and Dolls," prompting producers to dig up another old musical for him to work his magic on.


Warwick Baker To Acquire Agency
In the latest example of the continuing consolidation of agencies, Warwick Baker &amp; Fiore said yesterday that, as expected, it would acquire Isidore &amp; Paulson.
Both New York shops will continue to operate separately, as the staff of Isidore &amp; Paulson relocates into Warwick's office.
Warwick Baker, founded in 1935, has billings estimated at $150 million.
Isidore &amp; Paulson, founded in 1983, has billings estimated at $20 million from clients like American Home Foods, Kraft General Foods and Princess Hotels.
Tony Isidore, chairman and creative director, and Paul J. Paulson, president and chief executive, will continue in those capacities.


Sounds Around Town
The Soul of Grace  James Carr, Tramps, 45 West 21st Street, Manhattan, (212) 727-7788.
James Carr's original 1966 version of "The Dark End of the Street," released on the independent Goldwaxlabel, was sweet enough to turn the song into a soul standard.
While Mr.
Carr never reached the renown of some of his contemporaries, his voice has all the dignity, ache and transcendence of the best soul music.
He has had his share of career trouble: in 1979, he walked onstage in Japan and couldn't sing a word, and last month at Tramps he canceled the second of two performances because of laryngitis.
But when his voice is on, it's worth the wait: he can smooth over a melody with the gentle grace of a true craftsman.
Tomorrow at 8:30 and 11:30 P.M.
Tickets are $15.
Peace and Love
Poi Dog Pondering, the Marquee, 547 West 21st Street, Manhattan (212) 929-3257.
With its congas, violins, shakers, timbals, fluegelhorns and Tahitian log drum, Poi Dog Pondering, from Austin, plays a kind of world beat-influenced earth music.
There's a serious hippie-love vibe in the group's grooves, and nary a black cloud ever seems to appear on its sonic horizon.
The band's recent album "Volo Volo" (Sony) celebrates buildings, collarbones, thunder and the joy of shaking one's booty; the live shows stick to an ethic of spontaneity and fresh-air good will.
Show tonight at 9.
Tickets are $15.


A Miscue Matinee for Pittsburgh
Expos 6, Pirates 3
MONTREAL, April 23 (AP) -- Pittsburgh had played almost perfect baseball in fashioning a nine-game winning streak.
The pitchers pitched.
The hitters hit.
And the defense dazzled.
But then came today.
The Pirates, who had made just 8 errors in their first 14 games and won 12 of them, suddenly came up with 5 more miscues as they lost to the Expos, 6-3.
Spike Owen drove in two runs and Mark Gardner won his second game before a less-than-imposing crowd of 5,806.


Ex-Fidelity Executive Is Disciplined
The man who ran Fidelity Investments' $1.7 billion junk-bond fund during most of the 80's has been disciplined by the Securities and Exchange Commission for falsifying the records of his fund's dealings with Drexel Burnham Lambert.
William H. Pike of Wellesley, Mass., who built the Fidelity High Income Fund into one of the largest and most powerful shoppers in the junk-bond market between 1981 and 1988, has settled an S.E.C. administrative complaint by agreeing to a three-month suspension from the securities business.


Linebackers No Longer Jacks of All Trades
Matt Millen, after a productive regular season, did not play in the National Football League playoffs or in the Super Bowl last January because of the pass-first teams the champion Washington Redskins encountered.
But Millen knew even before it began that his season could unfold that way.
Millen was grabbed by the Redskins via Plan B from the San Francisco 49ers to perform one job: stop the run by plugging the middle at linebacker.
He has become a situational player who enters the game depending on the down, the distance, the opponent.
In today's game, it is rare to encounter the every-down linebacker who can play the run, cover the pass and rush the passer equally well.


Pretoria Policemen Guilty of Massacre
In a verdict providing the first legal confirmation of police involvement in South Africa's politically motivated violence, five policemen, including a white captain, were convicted today of murdering 11 black villagers in rural Natal nearly three and a half years ago.
The verdict, delivered by Justice Andrew Wilson in Natal's capital of Pietermaritzburg, found Capt.
Brian Mitchell, who then commanded a nearby police station, and four black special, or auxiliary, policemen guilty of killing the villagers in the settlement of Trust Feed during the night between Dec. 2 and 3, 1988.


Sniffing Out the Big One In Every Little Temblor
Along with jittery nerves and a few broken windows, Wednesday night's earthquake generated a warning from seismic experts that the Big One could be imminent.
The earthquake's size, its proximity to the volatile San Andreas fault and local geologic history made it a plausible candidate for being a foreshock to the Big One, the catastrophic earthquake that is expected to strike the region in the next few decades, said Dr.
Lucile M. Jones, a seismologist at the United States Geological Survey in Pasadena and a leading authority on the San Andreas fault.


Alexander's, the Real Estate Group
In trying to get itself out of retailing and into real estate, Alexander's Inc., the financially ailing department store chain, finally seems to be facing facts.
As many of its former competitors -- Mays, Gimbels, B. Altman -- realized, there is no assured place for a scrappy, home-grown retailer in the New York area.
Big national chains with a better range of merchandise and equally low prices have taken their place in the suburbs, while smaller specialty discount stores have moved onto their turf in the city proper.


Friends Call Driver, 74, Kindly and Alert
For Stella G. Maychick, the first breathtakingly beautiful day of spring was meant for shopping with her daughter, Diana, across the river in New Jersey.
But by the end of the day the 74-year-old widow from Yonkers was leaving the Sixth Precinct station house on a stretcher, shielding her face from television cameras with a linen sheet, her life irrevocably changed in one horrible instant.
Friends of Mrs.
Maychick were shocked that a woman they saw as gentle, caring and remarkably alert for her years could have lost control of her car in Washington Square Park.
"I'm stunned -- I have to sit down," said Father John A. Gallagher of St.
Paul the Apostle Roman Catholic Church in Yonkers after hearing of the accident.


Holding Vast Space and Vast Debt; New York Lenders Shivering With Olympia &amp; York's Ills
In New York City, no industry has wielded as much influence as real-estate, and within that community, no company in recent years has played a more prominent role than Olympia &amp; York.
It is perhaps best known for having developed the World Financial Center office complex and its towering glass Winter Garden, with signature palm trees.
Since the 1970's, the Canadian-based company has amassed over 22 million square feet of office space in Manhattan, nearly 10 percent of the total and three and a half times that of the next-largest commercial landlord.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
American Enterprises, Las Vegas, Nev., an accounting firm, appointed Roy Keefer chief financial officer. *
Bozell Public Relations Inc., New York, named Andy Polansky executive vice president.


Car Model in Park Crash Drew Safety Complaints
The 1987 Oldsmobile Delta 88, the type of car that crashed in Washington Square Park yesterday, has had problems with its throttle system that led to a recall of thousands of the cars in 1988.
From 1987 to 1989, the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration conducted an investigation of complaints about sudden acceleration in the 1987 Oldsmobile Delta 88.
General Motors, the manufacturer of the car, notified the agency that it was recalling 22,000 Delta 88's and Pontiac Bonnevilles.


Art in Review
Hans-Peter Feldmann  303 Gallery 89 Greene Street SoHo
Through tomorrow
After making a name for himself as a Conceptualist in the early 1970's, the German artist Hans-Peter Feldmann put aside his art career and opened a gift shop in Dusseldorf.
Three years ago, he began to make art again.
The work here suggests that he has put his other career to good use, incorporating knickknacks and tourist memorabilia from his shop into his art.
One piece consists of blue-rimmed plates of various sizes arranged on a pedestal.
Another offers a collection of silver-plated picture frames, half of which feature the same portrait of Charlie Chaplin, the rest the same picture of Greta Garbo.


Horrible Timing for Richter's Bad Night
The shot was an afterthought.
Claude Vilgrain, the Devils left wing, wound up along the right boards early in the second period, firing an unscreened slap shot in the general direction of the Ranger net.
No real threat intended.
Back in November or December, before a torn thigh muscle and a mended labor rift interrupted his season, such a sling would not have caused a single bead of sweat on the masked brow of Ranger goaltender Mike Richter.
Now, however, events and angles had conspired against him.


Beijing Journal; 'Billions Served' (and That Was Without China)
Taking her seat this morning under the capital's gleaming new golden arches, Zhang Wei laid out the banquet on the plastic tray in front of her and slowly savored her breakfast of a hamburger, french fries, chocolate sundae and a Coke.
"It's a bit expensive to eat here at McDonald's," said Miss Zhang, a 20-year-old university student.
"But I guess for a high-fashion restaurant like this, the prices are O.K."


A Rebound At Tandem
Tandem Computers Inc. said today that it had returned to profitability in the second quarter after posting a big first-quarter loss primarily because of a restructuring.
The company, which makes "fault tolerant" mainframe computers with redundant parts to prevent crashes, earned $8.8 million, or 8 cents a share, for the three months that ended on March 31.
That was 51 percent lower than net income of $17.9 million, or 17 cents a share, for the 1991 period.
Tandem's revenues rose 3 percent, to $502.9 million from $489.3 million.


More Redskin Thunder
The Washington Redskins' coach, JOE GIBBS, may not be a Pied Piper, and Redskins quarterback MARK RYPIEN may not be a copycat, for that matter.
But for the record, three months after Gibbs became an owner of a major league stock car team, Rypien will today announce plans to follow his coach by fielding a car on the 1993 Nascar Winston Cup tour.


PAY OF TEACHERS LAGS AT COLLEGES
College and university faculty salaries in the current academic year rose at the smallest rate in 20 years because of the recession and budget reductions by states, according to a national survey of faculty income.
Salaries rose an average of 3.5 percent in the 1991-92 academic year, to $61,650 for a full professor, $45,312 for an associate professor and $38,969 for an assistant professor, said the American Association of University Professors in its annual faculty salary survey of 2,072 institutions.


The Public Theater Is Renamed for Joseph Papp
In a dedication rich in memories and celebration, the Public Theater, home of the New York Shakespeare Festival, was renamed the Joseph Papp Public Theater yesterday in honor of its founder.
"Now the mourning is over, and the celebration begins again," said Raul Julia, the actor, on a small stage outside the theater at 425 Lafayette Street.
It was at the Public that Mr.
Papp introduced and shaped the careers of so many celebrated playwrights and actors, including Mr.
Julia, and oversaw the birth of two landmark musicals, "Hair" and "A Chorus Line." Mr.
Papp, one of the most influential producers in the history of the American theater, died of cancer in October at age 70.


Advertising Age Names Best '91 Ads
Agencies outside the United States fared well as Advertising Age named its best ads of 1991, the first year those shops were eligible to compete in all categories.
In New York last night at the trade publication's seventh annual awards show, television commercials by GGK in London were named as the year's best.
The spots, which have won other awards recently, featured interviews with talking animals on behalf of British electric utilities.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Congress; Kemp Assistant to Challenge Representative Loyal to Bush
A top aide to Jack F. Kemp, Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, is embarking on a political challenge of a veteran Republican member of Congress who has been a Bush Administration loyalist.
The aide, Thomas M. Humbert, said he would resign next week as Deputy Assistant Secretary for Policy Development to mount a campaign against Representative William F. Goodling of Pennsylvania as an independent candidate.
Another Assistant Secretary, Mary S. Brunette, the agency's chief public affairs officer, said she would resign on June 1 to manage Mr.
Humbert's campaign against Mr.
Goodling, a 16-year House veteran who is the ranking Republican on the House Education and Labor Committee.


Devils Pull Together to Take the Rangers Apart
The Devils have converted themselves into a relentlessly fearless and physically unified team from the ragtag mixture they were in the last games of the regular season.
Frequent watchers of the Devils would see a player the stature of Slava Fetisov, the heralded Russian defenseman, getting mowed down time and again, and no one among his teammates would stand up for him the last two months before the playoffs.


Sports of The Times; Point Guards Lead League In Surviving
MARK JACKSON is a New Yorker, and he could read the graffiti on the wall.
Spray painted in his consciousness was the message, Time to Move On.
He is a New Yorker and Madison Square Garden is his psychic home, but last year things got so bad he could see himself slipping away.
"Was I gone?" he repeated the other day.
"I really didn't know. If the same people were here, it would be best to be gone."


Art In Review
Annette Lemieux and Annette Messager  Josh Baer 476 Broome Street SoHo Through May 9
Both artists in this show have done good work in the past, although one looks stronger than the other here.
The French-born Annette Messager concentrates on a melodramatically dark side of sexual desire.
In one piece, women's clothes are displayed in coffinlike vitrines.
A high-necked white nightgown has childlike drawings of ghosts and spiders pinned down its front; a sheer black nightgown is festooned with little black framed photographs of male and female body parts.


INSIDE
De Klerk Refines Proposal For Black Role in Govenment
South Africa's President offered to bring black leaders into a transitional government and proposed that his presidency be replaced by a popularly elected executive council.
Page A3.
Shift on High-Tech Exports
President Bush announced looser export controls on high-technology products with applications in military aircraft and submarines.
Page D1. 3 Guilty of Slaying Tourist
Three defendants were convicted in the 1990 subway murder of Brian Watkins, a Utah tourist.
Page B1.


Libya Case Shows Need for Terrorism Court
To the Editor:
It is heartening to see the Bush Administration working through the United Nations to bring to justice those accused in the 1988 bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland, as you report in "Security Council Votes to Prohibit Arms Exports and Flights to Libya" (front page, April 1).
Yet, while the United States forges a multinational response in this case, it rejects a promising approach to the general problem of international criminality.
The United Nations is studying establishment of an international criminal court with jurisdiction over individuals who commit such transnational crimes as terrorism, drug trafficking and aggression.
This would provide an impartial forum for the litigation of the Libyan case or similar cases, bound to arise in the future, and make it more difficult for a country harboring alleged international criminals to resist pressure to hand them over for trial.


Lemieux Gets Going for Penguins
Penguins 6, Capitals 4
PITTSBURGH, April 23 (AP) -- The Pittsburgh Penguins were in need of some magic, and who better to supply it than Mario Lemieux.
Lemieux figured in every Pittsburgh goal as the Penguins rallied by scoring four times in the second period, then held off the Washington Capitals, 6-4, tonight in Game 3 of their Patrick Division semifinal series.


Review/Art; A Dutchman Whose Heart Belonged to New York
When it comes to artists, New York City has a long list of 20th-century admirers who have paid it homage with pen and brush, from Georgia O'Keeffe and John Marin to Abraham Walkowitz and Joseph Stella.
But none were quite as ardent as Adriaan Lubbers, a Dutch artist who visited the city for the first time in 1916, when he was 33 years old, and fell in love with what he saw.
As is evidenced by the small, often wonderful exhibition "Adriaan Lubbers in New York," at the Museum of the City of New York, Lubbers made the city's soaring bridges and skyscrapers, its narrow man-made canyons and spreading panoramas the central motifs of his career.
Part realistic and part expressionistic in style -- with occasional hints of the visionary -- his paintings evoke the bustling grandeur of Manhattan between the two world wars, while their animated textures give the city a wonderfully accessible, even intimate sense of detail.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Third-Party Candidacy; In Sharpest Attack, Perot Accuses Bush of Inaction
Acknowledging his rising popularity in some recent opinion polls and other signs of potential political strength, Ross Perot today mounted his sharpest criticism to date of President Bush and the Republican Party.
In occasionally mocking and sarcastic terms, Mr.
Perot, who is considering an independent campaign for the Presidency, accused Mr.
Bush of ignoring the nation's deepening debt troubles, propping up President Saddam Hussein of Iraq in the years before to the Persian Gulf war and not acting to halt the savings and loan crisis while overseeing deregulation of the industry as Vice President.


Protecting the Planet
Celebrations of Earth Week (Earth Day was on Wednesday) continue this weekend.
Here is a sampling of activities focusing on ecology, wildlife and the environment at Central Park and other New York City locations.
Unless otherwise noted, events are free.
Today
SPRING BREAK AT THE CENTRAL PARK ZOO, reachable from the 65th Street entrance.
Participants can paint wildlife pictures, collect wildlife stamps and learn about the plants that sustain wildlife. 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Free with zoo admission: $2.50 (50 cents for those 3 to 12; free for those under 3).
Information: (212) 439-6500.


Review/Film; Enemies, Mysteries and Lots of Sand
Roger Donaldson's "White Sands" is set entirely in the vast painterly landscapes of the American Southwest, but it means to be a suspense thriller reflecting the scaled-down undercover realities of the post-cold-war era.
In fact, it's almost as difficult to follow as the politics of the federation that replaced the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, and as difficult to remember as that federation's official name.
The film, written by Daniel Pyne, begins well: the body of a well-dressed man, an apparent suicide, is found in the ruins of an Indian village in a remote corner of New Mexico.
In the man's hand is a gun; beside him is a briefcase containing $500,000 in $100 bills.
If the man is truly a suicide, why did he travel so far to do the deed?
Why no suicide note?
But if it was murder, why did the killer leave the money?
These are the questions the local sheriff, Ray Dolezal (Willem Dafoe), asks himself and, with the help of the garrulous old coroner (M. Emmet Walsh), starts to answer.
Ray stands by as the coroner performs the autopsy.
"He must have had his last lunch at a salad bar," the coroner says, just before retrieving a piece of partly digested paper with a telephone number on it.
With this telephone number, Ray, whose job is otherwise pretty boring, sets out to solve the puzzle.
To this end he adopts the identity of the dead man.
In no time flat, he finds himself in partnership with Gorman Lennox (Mickey Rourke), an arms dealer with an unreliable temper, and being romanced by Lane Bodine (Mary Elizabeth Mastrantonio), a rich and beautiful young woman who raises money for what are vaguely identified as liberal Latin-American causes.
Lane doesn't squeal on Ray, though she's aware he's not the man he says he is.
Ray also finds himself pursued by two different pairs of agents from the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
The United States military is involved and, possibly, even the Central Intelligence Agency, if not in an official capacity.
What begins as a puzzle and turns into a mystery finally sinks into utter confusion.
Yet it is always quite photogenic confusion, the penultimate sequence being played out in New Mexico's brilliantly white gypsum dune fields, which look like masses of refined cocaine.
Cocaine is a substance that often crops up in such movies, though not (I think) in "White Sands." It's necessary to hedge that statement since, toward the end of the movie, there are so many twists and reversals that anything is possible.
Mr.
Donaldson gets some attractive performances from his leading players, as well as from some of the supporting actors, especially from Mr.
Walsh and a young woman named Maura Tierney, who appears briefly as the lover of the dead man.
Yet the director, who somehow made the complex plot of "No Way Out" comprehensible, allows "White Sands" to get buried under its own revelations.
Could it be that Mr.
Donaldson modified Mr.
Pyne's screenplay to serve the actors during the shooting, leaving little time for explanations?
When the explanations do come, they are delivered at such speed, and with such lack of emphasis, that the audience is left behind.
Or was Mr.
Donaldson actually trying to clarify the screenplay?
In one way and another, "White Sands" raises more questions than it can hope to answer.
"White Sands," which has been rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian), has some violence, partial nudity and vulgar language.
White Sands  Directed by Roger Donaldson; written by Daniel Pyne; director of photography, Peter Menzies Jr.; edited by Nicholas Beauman; music by Patrick O'Hearn; production designer, John Graysmark; produced by William Sackheim and Scott Rudin; released by Warner Brothers.
Running time: 102 minutes.
This film is rated R. Ray Dolezal . . .
Willem Dafoe Lane Bodine . . .
Mary Elizabeth Mastrantonio Gorman Lennox . . .
Mickey Rourke Greg Meeker . . .
Sam Jackson Bert Gibson . . .
M.
Emmet Walsh Flynn . . .
James Rebhorn Noreen . . .
Maura Tierney Roz . . .
Beth Grant Ben . . .
Alexander Nicksay Delmar Blackwater . . .
Fredrick Lopez Ruiz . . .
Miguel Sandoval Demott . . .
John Lafayette Kleinman . . .
Ken Thorley Casanov . . .
Jack Kehler


Catching His Wind, Conner Gets a Victory
In a yacht-racing site where every windshift creates a new gameboard, America's Cup competitors have had a puzzling week.
Winners in both finals have played swings in the wind direction as adroitly as Gary Kasparov moves chess pieces.
Dennis Conner, the helmsman most credited with the uncanny ability to find the favored side of a changing breeze, seemed as if he had lost his knack in the first three races of the cup defense finals.
But Conner was back on the breeze today as his Stars &amp; Stripes crew defeated Bill Koch's Amercia
by 39 seconds.


On My Mind; Tale of One City
At 12:20 P.M. a man in a bow tie could be spotted walking around 42d Street accosting strangers and asking them crazy questions.
"Isn't it pretty here?" "Does it make you happy?" "How long do you think it will last?"


James L. Yassky, 40, Defender of Gay Rights
James L. Yassky, a founding member of the Lesbian and Gay Law Association of Greater New York, died on Saturday at his home in Brooklyn.
He was 40 years old.
The cause of death was asthma, his companion, George Piette, said.


Europe's Last-Minute Jitters
National sovereignty is in the limelight in Western Europe again.
The 12 European Community members are preparing to ratify the Treaty of Maastricht, which was agreed on in the Netherlands in December, and the debates are suddenly reminding people they will be committing themselves to a decisive plunge toward union.
This has provoked last-minute jitters and premature nostalgia about identity.
Paradoxically, Britain, the most reluctant to consider itself European, faces the least difficulty because it has already had its full debate.
The other countries have been talking Europe for so long that their governments tended to take popular support for granted and did not bother to explain the new decisions they were making.


Durable-Goods Orders Rose 1.6% in March
Evidence of solid, though subdued, recovery mounted today as the Commerce Department reported that orders for durable goods climbed 1.6 percent in March and that a small February downturn had been revised away
The March increase, which was somewhat larger than expected, was heavily influenced by a jump for both commercial and military aircraft but analysts also noted that gains were still fairly widespread.


Computers to Improve Testing for Colleges
To the Editor:
With all due respect to Prof.
Howard Gardner of Harvard, he states some misconceptions in "Computer College Tests Leap Backward" (letter, April 12) and misses the point of the new computerized Graduate Record Examination.
Computer-adaptive testing allows better measurement in less time, using fewer questions than traditional multiple-choice tests.
Students will tackle challenging questions according to their ability and not spend time on questions far below or above their level.
A student may take the examination more than once.
Thus, the opportunity to improve a score is readily available.


Bankruptcy? He Can Kiss It Goodbye
Reclining on a brown velour couch, David N. Demarest, one of New Jersey's newest wealthy citizens, fielded calls -- 6 in 10 minutes -- from accountant and broker types offering to help handle his first Pick-6 Lotto check.
But after going bankrupt last year, the 51-year-old telephone installer and repairman said he had simple plans for the fat check sitting in his bank account.
"Some for my brothers and sisters," he said.
"Some for my mother, of course, and my son and daughter. And my wife -- that is, ex-wife."


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  A FATAL CRASH IN THE VILLAGE
A car driven by a 74-year-old woman careered out of control and plowed into crowds of people in Washington Square Park in Greenwich Village.
Four people were killed, including one who died later, after surgery, and as many as 27 others were injured.
The park, packed with sunbathers, street musicians and mothers pushing strollers, erupted with a chaos of screaming victims.
"It was like war, total war," said Sam Catlin, a student at New York University.
A1.
A perfect spring day is shattered.
B2.
COURT UPHOLDS CONDOM PLAN


Play It Again, Mrs. Blandings (If It Will Sell Some Paint)
DECADES ago, moviegoers were teased with trailers promising that films like "Gone With the Wind" and "The Wizard of Oz" were "coming to a theater near you." Today, those films, as well as classic television series, are coming to a commercial near you.
The use of footage from vintage movies and television shows for advertising purposes is a growing trend in an industry that already assiduously mines popular culture for inspirations and images.
Clips from famous films ("High Noon") and obscure ones ("The Colossus of New York"), as well as excerpts from sitcoms like "Leave It to Beaver" and "Mr. Ed," are enlivening pitches for products from office equipment and paint to liquor and soft drinks.


Comptroller Choice Appears Set
James E. Gilleran, a senior bank regulator in California, has emerged as the Bush Administration's probable nominee for Comptroller of the Currency, according to several industry executives who were briefed by the Treasury Department and the White House.
Mr.
Gilleran, the Superintendent of the California Banking Department, would replace Robert L. Clarke, whose nomination for a second five-year term was rejected by the Senate last fall in a bitter partisan fight.


Judge Instructs Jurors In Police Beating Case
Assault charges against four Los Angeles police officers were placed in the hands of a jury today after the trial judge rejected a motion for a mistrial by a defense lawyer who said he had been "slimed" by the prosecutor.
The judge, Stanley Weisberg of Superior Court, spent more than an hour reading jurors 81 legal instructions on the charges against the four white officers in the beating of a black motorist, Rodney G. King.
Among the instructions were those involving the charge of "assault under color of authority."


Sounds Around Town
Birthday Concert
Red Richards Quartet, St.
Peter's Church, Lexington Avenue at 54th Street, Manhattan, (212) 935-2200.
The anniversary of Duke Ellington's birth (he was born on April 29, 1899) has always been an occasion for celebrations bursting with Ellington music and, until time began to catch up with them, Ellington musicians.
Since the Duke died in 1974, the number of veterans of the Ellington band has dwindled, but the music remains as provocative as ever, particularly in its emphasis on lesser-known works.
This year's birthday concert, presented by the New York chapter of the Duke Ellington Society, will be led by Red Richards, who came out of the same Harlem piano background as the Duke, and the members of the quartet -- the saxophonist George Kelly, the bassist Johnny Williams and the drummer Oliver Jackson -- are knowledgeable veterans of the Ellington years.
Their birthday concert for the Duke will be three days early, on Sunday at 7:30 P.M.
Admission is $10.
Long Runs
Barbara Carroll, Bemelmans Bar, Hotel Carlyle, Madison Avenue at 76th Street, Manhattan, (212) 744-1600.
Barbara Carroll's piano playing and singing have been fixtures since 1978 amid the whimsical Ludwig Bemelmans murals that decorate Bemelmans Bar.
By most standards, this is an unusually long run.
But right across the hall, in the Cafe Carlyle, Bobby Short has been playing and singing even longer, since 1968 (he starts his annual spring season there on May 5).
Miss Carroll was a jazz star on 52d Street in the 1940's and 50's, leading a trio, but in Bemelmans Bar she has become a cabaret star, as she mixes jazz and piano with a choice repertory as a warm-voiced singer of show tunes.
Tonight and tomorrow, she plays and sings from 9:45 P.M. to 12:45 A.M. for a $5 cover charge.
There is no minimum.
Brunch Dates
Bob Kindred Trio, Jimmy Walker's, 245 East 55th Street, Manhattan, (212) 319-6650.
The saxophonist Bob Kindred has brought Sunday-brunch jazz back to Jimmy Walker's, the East 55th Street restaurant where he led some memorable brunch sessions a few years ago.
This Sunday will be the sixth in his current series, giving indications that he may be there for some time to come.
His trio, which includes the pianist Bill Mays and the bassist Scott Colley, conducts musical conversations in which all three musicians play off one another, using the music of Ellington and of the Brazilians Antonio Carlos Jobim and Ivan Lins, among others, as the stimulants for their inventions.
They play from 1 to 4 P.M. for $12.95, which includes brunch and a drink.


David Fallek; Police Inspector, 77
David Fallek, a retired lawyer and New York City Police Inspector, died on Wednesday at North Broward Medical Center in Pompano Beach, Fla.
He was 77 years old and lived in Pompano Beach.
He died of cancer, his family said.


Study Lists Lower Tally of Iraqi Troops in Gulf War
The United States and its allies may have vastly overestimated the size of Iraq's forces at the start of the 100-hour ground campaign, a Congressional report on the Persian Gulf war said today.
The 700,000 allied troops amassed in Saudi Arabia and the gulf region may have attacked only 183,000 Iraqi troops in Kuwait and southern Iraq -- about one-third of what Washington had estimated were originally deployed in the area by Baghdad -- when the land war started on Feb. 24, 1991, according to a bipartisan study by the House Armed Services Committee.  'An Educated Guess'
Representative Les Aspin, the Wisconsin Democrat who heads the committee, told reporters today that undermanned Iraqi military units, desertions and casualties during the 38-day air war accounted for the difference in Iraqi troop levels.
Mr.
Aspin acknowledged, however, that the study's analysis was based on estimates that were "little better than an educated guess."


Delta Air Lines Reports Deficit
Delta Air Lines yesterday reported a $151.6 million loss for the first three months of the year, blaming a weak economy and discount fares it offered to compete with other carriers.
The deficit compared with a loss of $84 million in the correspondingquarter last year.


Reopen Harassment Case, Holtzman Says
New York City Comptroller Elizabeth Holtzman accused the Fire Department yesterday of inadequately pursuing a complaint of sexual harassment made by a female firefighter against a department doctor more than a year ago and said the case should be reopened.
The firefighter, Brenda Berkman, who grew dissatisfied with the department's handling of the case, filed a complaint with the city's Human Rights Commission last month accusing a fire department doctor of fondling her breasts during a Department-ordered medical exam on Jan. 17, 1991, and saying that the fire department had failed to act on the complaint.


Critic's Choice/Music; Seldom a Better Time To Wallow in the Blues
With new clubs and concert series, first-rate blues is now available just about every day of the week in New York City.
This weekend brings an especially strong selection to uptown and downtown Manhattan and to Brooklyn, with two Kings (Albert and B. B.), a man who learned his blues from the legendary Robert Johnson (Robert Jr. Lockwood) and a performer who's moonlighting from his own Mississippi juke joint, Roosevelt (Booba) Barnes.
Albert King may be best known for "Born Under a Bad Sign." That song's minor-key riff and unbowed fatalism are two of his trademarks; the third is a solo guitar sound that's lean and cutting, with a touch of country twang.
He is to perform tonight at Tramps, 45 West 21st Street (727-7788), with sets at 8:30 and 11:30 P.M.; tickets are $15.


American Express Net 76% Higher in Quarter
With its credit card business slumping, the American Express Company reported yesterday a 5.7 percent drop in first-quarter earnings to $249 million, or 51 cents a share, before an accounting change to cover income taxes.
However, after the accounting change, net income for the first quarter rose 76 percent to $465 million, or 95 cents a share, from $264 million, or 55 cents a share, in the comparable period a year ago.


Checking on C.D. Lures
The sharp decline in personal savings rates has prompted many banks to create accounts designed to attract or keep customers.
Often these accounts bear such names as "bump-up" certificates of deposit or "rising-rate" C.D.'s.
They require the customer do some basic math to figure the real bottom-line return so they can make comparisons to find out what they could earn elsewhere.
Bump-ups allow the depositor to change to a higher rate once during the life of the C.D.
A rising-rate certificate pays progressively higher predetermined rates every three to six months over the life of the certificate.


General Motors Shifts Operations And Plans a Huge Stock Offering
The General Motors Corporation, moving swiftly after a management shake-up, announced yesterday that it would attempt the largest stock offering in American history and took another step in reorganizing its huge vehicle-making operations.
It said the goal was to produce better-quality vehicles faster and at less cost.
G.M., the world's largest auto maker, said it would offer up to 57.5 million shares of common stock to investors around the world, worth $2.3 billion at current market prices.
It plans to issue another $500 million worth of stock to its pension funds.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the earthquake on Wednesday in California and a list of previous California quakes gave an incorrect date in some editions for one in the San Francisco Bay area in 1989.
It occurred on Oct. 17, not Oct. 18.


Tasty Baking Appoints New Chief Executive
The Tasty Baking Company, maker of Junior, Krimpets and other cupcakes and sponge-cake snacks, yesterday named Carl S. Watts as its chief executive.
He was also named to the company's board.
Mr.
Watts, 48, has been president and chief operating officer of the $278 million bakery company.
He will retain the president's post.
Mr.
Watts will take the top job May 1, when Nelson G. Harris, 65, retires as chairman and chief executive after a 30-year career with the Philadelphia company.
Mr.
Harris will continue to be active in management and will serve as chairman of Tasty's executive committee, which will be responsible for strategic planning, corporate policy and financial matters.


Minnesota Is Close To Ousting Detroit
North Stars 5, Red Wings 4
BLOOMINGTON, Minn., April 24 (AP) -- Todd Elik, who had missed all but 21 seconds of the National Hockey League playoffs with sore ribs, deflected the puck past Tim Cheveldae with 8 minutes 33 seconds to play tonight, giving Minnesota a 5-4 victory and a 3-1 series lead over Detroit.


Stephen Larkin to Play
University of Texas officials have cleared the way for outfielder STEPHEN LARKIN to play baseball despite his heart condition.
Larkin, 18 years old, and his parents signed a waiver that releases the school from liability if he should be injured or die as a result of his medical problem, The Austin American-Statesman reported.


Review/Film; A Caper With a Redford Look-Alike
William Goldman's screenplay for "Year of the Comet" has the charming elan of an old-fashioned caper story, the sort that inevitably concludes (as this one does) on the French Riviera.
Mr.
Goldman throws together a pert young wine expert named Maggie Harwood (Penelope Ann Miller), a handsome, wisecracking trouble-shooter named Oliver Plexico (Tim Daly) and a bottle of wine dating back to Napoleon (Lafite, 1811) to create a scenic and romantic escapade.
This sort of material calls for a higher gloss than Peter Yates's direction ever supplies, so the dialogue and plot development are often more fun than the production. (The story line is sheer nonsense even by caper-movie standards, but Mr. Goldman does an energetic job of coaxing it along.) "Year of the Comet" is mostly breezy and entertaining even under these circumstances, but it's clear that both the casting and the direction could have had more spark.


CHRONICLE
Strictly speaking, the guest with the highest social rank at a birthday party for William Shakespeare (his 428th) on Thursday in Washington was PRINCESS ALEXANDRA, a cousin of Queen Elizabeth II.
But the one who garnered the most attention was MARGOT PEROT of Texas, wife of ROSS PEROT, the would-be Presidential candidate.
Mrs.
Perot insisted that nothing should be read into her presence in Washington, since she had accepted the invitation long before her husband announced that he was considering running for President.
"I'm a good friend of Lucky Roosevelt's," she said, referring to SELWA ROOSEVELT, the chairwoman of the event, who was the chief of protocol in the Reagan Administration.


Can Arsenal Africa Hope to Find Democracy?
To the Editor:
For one who was born in Uganda in 1962, "Africa Finds Reasons to Hope for Democracy's Future" by Michael Clough of the Council on Foreign Relations (The Week In Review, March 22) hits the bull's-eye.


Arms Policy: Dodges, Winks, Nods
Iraq.
Iran.
Syria.
The list of forbidden recipients of U.S.-made weapons during the Reagan and Bush Administrations reads like a roster of the world's chief troublemakers.
U.S. law forbade sending them American arms.
Yet for almost a decade, the two Administrations circumvented the law with covert transfers.
Saudi Arabia sent American weapons to Iraq.
Americans encouraged Israel to transfer U.S.-made arms to Iran.
This winking and nodding encouraged the Saudis to disregard the law and transfer U.S. arms to Syria.


Corrections
A report in the Chronicle column yesterday about the appointment of Paul Cavaco as fashion director of Harper's Bazaar misidentified the photographer who shot the original Brooke Shields advertising campaign for Calvin Klein jeans.
He was Richard Avedon, not Bruce Weber.


U.S. Says a C-130 Was Hit by Gunfire From Peru
An unarmed American military transport plane, flying on a routine counter-drug mission off the northern coast of Peru, was fired on by a Peruvian Air Force plane this afternoon, a spokesman for the American Embassy said this evening.
One crew member was missing, reportedly falling out of the plane when a door on the C-130 transport plane was blown open by the machine-gun fire from the Peruvian aircraft.
Two other crew members were reported wounded, one superficially.


Bridge
Most of the country's top partnerships have many years of experience, with hundreds of hours of discussion and practice between them.
But new partnerships can do very well, and an example occurred in the Vanderbilt Knockout Teams in Pasadena, Calif., in March.
Brian Glubok of Manhattan improvised a partnership with Swedish star Per-Olov Sundelin and they turned in good performances as members of the George Rapee team, which reached the quarterfinals.
On the diagramed deal their opponents bid an optimistic slam contract with the North-South cards.
The opening one-club bid was strong and artificial, and the subsequent bids were natural.
The response to Blackwood showed two key cards, the club ace and the king of the intended trump suit, diamonds.


Bristol-Myers Pleads Guilty To Pollution
A major pharmaceutical manufacturer pleaded guilty yesterday to violating the Federal Clean Water Act by discharging chemicals that polluted a lake in Syracuse.
The manufacturer, Bristol-Myers Squibb Company, was fined $3.5 million and, as part of its plea agreement, said it would build a wastewater-treatment plant that Federal and state officials estimated might cost as much as $30 million.


No Complaint vs. Burns
An unidentified Hartford Whalers fan who said he was hit by a hockey stick swung by Montreal Coach PAT BURNS Thursday night as the Canadiens were leaving the ice after a 5-2 loss to the Whalers, did not file a complaint against him, the Hartford police said yesterday.
Because of a fight moments before the end of the game, police were not able to roll a protective canopy over the visiting team's exit.
"Fans leaned over the rails and began pelting the team with soda and beer and spitting on them," Lieut.
TOM O'CONNOR of the Hartford police said.
"The coach grabbed a hockey stick and began striking a wall in an effort to protect his team and force the fans back. In the process he made some contact with a fan, but the party was not injured."


Parking Rules
Because of the eighth day of Passover, alternate-side parking rules are suspended in New York City today.
Other regulations remain in effect.


Brown Makes a Pledge to Pennsylvania Workers


Patents; Man-Made Lake to Fight Pollutants
Using plants like pondweed as a weapon to fight water pollution, an aquatic biologist in Idaho this week scored what appears to be a first: a patent on a lake.
The lake, an artificial one to soak up pollutants carried in the stormwater that washes off streets and lawns, was invented by David P. Murray, founder of the Limnion Corporation in Bayview, Idaho.
His company specializes in restoring the health of polluted lakes and ponds.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Third Party Candidacy; As Aides Back Perot, Weicker Remains Undecided
Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr., who formed his own independent party to run for governor of Connecticut in 1990, said today that he remains undecided about Ross Perot as a Presidential candidate, but some of the Governor's senior political advisers have begun openly pushing the party to endorse the Texas billionaire as a sort of chip off the old Weicker block.
Under state election laws, formal endorsement by Mr.
Weicker's organization, called A Connecticut Party, would give Mr.
Perot the top ballot line in Connecticut in November, above President Bush and the Democrat's nominee, because it is the party that received the most votes in the last election for governor.


Zafferana Etnea Journal; It's Plug Up Mt. Etna or Go the Way of Pompeii
What do American marines aboard an aircraft carrier in the Mediterranean do as an encore to the Persian Gulf war and its aftermath?
For some, at least, they drop seven-ton concrete blocks from America's biggest military helicopters hovering 15 feet over molten lava on Mount Etna to save an Italian village from the volcano's wrath.
"Everything is easier when no one is shooting at you," said Comdr.
John Carpenter of the Navy, the air-operations officer at the United States Sigonella naval base at Catania near this Sicilian mountain village of 7,000 people threatened by the lava flow.


Hiking Into the Future With a Lighter Boot
The design of hiking boots has changed considerably in the last 50 years; in the 1940's, the state-of-the-art model was a handmade leather boot worn by Swiss Alpine guides.
A boot introduced this spring has a far more futuristic look.
On the Adventure hiking boot by Salomon/ North America of Georgetown, Mass., the shoe laces are not visible.
You slip your foot into an inner boot made of nylon mesh and then lace it up as you would a shoe.
A water-repellent flap across the top of the foot covers the inner boot, and a zipper that runs on a diagonal, from your big toe to the outside of your ankle, seals the boot.


Transit Officer Suspended
A probationary New York City transit police officer was arrested on a menacing charge yesterday, accused of aiming his service gun at a traffic agent when she gave him a parking ticket, a Transit Authority police spokesman said.
The officer, Gene Parker, 25 years old, who joined the force on April 30, 1991, was released on a desk appearance ticket.
He is accused of menacing the agent, Yvonne Burchette, 39, on April 8 after she gave him a ticket for parking in a No Parking Zone at 78th Avenue and Queens Boulevard.
"He aimed his weapon, a 9-millimeter Glock, at her," Sgt.
Luis Medina said.


Strike Is Closer in Germany
Western German postal workers began walking off the job in Hamburg today, just hours after becoming the first of Germany's 2.6 million public service employees to vote in favor of a nationwide strike for higher pay expected to begin Saturday.
In Hamburg, the postal workers' union said 95 percent of the 155,000 workers who cast ballots supported a strike.
About two hours later, 400 of the 1,600 workers in Hamburg's central post office struck.
Beginning Monday, strike measures will be gradually introduced at all the nation's post offices, the union said.


Union Upset At A.T.&amp; T.
What A.T.&amp; T. said was meant to be a routine announcement about plans to manufacture telecommunications equipment in Canada has been denounced by the company's main union as a move that will steal jobs from Americans and hamper current contract talks.
The American Telephone and Telegraph Company said Thursday that it would make complex electronics for fiber-optic telephone lines at its plant in Waterloo, Ontario, starting later this year.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Voters; Disappointment Leads In Yet Another Primary
In this leafy suburb of Philadelphia where children roam like birds and the pharmacist dances in community theater, people say they are disgusted with the fuss over Bill Clinton's character and intrigued by Ross Perot's possible candidacy.
"I don't care if other people sleep with humpback whales as long as they legislate in the areas I'm concerned with," said Ruth E. Malone, a 74-year-old author of children's books, mystery stories and profiles of her neighbors in the community newspaper.
"I know Clinton isn't perfect, but I also know that I haven't felt anybody was perfect since Adlai Stevenson. People in this country don't seem to be looking for living, breathing human beings. They're looking for fables like John Kennedy, who, it turns out, bought his nomination."


COMPANY BRIEFS
*
Computer Sciences Inc., El Segundo, Calif., was awarded a $575 million contract by the Air Force to provide engineering and technical support services over an eight-year period to the Air Force Flight Test Center at Edwards Air Force Base, Calif. *
First South Savings Bank Inc., Columbia, S.C., was placed in receivership by the Office of Thrift Supervision.
A new Federal mutual institution, First South Savings Bank, F.S.B., will assume certain liabilities and assets of the old institution, and operate under the management of the Resolution Trust Corporation.


Heat Makes Bulls Sweat, for a While
Bulls 113, Heat 94
CHICAGO, April 24 (AP) -- Michael Jordan scored 46 points tonight as the Chicago Bulls opened their defense of the National Basketball Association championship by routing the Miami Heat, 113-94.


'Shimada' to Close
"Shimada," a drama by Jill Shearer, is to close after this evening's performance at the Broadhurst Theater, 235 West 44th Street.
The play, directed by Simon Philips and starring Ben Gazzara, Ellen Burstyn, Mako and Estelle Parsons, will have run for 4 regular performances and 20 previews.


The Tides of Crime
Crime is going down, the New York City police report.
Can it be true, after all these years of pain, cost and fear?
The police and criminal justice experts respond with proper caution.
History teaches that crime waves arise from profound forces not easily subject to Government control.
Officials can't honestly do more than try to contain crime and minimize its damage.
But to the extent they exceed the trends elsewhere, the New York figures also suggest that government
can
achieve such containment, to visible and reassuring effect.
There's good reason, in short, to persevere in efforts like the current expansion and redeployment of police in New York.


Terreri Is the Latest Sorcerer To Block Rangers' Bid for Cup
The lastest in a long queue of Ranger playoff nightmares was busy tucking his black T-shirt into a pair of slacks today after practice, looking far punier than he had on Thursday night.
Chris Terreri had seemed more fearsome than his 160 pounds when the Devils beat the Rangers, 3-1, to take a two-games-to-one lead in their four-of-seven-game Patrick Division semifinal series.
The rejuvenated goaltender had turned aside 34 of 35 shots, tearing the heart out of the Ranger attack, making offensive naturals like Tony Amonte and Darren Turcotte shoot the puck downright unnaturally.


Beware of Cost Parers Playing Doctor
To the Editor:
Prof.
Jesse Lemisch tells a poignant story in "Do They Want My Wife to Die?" (Op-Ed, April 15), describing how the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company has informed him it will cut back nursing care for his wife, a professor of psychology struck down by acute chronic fatigue syndrome, from the 24 hours a day her doctor says she needs to stay alive to 4 hours a day.


Observer; Roe, Wade And Mayo
The following is from a cassette tape found under the pantry steps behind the Supreme Court building.
Eight distinctive male voices are heard and one female.
Fortunately, none can be identified with certainty:
Male Voice One: Did anybody get a pastrami on white with mayonnaise and lettuce?
I ordered pastrami with mayo and -- would you look at this revolting sandwich, Chief?
Corned beef on rye with mustard.
They must think we're writing a Broadway musical here instead of interpreting a Constitution.


A Turnaround at Goodyear
The Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company, aided by the sale of some of its businesses and increases in production and efficiency, reported a net income of $66.3 million for the first quarter yesterday, in contrast to a loss of $90.1 million in the comparable period a year earlier.
The giant tire company, based in Akron, Ohio, said all of its businesses had reported improvement, including its troubled pipeline operation, which was built to carry oil from offshore California wells to Texas refineries.
Analysts said the company's earnings demonstrated that Goodyear had worked to enhance itself in the face of fierce price competition.


Classical Music in Review
Festival of 20th-Century Music Manhattan School of Music


Review/Film; Ex-Spies in Double Trouble
"You're both dinosaurs," a comparatively neutral observer tells the two bewildered former cold war spies in Nicholas Meyer's new espionage melodrama, "Company Business." They are Sam Boyd (Gene Hackman), an American, and Pyotr Grushenko (Mikhail Baryshnikov), a Russian, who have joined forces to flee the coordinated wrath of the Central Intelligence Agency and the K.G.B.
The neutral observer fails to notice that if the two men are dinosaurs, then their adventure must be antediluvian.


Miriam Borgenicht Klein Novelist, 76
Miriam Borgenicht Klein, the author of 17 suspense novels under the name of Miriam Borgenicht, died on Thursday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 76 years old.
She died of lymphoma, her family said.


Macy Board to Be Controlled by Outsiders
Outside investors will increase their control of R. H. Macy &amp; Company, as stipulated by the terms of the leveraged buyout that took the company private in 1986.
The board of Macy, which is operating with bankruptcy court protection, was once dominated by the managers who had been instrumental in the $3.5 billion buyout.
But within days, it will be run by the likes of Henry A. Kissinger, the former Secretary of State, and Laurence A. Tisch, the chairman of chief executive of CBS Inc. and the Loews Corporation.


Your Money; Insurance Review Is Suggested Now
In today's low-interest-rate environment, many consumers need to review their life insurance policies, experts say.
Many need to increase coverage, while others may find they are paying for coverage they no longer need.
"Thousands of people have policies buried away in safe-deposit boxes or drawers, and they just haven't addressed them or looked at them," said John Peterman, an account executive for Dean Witter &amp; Company in New York who began evaluating insurance portfolios as a service to clients and has since developed an active business in the area.


Jury Still Out in Police Beating Trial


A Low Bridge Struggles to Serve 2 Masters
One nice thing about tides is that they're predictable.
And so Tony Palazzo, who manages the Veterans of Foreign Wars' marina here, can look at his charts and see exactly when the historic swing bridge over the Saugatuck River will have to swing open this summer to let boats by at high tide.
For example, mid-afternoon on the Fourth of July.


Deciding Perot Can't Be Ignored, Clinton Takes Him On
Just a few days ago, campaign aides to Gov.
Bill Clinton let it be known that they planned to ignore Ross Perot as a potential rival until he got into the Presidential race officially.
An adviser to the Arkansas Governor said engaging Mr.
Perot so early would be like fighting a shadow.
But that strategy has apparently shifted in the aftermath of public opinion polls showing Mr.
Perot's strength growing and cutting into Mr.
Clinton's support.
Today, Mr.
Clinton took on the Texas billionaire directly, saying, "If he wants to run, he ought to get out here and run."


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
General Motors will attempt the largest stock offering in American history and reorganize its huge vehicle-making operations.
It said it would offer as many as 57.5 million shares, now worth $2.3 billion.
Most investors and analysts were bullish on the move, but G.M. shares fell.  [ Page 1. ]


President to Ease Rules on Sale of Public Property
President Bush will issue an executive order next week making it easier for state and local officials to sell public assets like airports, roads, bridges and sewage treatment plants to private businesses, White House officials said tonight.
Plans for the order are the latest move in a campaign of deregulation and privatization driven in part by the Administration's ideology but also aimed at showing a President coping with domestic issues in an election year.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
American International Petroleum Corp., New York, appointed James H. Dorman senior vice president and general manager-exploration. *
American Re-Insurance Co., Princeton, N.J., a unit of Aetna Life and Casualty Co., named Thomas H. Walker Jr. senior vice president in the executive division.


Possibility of Driver Error Considered in Park Crash
Police investigators said yesterday that they found no evidence of any mechanical malfunction in the 1987 Oldsmobile that raced out of control through Washington Square Park on Thursday, increasing the possibility that error by the 74-year-old driver caused the accident that left four people dead and more than two dozen injured.
The investigators said they had not entirely ruled out the possibility that the car's accelerator had somehow become stuck, causing the car to smash through the crowded park at high speed in middle of a warm spring afternoon.
But they said the likelihood of that happening without leaving any mechanical trace was 1 in 10,000.


Can Arsenal Africa Hope to Find Democracy?; Killings in Ethiopia
To the Editor:
On March 23 in Water, Hararghe, Ethiopia, there was a peaceful demonstration involving approximately 30,000 Oromo people.
Ethiopian People's Revolutionary Democratic Front armed forces fired on the crowd, killing 92 people and seriously wounding more than 300.
Why have you not published this news?


Editorial Notebook; Is It Jackson Hole-Compatible?
When choosing a computer to run personal software programs, I look for an all-important label: I.B.M.-compatible.
When choosing among proposals to reform the national health care system, there's good reason to look for the reassurance of this label:
Jackson Hole-compatible
.
Jackson Hole refers to a self-selected group of health care executives, scholars and physicians that meets each year in Jackson Hole, Wyoming.
This is the group, led by Dr.
Paul Ellwood of Minnesota and Prof.
Alain Enthoven of Stanford, that formulated the shrewd plan known as managed competition.


Corrections
An entry in the Accounts section of the Addenda listing on the Media Business page on Thursday about Harvey Electronics Inc. referred incorrectly to the the company's advertising.
It continues to be handled by Harvey; it was not moved to PSA Inc., New York, which was named to write and produce three radio commercials on a freelance basis.


A Republican in Trouble For Opposing Taxes
To the Editor:
A primary reason for New York State's economic problems is that leaders of the Democrat and Republican parties are committed to the same failed big-government solutions that have reduced the Empire State to the Debtor State.
Rumors that State Senator Tarky J. Lombardi Jr., chairman of the Finance Committee, is in danger of losing that post for voting against the new taxes and fees in the state budget that Ralph J. Marino, Senate majority leader, was in charge of negotiating (news article, April 7) confirm this sorry state of affairs.


A Teacher Uses Music's Boundaries to Keep Out Urban Chaos
Just beyond the barred windows of Intermediate School 166 in the Morrisania section of the Bronx, drug dealers cross paths with the homeless near the charred facade of an abandoned building.
But inside the windowless fortress of the school auditorium on a recent morning, several dozen teen-agers from the neighborhood were creating beautiful music.
Playing decrepit violins and cellos that were resurrected in the school carpentry shop, the students are riveted to their teacher and conductor, Charlie Randall, who is drilling them with military precision in "The Greatest Love of All," the ballad made famous by Whitney Houston.


The Ploy's the Thing, But It Doesn't Work
The entrapment is designed to produce a theft, and, as a result, perhaps even steal a game as well.
The runner at first, appearing stupid or greedy, takes a giant lead and then stumbles breaking for second.
The runner at third, anticipating the pitcher's pickoff throw to first, breaks for the plate.
The bet is that the runner at third can beat the first baseman's throw to the plate.
The gamble, though, is dead if the pitcher never falls for the trick.


CHRONICLE
More than 500 people crowded into the S. Bitter-Larkin Gallery in Manhattan earlier this week to see and buy the works of 87 artists with an uncommon link.
They are all alumni, faculty members, parents and grandparents of students and graduates of the Friends Seminary, at 222 East 16th Street in New York.
Among the artists whose works were donated to benefit the private school's arts programs were such luminaries as DONALD SULTAN, ALICE NEEL, FRANK STELLA, MILTON AVERY and his daughter MARCH AVERY, RAPHAEL SOYER, ALICE TRUMBULL MASON and WOLF KAHN.


McDowell Wins Fourth in a Row
White Sox 9, Tigers 1


Paths to a Common Fate On a Spring Day in the Park
They were a cross-section of New Yorkers, the kind of parkgoers who sit each day beneath the oaks of Washington Square talking with people they know and watching those they do not know.
Two were elderly women and best friends: one a quiet retired secretary, the other an elegant chatterer in English and Italian.
Another was a 19-year-old student at New York University, an immigrant's son who yearned to become a psychiatrist.
The fourth was an ex-Marine who had just gained a wife and lost a job.
A Screeching Nightmare
In a park that reflects the city's verve and diversity, four people who shared little in life died together on Thursday when a gray Oldsmobile barreled onto an asphalt pathway and into a crowd of terrified people.


Natori Planning to Cast a Wider Net
Who would have thought that a successful career in stocks and bonds would prepare someone for success in the world of nighties and slippers?
But Wall Street is where Josie and Ken Natori acquired the business expertise to assault the frilly pink and white domain of lingerie with bold colors, prints and appliques.
Then they popularized innerwear-as-outerwear, finding a broad new market for bodysuits, leggings and nightgowns beyond the bedroom.


America3 Uses Boat Speed To Take 4-1 Lead in Cup
Bill Koch's America
put yachting's equivalent of a stranglehold -- more boat speed -- on Dennis Conner's Stars &amp; Stripes today, defeating the older yacht by 3 minutes 31 seconds.
The victory for America
gave the Koch team a 4-1 lead over Stars &amp; Stripes in the 7-of-13 race America's Cup defense finals.
Koch could clinch the series with three more victories.
But given the hard time Conner gave Koch today, it's not likely to end quickly.
After three lead changes today, Conner showed that his team still had a lot of fight left.


Review/Ballet Theater; A 'Giselle' With Interpretive Surprises
With its simple story of love betrayed and dancing that actually fills only one of its two acts, "Giselle" is hardly a ballet to top a thinking person's list.
It is, moreover, the kind of work that seems to cry out for superstars in the leads and was, in fact, originally conceived as a vehicle for the young ballerina Carlotte Grisi in Paris in 1841.
Cynthia Harvey and Guillaume Graffin of American Ballet Theater are not superstars, but their performance, impressively growing into emotional fervor, left the Metropolitan Opera House audience cheering on Thursday night.


Arkansas Sinks Opponents With Anchor Leg of Men's Relay
When you have won the men's distance medley relay in the Penn Relays seven times in the nine previous years, you worry about yourself and not the opposition.
So while Villanova was concerned about Arkansas and Georgetown and while Georgetown was concerned about Arkansas and Villanova, the only thing on Arkansas's mind today was itself.
"We thought that no matter what the others did, we would be all right," said Graham Hood of Arkansas.


Top Cyclops Official Now Armco President
Armco Inc., the large steel producer, said yesterday that it had named James F. Will, formerly president and chief operating officer of Cyclops Industries, president and chief operating officer.
Cyclops, which was officially acquired by Armco yesterday, is a big force in the specialty steel business.
The position at Armco had been held by Robert L. Purdham, the chairman and chief executive.


Patents; A Simple Method for Robot's Grip
As a computer scientist, Kenneth Y. Goldberg has spent most of his career working on robotics.
Despite his high-technology training, however, he argues that the best way to tackle some problems in his own field is with simple innovations, rather than advanced electronics.
To that end, Mr.
Goldberg recently patented a gripper for assembly-line robots that improves the sureness with which they grasp irregularly shaped objects.
The key to the invention comes down to ball bearings, not to fancy sensors or computer algorithms.


Big Digital Charge Due To Cover 4,000 Layoffs
The Digital Equipment Corporation, the financially troubled $14 billion computer company, told industry analysts and reporters today that it would be taking a restructuring charge of $500 million to $1 billion this quarter to cover layoffs of 4,000 more employees.
John F. Smith, senior vice president in charge of operations, spoke informally about the earnings charge and layoffs, which he had said two weeks ago were likely.
Digital announced then that it had lost $294 million for its third quarter.


U.S. Marines Help in Effort To Stop the Lava Flow of Italian Volcano


Classical Music in Review
New Music Consort Manhattan School of Music


Review/Music; Wildness That's Refined and Truly Wild
Listening to "La Valse" by Ravel, moments after the Cleveland Orchestra had played Edgard Varese's "Ecuatorial" at Carnegie Hall on Thursday night, was like stepping out of a tropical rain forest into the Jardin du Luxembourg.
Two poles of creative thought -- contrary but symbiotic -- stood next to each other.
The Varese represented music's thirst for the unexplored.
Ravel expressed music's need for a controlling human hand, one that creates recognizable symmetry from the chaos of sensory experience.
"Ecuatorial" with its sung Mayan texts and its total rejection of orchestral tradition, enters new territory and burns the bridges leading to it.
No stringed instruments, no woodwinds: Varese's batteries of percussion devices, drums and keyboards are jungle-bright; they make mockery of bar lines, thematic development and predictable movement.
One encounters violence and extravagant colors as surprises, as flora and fauna happened on by chance.


Rohatyn Warns New York City It Risks Loss of Millions in Aid
The chairman of the Municipal Assistance Corporation, Felix G. Rohatyn, yesterday demanded to know how New York City had generated a budget surplus.
He also warned that if the city increased the size and cost of government, it would risk losing at least $100 million in aid he has promised, and maybe more.
In issuing the warning, Mr.
Rohatyn joined an angry chorus of municipal labor leaders in pressing the city to explain how it managed to produce a $455 million cushion in the budget for the fiscal year that ends June 30.
But he did so with precisely the opposite objective: Labor now wants raises from the city, while Mr.
Rohatyn insists it cannot afford them.


U.N. Chief Opposes Bosnia Peace Force
Rejecting an appeal by France, Germany and Poland, the United Nations Secretary General told the Security Council today that he could not recommend deployment of a new peacekeeping force in Bosnia and Herzegovina because of the renewed fighting there.
In a written report, he also disagreed with them by refusing to blame Serbia and the predominantly Serbian Yugoslav Army for most of the increase in violence there and the breakdown of the cease-fire agreed to on April 12.


Hard Choices for Russians
After nearly 75 years of deliberate isolation, Russia is expected to rejoin the world economy next week, when it should be formally accepted as a member of the International Monetary Fund.
This is occurring at a critical time for President Boris N. Yeltsin, who must make some politically difficult decisions to keep his vaunted economic reform moving.
Without these decisions -- primarily to restructure the bulky industrial economy and thereby bring about the inevitable displacement of thousands of workers -- the reform could fail to go far enough to get the billions of dollars of aid being prepared by the I.M.F. and Western nations.
Russian leaders know that to receive the much needed Western aid, they will have to submit to I.M.F. discipline and tighten the collective economic belt ever tighter.
Credit Is Expanded
But already some serious signs of slippage have occurred in Mr.
Yeltsin's program of economic reform.
Aware that the sudden rise of prices without a similar rise in income has led to widespread grumbling, the Russian Government in recent weeks has begun to loosen up on its tight-money policy.


Pirates Catch Thief And Slip Past Cubs
Pirates 3, Cubs 2
CHICAGO, April 24 (AP) -- Manager Jim Leyland must be doing something right.
The Pittsburgh Pirates have overcome their losses and gotten off to a 13-3 start, the best in the majors.


Unity on Balkans Eludes Europeans
The latest attempt by the European Community to deal with violence in the Balkans has once again made clear how difficult it will be for the community to move toward a common foreign and security policy by next year.
A cease-fire negotiated on Thursday in Sarajevo, the capital of Bosnia and Herzegovina, by the community's troubleshooters, Lord Carrington of Britain and Foreign Minister Joao de Deus Pinheiro of Portugal, held for a while today, but individual community nations immediately began going off in separate directions to find a better way of keeping Serbs, Muslims and Croats from shooting at one another in the former Yugoslav federation.


Rebels Agree on Interim Rule for Kabul
Leaders of six Afghan rebel groups announced the formation of a 50-member interim council early today, saying it would assume power from the Government in Kabul within the next few days.
The announcement came at 2 A.M. in the Pakistani border city of Peshawar after Afghan guerrilla leaders, United Nations representatives and the Pakistani Prime Minister met for several hours to try to reach a consensus.


A New Cooler From Seagram
Make way for another clear drink.
The Seagram Beverage Company plans to market a clear alcoholic drink called Seagram's Spritzer in 15 states.
The potion is malt-based and has a light fruit flavor.
It will be about as strong as beer, containing 3.5 percent alcohol.


This Square Game Requires an Enforcer? Bingo!
On his way to the inspection, Joe Kennelly said there was a good chance he would find some fishy doings.
In this sort of activity, just about everyone breaks the law, often brazenly.
They do it right in front of him.
"Yeah, there's likely to be something going on," he said, as he thundered uptown on the No. 2 train.
"I checked the records and this outfit got hit last year with a violation."


McDowell Wins Fourth in a Row
White Sox 9, Tigers 1


For Nets, Coleman Is the Password
His 21 points and 11 rebounds Thursday night were nothing for Derrick Coleman to get too excited about.
He knows he can score and go get the ball.
Nine assists, now that brought a smile of satisfaction to Coleman's face today before the New Jersey Nets took the practice floor in preparation for Game 2 of their three-of-five-game series against the Cleveland Cavaliers in the first round of the National Basketball Association playoffs.
That game will be played here at Richfield Coliseum on Saturday night.


2 Groups Honor Excellence in Education
Two private groups honor excellence in education in New York City schools this month: Reliance Group Holding Inc., and the Fund for New York City Public Education.
The Reliance Group will present its second annual Awards for Excellence to people and businesses in a ceremony on Wednesday.
These are the winners:
Elementary school teacher: Ernestine Volpe, P.S. 172, Brooklyn;


Review/Theater; The Quixotic Don Rides Again
When it comes to the revival of "Man of La Mancha" at the Marquis Theater, "Forbidden Broadway" was there first.
In the latest version of that satiric revue, there is a malicious spoof in which the new Don Quixote strides boastfully on stage and sings, "I am I, Raul Julia," and declares himself as the first Hispanic actor to play the title role.
He is followed by a Valley Girl impersonation of Sheena Easton as the lusty Aldonza.
Overstatement is a comic essence of "Forbidden Broadway"; it is also no stranger to the sentiments of "Man of La Mancha."
In this production, the show proves to be what it always was: a quasi-inspirational musical about the Spanish Inquisition.
It had, and still has, a novelty effect, as it tells a story remote in time and sensibility.
A surprise success in 1965, it went on to become one of the longest running musicals and one that is frequently revived.
It always seems to attract partisans, most of whom, one would suggest, have never so much as thumbed a copy of "Don Quixote."


Olympia Gets Another Lift From Banks
Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd., struggling to stave off a bankruptcy that could shake international finance and real estate markets, today received its second show of support from bankers since announcing plans to restructure $14.3 billion in debts on April 13.
But the banks are still keeping the company, the world's largest developer, on a tight leash.


Skull of Missing Boy Found in New Jersey Marsh
A skull found Thursday in a vast marsh in Edison has been identified as that of Timothy Wiltsey, a 5-year-old boy whose mother reported him missing at a carnival 11 months ago, the Middlesex County prosecutor said today.
The prosecutor, Robert W. Gluck, said at a news conference here today that the boy's death would be treated as an "apparent homicide," instead of a kidnapping or missing persons case.
But he would not comment on how the boy might have been killed, or where, or when.
Scraps of Clothing
He said that the search had turned up other skeletal remains and scraps of clothing that matched the outfit the boy was last seen wearing.
He said additional laboratory analysis would be needed before the authorities could speculate on the circumstances of his death.


Sendak Turns to Films but Not to the Glamour
Maurice Sendak said with a laugh that he's not going Hollywood.
The author and illustrator, who signed a development deal with Tri-Star Pictures on Thursday, said he plans to continue to live relatively privately in Connecticut and hardly sees himself as glamorous.


Robert M. Ganger, 88, a Leader In Advertising in the 60's, Is Dead
Robert M. Ganger, a leader in advertising who was instrumental in introducing diet soda and who also popularized filtered cigarettes when he headed a major tobacco company, died on Thursday at his home in Gulfstream, Fla.
He was 88 years old and died of respiratory failure, his family said.


Sendak Turns to Films but Not to the Glamour
Maurice Sendak said with a laugh that he's not going Hollywood.
The author and illustrator, who signed a development deal with Tri-Star Pictures on Thursday, said he plans to continue to live relatively privately in Connecticut and hardly sees himself as glamorous.


Georgetown University Pushes Abortion-Rights Group Off Campus
After a year of controversy over recognition of an abortion-rights group, Georgetown University today withdrew financial support of the organization and said it would no longer provide meeting space for the group.
Georgetown, the country's oldest Roman Catholic university, had been criticized for recognizing the group and giving it $150 a year and meeting space, things that it routinely supplies to other student organizations, including G.U.
Right-to-Life, a group that, like the Catholic Church, strongly opposes abortion.
Advocacy Was Forbidden
In a letter sent this morning to Georgetown students and alumni, the president of Georgetown, the Rev.
Leo J. O'Donovan, said the university would cease to finance the group, G.U.
Choice, and to give it access to meeting places because the club had violated its agreement not to participate in "advocacy or action on behalf of abortion."


F.A.A. Seeking Replacement Of Faulty Plane Signal Device
The Federal Aviation Administration will require airlines to replace electronic devices on about 300 airplanes because they can send out faulty signals, confusing air traffic controllers and raising the possibility of midair collisions, the agency said today.
The aviation agency announced its order, which it said would be issued in a few days, under pressure from the National Association of Air Traffic Controllers, the union representing the controllers.
But the agency said that it might take weeks or months to correct the problem, and the controllers' union said the agency was doing too little and too late.


U.S. Accused of Punishing Monitors on Iraq
A Congressman who investigated an unsuccessful 1989 warning about Iraq's nuclear weapons program has accused the Energy Department of punishing employees who raised the alarm and rewarding those who disparaged it.
"Top-notch employees will not be attracted to the Department of Energy as long as it subjects its employees to 'bureaucratic execution' " for questioning the status quo, the Representative, John D. Dingell, Democrat of Michigan, said in a letter to President Bush on Thursday.


Solidarity Members Protest Poland's Economic Reforms


A Home Exercise Machine for a Customized Workout
A move by fitness enthusiasts to forsake their local health club for a workout unit at home has created a market for personal exercise machines.
Among the new devices is a strength-training machine built by Nordic Track, the Minnesota company that 17 years ago began producing the first cross-country ski trainer for the living room.
Strength-training machines usually offer a series of exercises that work major muscle areas in the legs, arms, stomach, back and chest.
They tend to operate on pulley systems that derive tension from stacks of weights or heavy-duty rubber bands.
Isokinetic Resistance
The Nordic Flex Gold was introduced by the company in November.
Nordic Track, of Chaska, Minn., is a subsidiary of the CML Group Inc. of Acton, Mass., which also owns clothing and nature-products companies.


Beer Dispute Compromise Being Sought
American and Canadian trade negotiators tried to strike a compromise this evening on a dispute over beer that has disrupted supplies on both sides of the border and become increasingly irritating in diplomatic relations.
The talks broke off tonight and are scheduled to resume on Saturday.
Administration officials said that if no agreement could be concluded quickly, they would have to announce punitive duties on Canadian beer imports.
These imports have dropped off sharply since April 14, when the United States confused and angered Canadian breweries by saying it was considering whether to impose much higher duties and make the increases retroactive.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.25-6.5
6.25-6.5
9.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
6.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.62
3.68
5.85
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.64
3.66
5.61
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.80
3.83
5.72
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.16
7.20
7.91
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.03
8.04
8.20
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.97
8.97
9.27
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.73
6.73
7.28
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Armando Balloffet, Hydraulics Engineer And Consultant, 74
Armando Balloffet, who had a career ranging over five decades as a hydraulics engineer, teacher and consultant on three continents, died on Thursday at the Westchester County Medical Center in Valhalla, N.Y.
He was 74 years old and had lived in Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y., since 1955.
His family said he died of a heart illness.


Jacques Cousteau Urges President Bush to Attend Earth Summit


House Bank Inquiry Is Greatly Widened By the Justice Dept.
In an action that could lead to yet another round of battles over the House bank, the Justice Department has subpoenaed all financial records of every House member's transactions there for a 39-month period from 1988 to 1991.
The subpoenas were first disclosed in a letter that Speaker Thomas S. Foley of Washington State sent to his House colleagues today.
Mr.
Foley did not indicate whether the House leadership would comply with the subpoenas, which were issued on Tuesday.


Dr. Joseph Laval, 90, Ophthalmology Leader
Dr.
Joseph Laval, an ophthalmologist for 63 years and a leader in that specialty, died on Tuesday while walking near his home in Manhattan.
He was 90 years old.
He died of heart failure, his family said.


Clean-Air Battle: Unusual Cast of Courtroom Foes
When Federal courts hear a case involving pollution regulations, the parties are usually an industrial company seeking to overturn the rules and an angry state regulator.
But the politics of the 1990 Clean Air Act are so convoluted lately that the polluters are years away from court.
Instead, in Federal district court in Albany, the states are suing the Federal Government to establish rules in the first place.
Nine states are suing the Environmental Protection Agency because they fear that the Federal Government is planning to offer polluters too soft a deal.
And the environmental agency has come close to saying it agrees.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Reporter's Notebook; Bush and Clinton Spar, But Out of Arm's Reach
President Bush and Gov.
Bill Clinton engaged in their first debate of the campaign today.
Sort of.
They were in different cities, never talked directly to each other and never referred to each other by name.


Japanese Re-questioned
The owner of the Chicago White Sox, JERRY REINSDORF, said he will ask for additional changes in the Japanese-led bid for the Seattle Mariners when baseball's ownership committee meets Thursday to discuss the proposed sale.
Reinsdorf said he wanted more assurances that the Japanese will not be able to control team decisions and said he might urge the 10-member committee to postpone action.


Olympia Gets Another Lift From Banks
Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd., struggling to stave off a bankruptcy that could shake international finance and real estate markets, today received its second show of support from bankers since announcing plans to restructure $14.3 billion in debts on April 13.
But the banks are still keeping the company, the world's largest developer, on a tight leash.


Alcohol Doesn't Beat Wives; Husbands Do
To the Editor:
Implicit in "Bolivia Is Helping Its Battered Wives" (news article, March 30) is the assumption that drinking alcohol causes men to beat their wives.
While there is a high correlation between alcohol and wife abuse, many men drink who do not beat their wives, and many men beat their wives who do not drink.


Can Arsenal Africa Hope to Find Democracy?; Botswana's Elephants
To the Editor:
In the aftermath of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species in Kyoto, Japan, March 2-13, many misperceptions surround the petition of five Southern African nations to allow limited trade in meat and skin.
However, the most blatant inaccuracy was contained in "Bluefin Tuna and African Elephants Win Some Help at a Global Meeting" (news article, March 11): "In the end, however, the United States opposed allowing trade in hides and meat because it feared that other African nations with a poor record on elephants, including Botswana, Namibia and Malawi, might take advantage of a change."


AFGHAN GUERRILLAS MOVE INTO CAPITAL BY THE THOUSANDS
Thousands of Islamic guerrillas from six major rebel groups have entered Kabul and firmly control many of the city's sprawling neighborhoods, Government and rebel leaders said today.
Afghanistan's disintegrating Government now holds sway over only the center of the capital.
Rebel groups have moved swiftly throughout poorer neighborhoods, setting up offices, establishing street patrols and manning checkpoints on city streets.
Unchallenged, young guerrillas stroll along potholed streets, past shops and houses, brandishing assault rifles, light machine guns and shoulder-fired rockets with the panache of small-town heroes.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo; Bush, Asking for Continuity, Sounds Like a Revolutionary
In 1992 everyone wants to be a reformer, even the President.
As he pleads for a second term by arguing that America needs a change, George Bush sounds more like a Vaclav Havel on the eve of revolution in Czechoslovakia than a man who has already spent 11 years in the White House.
After more than three years in the Oval Office, Mr.
Bush has developed a sudden fondness for the oratory of revolution, peppering his speeches with words like "change" and "reform" as he seeks to escape the voters' evident disgust with Washington in the 1992 elections.


BASEBALL HEADLINE&gt;Yanks Win But Lose Tartabull
A few hours after the Yankees made Danny Tartabull the highest-paid spectator in club history by placing the $25.5 million player on the 15-day disabled list yesterday, they still managed to nickel and dime their way to a 5-0 victory over the Baltimore Orioles at Yankee Stadium.
They parlayed four singles, a double, a walk and an error into four runs off Bob Milacki after two were out in the second inning and, behind Greg Cadaret, coasted to their third straight victory and fifth in the last six games.
While Tartabull rested his strained left hamstring and joined Pat Kelly and Mike Gallego in the infirmary section of the dugout, the Yankees on the diamond endured a 57-minute rain delay just before their early outburst and proceeded to snap Baltimore's winning streak at seven games.


Bond Prices Move Higher in Thin Trading
Prices of Treasury notes and bonds moved higher and interest rates inched lower yesterday in very thin trading.
Market participants said that most of the day's activity was telescoped into the first two hours of trading, and it was primarily concentrated in the purchase of short-term bills and notes.


Vincent Waits for Call After Lawsuit Dropped
At 11:10 A.M. yesterday, Leonard Kleinman received $1.05 million by wire from Florida, and about an hour and a half later, he dropped his lawsuit against Fay Vincent, the commissioner of baseball.
By the time Vincent left his office several hours later, though, he had not heard from George Steinbrenner.
"I don't want to be presumptuous," Vincent said when asked if he would meet with the Yankees' principal but exiled owner to discuss Steinbrenner's possible return to active duty with the team.
"How do I know if he wants to meet with me?"


Sports of The Times; The Lawyer Shuffle In the Bronx
To George Steinbrenner, lawyers are like managers; he can't hire enough of them.
In fact, Steinbrenner has had more lawyers in the last two years than he ever had managers in a similar period.
Billy Martin, Lou Piniella, Bob Lemon and Gene Michael had nothing on Stephen Kaufman, Dominic Amorosa, Paul Curran, Robert Gold, Robert Banker and Arnold Burns.
Those are the lawyers Steinbrenner has used at one time or another since Commissioner Fay Vincent put John Dowd, the tenacious Washington lawyer, on the Steinbrenner case in March 1990.
Steinbrenner has not used Harold Tyler and Arthur Christy, nor has he directly employed Robert Costello, but he is indirectly or directly paying their fees, too.


Abortion War, Buffalo Front: Top Guns Use Battle Tactics
Several days into a long-planned struggle over abortion rights here, leaders of the national anti-abortion group Operation Rescue took stock of the battlefield and saw less than a victory.
The skirmishes in Buffalo did not bode well for their next major target, the Democratic Convention in New York City this July.
So they called in reinforcements.
"We got the word," said a regional director from the West Coast.
The other side was using a strategy to defend the clinics here that had been successfully used in California.


Dana Benfield Weds
Dana Ann Benfield, an assistant district attorney in Brooklyn, and Dieter Lucas, a pilot for Trans World Airlines in New York, were married yesterday at the Presbyterian Church in Irvington-on-Hudson, N.Y.
The Rev.
David Harkness officiated.
Mrs.
Lucas, 30 years old, is a daughter of Teresa Parker of White Plains and John Benfield of South Salem, N.Y.
Mr.
Lucas, 29, is the son of Erika and Norbert Lucas of Yorktown Heights, N.Y.


Olympia Gets Another Lift From Banks
Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd., struggling to stave off a bankruptcy that could shake international finance and real estate markets, today received its second show of support from bankers since announcing plans to restructure $14.3 billion in debts on April 13.
But the banks are still keeping the company, the world's largest developer, on a tight leash.


Coca-Cola Turns From Talk To Contest With Gatorade
The Coca-Cola Company has apparently decided that it would rather fight the mighty Gatorade than join it.
Gatorade sales have reached nearly $1 billion a year worldwide, attracting the attention of the nation's three largest soft-drink makers.
Yesterday, in an effort to make the competition sweat, Coca-Cola USA said it planned to begin selling its sports drink, Powerade, in bottles and cans next month in four cities in the South.
Despite the limited introduction, Coke said it was "making a major commitment" to sports drinks.


Buying by Catalogue Is Easy; Timely Delivery May Not Be
Susan Kean, a television writer-producer from Far Hills, N.J., ordered a rugby shirt from the J. Crew catalogue by telephone and was told it would arrive in two weeks.
After receiving no package or notification for three weeks, she called the company again and was told the item would not be available until long after the occasion for which she was buying the gift.
"I told them to cancel the order," she said.
"They would have to promise me a free gift before I'd buy by catalogue again."


Detroit Journal; Jobs Oasis Is Created, But Price Was High
Once a working-class neighborhood of modest bungalows and two-family houses, a large portion of Detroit's lower east side is a decayed shell, with many homes abandoned and fire-charred.
Jefferson Avenue, the area's main thoroughfare, is a forbidding strip of liquor stores, beauty shops and boarded storefronts.
Amid this desolation, Chrysler Corporation cut the ribbon last month on a gleaming $1 billion factory, bucking the trend of building automobile plants in cornfields.


Memo Shows Improved Results for Deloitte
Deloitte &amp; Touche, the accounting firm formed by merger in December 1989, appears to making progress in improving its bottom line after two years of disappointing earnings, confidential partnership documents show.
As a private firm owned by its 1,460 partners, Deloitte does not usually disclose information about its profitability.


Suffolk Officials to Meet To Resolve Budget Crisis
Facing an immediate cash shortage, the Suffolk County Executive today called for a special meeting of the Legislature early next week.
And this time he said he believes he will have enough votes to resolve the county's four-month-old financial crisis.
Suffolk is facing a $78 million gap in its current $1.3 billion budget and will not have enough cash on hand to cover welfare payments that are to be mailed out on Thursday, Joseph R. Caputo, the county comptroller, has warned.


For Many, Paying for College Only Gets Harder
To the Editor:
"A Creative Tuition Increase" (editorial, April 17) urges support for the innovative City University of New York proposal to offer a tuition-free pregraduation semester, while minimizing the impact of a tuition increase on students now enrolled.


Quotation of the Day
"The first rule of Presidential speech writing is, or should be, that saying so doesn't make it so. For someone such as Bush, who has represented the political establishment his entire career, to try to pretend that he's a revolutionary won't fly. He can say it 700 or 7,000 times and people will not think that a jack rabbit who calls himself a horse is a horse." -- THEODORE H. SORENSEN, John F. Kennedy's speech writer.  [ 1:2. ]


Cleveland Orchestra Sues Jackson Over 'Sampling'
Rap musicians have long been freely appropriating excerpts from other artists' recordings for their own use, a practice known as electronic sampling.
But the nonprofit organization that operates the Cleveland Orchestra contended yesterday that Michael Jackson and Sony Music Entertainment Inc. had gone too far when they included a 1-minute-7-second segment of its recording of Beethoven's Ninth Symphony in Mr.
Jackson's latest album, "Dangerous."


Olympia Gets Another Lift From Banks
Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd., struggling to stave off a bankruptcy that could shake international finance and real estate markets, today received its second show of support from bankers since announcing plans to restructure $14.3 billion in debts on April 13.
But the banks are still keeping the company, the world's largest developer, on a tight leash.


Teaching the Meaning of Life Through Music


Tyson Denied Freedom During Appeal of Case
MIKE TYSON was turned down by the Indiana Supreme Court yesterday in his bid to be free on bail pending an appeal of his rape conviction.
In a unanimous decision, the five-member court voted to let stand lower court decisions denying Tyson's request.
The state's highest court concluded that it has jurisdiction over bail questions, but declined to invoke it in Tyson's case.
The court ordered the case returned to the state Court of Appeals.
Most of the 14-page opinion was devoted to technical legal arguments about bail requests.


New Jersey Paper Cites Abate Articles
Two newspaper reporters say that they had discussions with New York City's new Correction Commissioner, Catherine M. Abate, in 1976 and 1978 concerning allegations that her father was a high-ranking member of an organized-crime group, according to an article yesterday in The Record, a New Jersey newspaper.
Ms.
Abate, in interviews and at a news conference earlier this week, said that she had first heard about the charges against her 89-year-old father, Joseph F. Abate, on Monday, when she was called by a reporter from The New York Times.
The Times reported on Tuesday that New Jersey law-enforcement officials said that Mr.
Abate had been a captain in the Lucchese crime family until 1989.


California Selects Bid for Insurer
California's Insurance Commissioner today named the Pacific Mutual Life Insurance Company as the winner in the bidding for the First Capital Life Insurance Company, the junk-bond-laden insurer that was seized by regulators last year.
The Commissioner, John Garamendi, said he had chosen Pacific Mutual over three other bidders, including Shearson Lehman Brothers, because its offer gives policyholders "the best guarantee of security and the highest dollar value for their investment." Pacific Mutual, which is based in Newport Beach, Calif., is one of the largest life insurers on the West Coast, with nearly $50 billion in assets.


Stomping at the Garden, Knicks Win in a Waltz
The Knicks met the enemy last night, and they embarrassed it.
Playing with a devastating combination of poise and fury, the Knicks ripped the Detroit Pistons, 109-75, before 19,081 raucous fans at Madison Sqaure Garden.
New York leads the three-of-five-game playoff series, 1-0, with Game 2 here set for Sunday afternoon.


INSIDE
Drug Maker Admits Polluting
Bristol-Myers Squibb pleaded guilty to polluting a Syracuse lake and was assessed the largest penalty since the Exxon Valdez oil spill.
Page 25.
U.N.
Chief Rejects Appeal
The United Nations chief rejected a call by France, Germany and Poland for a peacekeeping force in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Page 3.
Peru Fires On U.S.
Aircraft
An unarmed Air Force C-130 was hit by gunfire from a Peruvian military plane off the coast, the U.S.
Embassy said.
One airman is missing.
Page 5.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-5  REBELS FAN OUT IN KABUL
Thousands of Islamic guerrillas now firmly control many of the Afghan capital's sprawling neighborhoods, officials said.
Afghanistan's disintegrating Government holds sway only in the city's center.  1  Six Afghan rebel factions said they had formed a governing council.  4  RUSSIA AT CAPITALIST THRESHOLD
After nearly 75 years of isolation, Russia is expected to rejoin the world economy next week, when it should be accepted as a member of the International Monetary Fund.
The decision comes at a critical time for President Yeltsin.  1  U.N.
CHIEF BALKS OVER BOSNIA
In a move that irritated France, Germany and Poland, the United Nations Secretary General told the Security Council that he could not recommend deployment of a new peacekeeping force in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
He said the fighting there was too fierce.  3  12 IDEAS ON BALKAN PEACE?
The European Community's response to violence in the Balkans makes it clear that it will be hard for the community to move toward a common foreign and security policy by next year.  3  OUSTED HAITIAN WANTS BLOCKADE
On a visit to Manhattan, Haiti's ousted President urged the world to step up pressure on the military junta that overthrew him by tightening an oil embargo.  4  PERU FIRES ON U.S.
C-130
An Air Force C-130 was hit by machine-gun fire from a Peruvian Air Force plane off the coast, the U.S.
Embassy said.
One American airman was reported missing and two crew members were wounded.  5  MOLTEN MONSTER VS.
MARINES
Zafferana Etnea Journal: In the battle between military technology and a wrathful volcano, there are no clear winners.
Ask Sicilian villagers below Mount Etna.  2  National 8-11  BUSH THE REVOLUTIONARY
Political Memo: In this election year everyone wants to be a reformer, and that includes the President.
Indeed, as he appeals for a second term by arguing that America needs a change, he sounds more like a Vaclav Havel on the eve of revolution in Czechoslovakia than a man who has already spent 11 years in the White House.  1  Bush and Clinton engaged in a kind of opening debate.  10  In a Philadelphia suburb, a Perot candidacy is finding favor.  11  Some Weicker advisers have begun backing Perot.  10  NEW TURN IN THE HOUSE BANK CASE
The Justice Department subpoenaed all financial records of every House member's transactions at the Capitol Hill bank for a 39-month period from 1988 to 1991.
Speaker Foley did not indicate whether the House leadership would comply with the subpoenas.
But he said he had rejected the department's informal request for most of the same records.  1  MORE BIG MOVES AT G.M.
Moving swiftly after a management shake-up, General Motors announced that it would attempt the largest stock offering in American history and took another step in reorganizing its huge operations.
It said the goal was to produce better-quality vehicles more quickly and at less cost.  1  CLEAN AIR AND RARE ALIGNMENTS
News analysis: When a Federal court hears a case involving pollution rules, the parties are usually an angry state regulator and an industrial company seeking to have the regulations overturned.
But the politics of the 1990 Clean Air Act have become so convoluted that the polluters are years away from court.
Instead, in Federal District Court in Albany, states are suing the Federal Government to establish rules in the first place.  8  A new analysis backed current action on global warming.  8  EASING SALE OF PUBLIC ROADS
The President will issue an executive order next week making it easier for state and local officials to sell public assets like airports, roads and bridges to private businesses.  8  SCHOOL ACTS IN ABORTION BATTLE
After a year of controversy over its decision to recognize an abortion rights group, the nation's oldest Roman Catholic university, Georgetown, withdrew its financial support of the group and denied it space to meet.  9  NEW ORDER ON AIRLINE SAFETY
The F.A.A. will require airlines to replace electronic devices on about 300 planes because they can send out faulty signals, confusing air controllers and enhancing the possibility of midair collisions.  11  Detroit Journal: Amid urban desolation, a gleaming-new plant.  8  Beliefs: Of Columbus, a flat Earth, and thinking old and new.  9  Metropolitan Digest, 25  LARGER ANTI-ABORTION RANKS
Leaders of the national anti-abortion group Operation Rescue have called in reinforcements to aid their efforts in Buffalo.
The mission is to counter defenses by abortion-rights advocates who managed to keep abortion clinics operating this week.1  WARNING ON BUDGET SURPLUS
The chairman of the Municipal Assistance Corporation demanded to know how New York City had generated a budget surplus, and warned that if the city increased the size and cost of government, it would risk losing at least $100 million in aid.  1  BROUGHT TOGETHER IN DEATH
In a park that reflects New York City's verve and diversity, four people who shared little in life died together when a gray Oldsmobile barreled onto an asphalt pathway and into the terrified crowd.  1  Business Digest 35  Sports 30-34  Baseball: Yankees win but lose Tartabull.  31  Phillies slip past Mets.  33  Basketball: Knicks steamroll the Pistons.  31  Column: Chass on Steinbrenner 31  Hockey: Rangers stymied by Terreri.  31  Consumer's World 50  Buying a tuner or receiver.
Mail-order deliveries.
Customized workouts.
Futuristic hiking boot.
Obituaries 12  Peter Joseph Fan, a bishop imprisoned by China for beliefs.
Robert M. Ganger, a leader in advertising in the 60's.
Arts/Entertainment 13-17  Sendak turns to film.  13  Cleveland Orchestra sues Jackson.  17  Theater: "Man of La Mancha" revived.13  Music: The Cleveland Orchestra.  13  Editorials/Op-Ed 22-23  Editorials 22  The tides of crime.
Arms policy: winks, nods.
Michael Weinstein: Health.
Letters 22  Russell Baker: Roe, Wade and mayo.  23  Norman Paradis: Making a living off the dying.  23  Norma G. Blumenfeld: Clubs that exclude women and blacks.  23  Uri Savir: Alone -- and together -- in New York City.  23


Beliefs
The belief in a flat Earth is a modern invention, a myth that reveals a good deal about the underlying dogma of an age claiming to be scientific.
Only in the last century did the idea spread that when Christopher Columbus set sail he was challenging a belief, entrenched in theology and enforced by the church, that the world was flat.
That belief, the story goes, was questioned only by a rebellious or scientifically advanced minority.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Blackmar Leads by 2  Phil Blackmar finished strongly yesterday to take a two-stroke lead over Mike Reid at the K Mart Greater Greensboro Open in North Carolina.
After a first-round fade that left him in a six-way tie for first on Thursday, Blackmar turned in a six-under-par 66 for a two-day total of 133.
Blackmar closed with two straight birdies, the last one a product of a 250-yard 3-wood shot to 25 feet of the pin.
Reid had six birdies and one bogey for a second-round 67 and a nine-under-par 135.
Chip Beck, who shot a 67, was alone in third at 136. (AP) 3 Tied for Lead: Dana Lofland, Tracy Kerdyk and an L.P.G.A. rookie, Florence Descampe, tamed the Hermitage Golf Course, tying the course record with seven-under-par 65's to share the first-round lead in the Sara Lee Classic in Nashville.
Descampe, 22 years old, had an eagle 3 at the par-5, 480-yard 11th. (AP) Snead and Nichols Lead Seniors: J. C. Snead and Bobby Nichols added a second-round 63 to their opening 61 for a 20-under-par 124 in the Liberty Mutual Legends of Golf, a two-man, better-ball seniors event in Austin, Tex. (AP) TENNIS  Krickstein in Semifinals


Corrections
Because of a typographical error, a letter April 15 by Roman Szporluk about Ukraine and the Crimea misstated that the Soviet Politburo was restored in 1956.
The Politburo, abolished in 1952, was restored in 1966.


U.S. Call to Cut Deficit Draws German Ire
Just two days before the Group of Seven's finance ministers are to meet here to discuss the world economy and aid to the former Soviet Union, the German Government lashed out at Washington's call for Germany to do more to spur world growth.
Using unusually harsh language, a senior German Finance Ministry official said today that the United States should not meddle in Germany's internal affairs.
He said American officials had made "false" and "one-sided" statements on Thursday when they urged Bonn to lower its budget deficit to give Germany's central bank some latitude to lower its interest rates.
Seeks Lower Rates
American officials have long asserted that the economic slowdown that Germany's high rates have caused in Europe will make it far harder for the states of Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union to make the transition to a market economy.
On Thursday, Treasury Under Secretary David C. Mulford called on Germany to move faster to lower its interest rates, saying that Germany's high rates were slowing growth in Germany, Europe and the rest of the world.


Corrections
Because of a typographical error, a letter April 20 on New York City water taxes by Alan Pekelner, director of an Upper West Side co-op, misstated the number of apartments in his building.
There are more than 100.


Suspension for Antley
Jockey CHRIS ANTLEY was suspended for seven days for what stewards ruled was careless riding Thursday at Aqueduct.
Necker Isle Queen, Antley's mount in the first race Thursday, was dropped to second after an apparent first-place finish.
Stewards said a review of videotape showed Necker Isle Queen had drifted out and impeded the second-place finisher, Bel Ray.
Bel Ray was moved up to first.


Memorial Service for Robert Alton Harris


Exiled Haiti Leader Urges Tougher Oil Sanctions
Calling for stronger sanctions against Haiti's military-backed Government, the nation's ousted President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, urged the world yesterday to establish "a real blockade" by tightening an oil embargo.
On a visit to New York, Father Aristide made his appeal at a news conference at City Hall after a meeting with Mayor David N. Dinkins.
Emphasizing that Father Aristide was Haiti's first democratically elected President, the Mayor pledged to "do all we can to assure that he is returned to office."


Dewey Albert, Astroland Founder, 84
Dewey Albert, the co-founder of Coney Island's Astroland amusement park and later the operator of its popular Cyclone roller coaster ride, died Wednesday in Miami, Fla.
Mr.
Albert was 84 years old.
He lived in Brooklyn and had a winter home in Lauderhill, Fla.
He died of cancer, a family spokesman said.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY A THREAT BY ROHATYN


You Get Maid Service, Meals and Quirkiness
The Hotel Olcott on West 72d Street in Manhattan is the kind of place where, in one room, a patient will confide to his analyst how bleak his life is, while, from an aspiring singer's room down the hall, will come wafting the cheery rhythms of "Everything's Coming Up Roses."
Tiny Tim lives there with his ukelele, as does the still regal Madame Nina Youshkevitch, with her late 1930's photographs of herself as a 16-year-old ballerina with the Ballet Russe de Monte Carlo.
The actor Martin Balsam is also in residence, with the Oscar he won for "A Thousand Clowns," one of the great valentines to New York City eccentrics.


U.S. PROGRESS SEEN IN REDUCING GASES
A new analysis by the Federal Government says that American emissions of gases believed to cause global warming may stabilize by the year 2000 at 1990 levels, because of steps to save energy or reduce pollution that are already planned or under way.
The analysis is significant because the Bush Administration has consistently opposed signing an international agreement that would commit the United States to achieve such a goal, partly because of concern about costs.


Terra Cotta
To the Editor:
In reference to your March 8 Posting headed "Preserving the Terra Cotta," I thought your readers would find it interesting to know that the previous building on this site at Park Row and Nassau Street, the World Building, was destroyed in a disastrous fire that took the lives of many people.


Losing Weight Can Mean Changing Your Life; No Bras Burned
To the Editor:
"A Growing Movement Fights Diets Instead of Fat" (front page, April 12) makes an important contribution on women's self-image and the anti-diet movement.


Earlier Revival
To the Editor:
I should like to add to William Kennedy's article, "The Guys Behind 'Guys and Dolls' "  [ April 12 ] , the 1976 Broadway revival of Frank Loesser's "Guys and Dolls" that starred an all-black cast.
The four leads -- James Randolph as Sky Masterson, Ernestine Jackson as Sister Sarah Brown, Robert Guillaume as Nathan Detroit and Norma Donaldson as Miss Adelaide -- were memorable, as was the entire cast.
ELMO J. MILLER Somerset, N. J.


School Districts Pool Funds for Investment
A CASH management program whose first five clients were Westchester school districts has expanded to 140 school districts and municipalities in several states -- all seeking to earn competitive returns on public investments by pooling their resources.
Sharing services for special education, insurance coverage and garbage removal is a common practice among school districts.
Extending this concept to investments was the brainchild of Francie Heller, a former speech teacher and school administrator who lives in New Rochelle.
She is now executive vice president of M.B.I.A.
Municipal Investors Service.


Western Aid Gone Astray
To the Editor:
Janine Wedel is right that Western charity to the former Communist bloc countries does not help much ("Getting It Right in Aid to Russia," Forum, April 5).
Last month I was a guide in Washington for a visiting delegation of people's deputies from Russia, Kazakhstan and Ukraine.
Members of the delegations, trying to save their hard currency, brought United States aid food parcels from Russia with them to eat in Washington.
The food that was supposed to be distributed to the poorest parts of the population ended up back in Washington being consumed by Russian parliamentarians.


A World Mark in 800-Meter Relay
The prodigal sons returned home today and broke a world record in the 98th annual Penn Relays.
Carl Lewis, the world record-holder in the men's 100-meter dash, comes from Willingboro, N.J., a half hour from Franklin Field.
Leroy Burrell, who held the record before Lewis, comes from Lansdowne, Pa., a suburb 20 minutes away.


Sculptured Form


On Health Insurance, Some States Are Going Back to Basics
Although health insurers see themselves merely as blameless messengers bearing the bad tidings of rapidly rising medical costs, that position promises scant protection from the heavy fire now directed at them by state government officials and members of Congress.
As recent developments in several states demonstrate, the pressure is mounting to control the costs and practices that have left an estimated 30 to 40 million Americans without health insurance.
State officials say that insurers and their employer-clients have much to answer for, notably the splintering of the national pool of the insured into thousands of groups that are often too small to bear the financial risk of even one member's serious illness.
Many insurers now agree that dividing the market, which was accomplished by offering lower rates to groups unlikely to need much care, has helped put coverage out of reach for many.


Plane Crash Findings Pose Questions
An inquiry into a fatal airplane crash in California on Wednesday has already yielded findings that raise safety questions about small companies that fly passengers for recreational purposes, a Federal investigator said today.
Sixteen people, including the pilot, died when the twin-engine plane, loaded with sky divers, crashed on takeoff from rural Perris Valley Airport, about 60 miles southeast of Los Angeles.
The other six people aboard the plane were injured.


Balance of Power
MOST PEOPLE who know me also know my friend David or know, at the very least, that someone with that name owes me $6,000.
When the meter first started running, I was living in Hoboken, N.J., and chipping away at freelance articles about pop stars, performance artists and vintage clothing stores.
David was ensconced in the empty, white house he rented in Connecticut while writing a novel he believed would shortly make him rich.
Our first transaction seemed wondrously simple: David needed some money so I wrote him a check.
Unfortunately, where male friendships are concerned at least, power relations can get awfully slippery.
A check, it turns out, is never just a check.
David and I have known each other for six years, and our egos have been doing a pas de deux just as long.
In 1986, while I was a junior at Brown University, I heard the extraordinarily distressing report that a student on my very campus had sold a short story to a certain high-minded weekly.
I had never read the magazine, but I knew it was not to be taken lightly.
The day the relevant issue arrived at a newsstand, I bought it, slumped down at the back of a lecture hall and pored over the story, which concerned a college student who owed someone a great deal of money.


For Vicente, 'There's No End' to Maturing
AT the age of 89, Esteban Vicente works each day in his studio, stands ramrod straight and looks more like an artist in his 60's.
At the opening of his latest show at the Berry-Hill Gallery in Manhattan, he greeted visitors for three hours without flagging.
"Esteban has eternal youth," another painter, Will Barnet, said.
"He must have been with Ponce de Leon."


'Heartbreak House' In Hartford
WHILE star-struck theatergoers fantasize about seeing Daniel Massey, Vanessa Redgrave and Paul Scofield in "Heartbreak House" in London, sensible ones will go to Hartford for a classy production by the Hartford Stage Company of what has been called Shaw's doomsday play.
"Heartbreak House," written during World War I, gathers in a moral void decadent idlers who are the cause, effect and prophetic account of a doomed civilization.
Even though Shaw said that the audience's "empty-headed laughter" during a performance defeated his "semi-tragic" intentions, the play is an artful blend of artifice and sobriety, of high comedy and foreboding.


Spring, a Fine Time To Hug a Tree
On an almost achingly beautiful day at my vacation home in the Poconos, I read "In the Natural State" by Pete Dunne (March 29).
I had just returned from a two-mile walk with my husband on the kind of morning that makes you feel grateful you're alive.
The naked branches of the trees swayed slightly in a gentle breeze.
The sun was warm on my face as we stopped to admire the deer that live in the woods surrounding our cottage.
A "no hunting" policy in this community renders them unafraid and even curious about people.
One approached within a foot of where I stood, and as I looked into its soft brown eyes, I wondered how anyone could derive pleasure at hunting down these graceful, defenseless creatures.


Making a Difference; Alamo's Big Drive to Lower Prices
Vacationing travelers may find plenty of reason to applaud Alamo Rent A Car's "Great American Rates," the program of sharply discounted uniform nationwide rates that the company announced last week.
For example, a Cadillac that rented for $36.99 a day in Miami and $64.99 in Chicago now goes for $29 at all 102 Alamo outlets.
Mid-size cars were reduced to $19 a day, and economy cars were cut to $15.
The only hitches: 24-hour advance booking is required and the renter must keep the car over a Saturday night.


Encore! Encore!
To the Editor:
I am one of the people referred to by Harry Kraut, Leonard Bernstein's longtime manager, who has asked many times over the years, "What ever happened to the Young People's Concerts?"  [ "Is Bernstein Passe on Television? Only in America," April 5 ] .
While these shows did not introduce me to classical music, they did introduce me to the thought that there were ideas behind it, that there was more there than just pretty melodies and stirring rhythms.
I still recall Bernstein's program on Liszt's "Faust Symphony" and the thrill of learning that the three movements were actually portraits of the three main characters in "Faust" and how Mephistopheles's theme is actually a variant (the dark side?) of Faust's theme.
This kind of discovery, that there are layers and hidden messages buried within music, is naturally exciting to young people.


A Housing Goal For Every Town
WESTCHESTER municipalities already struggling with the county's month-old plan to build 500 units of affordable housing can now consider the impact of 10 times that number, as they study a report released last week by a citizens advisory group.
The report specifies the share of affordable housing that each of the county's 43 municipalities should provide to meet the county's goal of providing 5,000 units of permanent affordable housing for households with incomes ranging from $22,000 to $52,000.


TODAY'S SECTIONS
Special Today: Good Health/Magazine Part 2


Anne LaBarr Lederer Is Married To Benjamin B. Duke in Connecticut
Anne LaBarr Lederer, a daughter of Richard Lederer of Concord, N.H., and Rhoda S. Lederer of New York, was married on Feb. 29 in Darien, Conn., to Benjamin Buchanan Duke, a son of A. St.
George Biddle Duke of Absarokee, Mont., and Jeanne Farmer Duke of Annandale, Va.
The Rev.
Ron Evans, a Congregational minister, performed the ceremony at the home of the bride's grandparents Mr. and Mrs.
Leland Lewis.
Mrs.
Duke, 26 years old, graduated from St.
Paul's School in Concord and Columbia University.
She is a doctoral student in psychology at the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father, formerly the head of the English department at St.
Paul's, is an author of books about the English language.
Her mother was an advertising manager for The Village Voice and 7 Days magazine in New York.


Bagley's 35 Help Celtics to 2-0 Lead
Celtics 119, Pacers 112
BOSTON, April 25 (AP) -- John Bagley matched his career high of 35 points and got 3 of his 15 assists on Boston's last three overtime baskets as the Celtics took a 2-0 playoff lead with a 119-112 victory today over the Indiana Pacers.


Contemporary Designs in a Historic Setting
THERE is a rich interplay between "Design '92," a show of contemporary crafts, and the 19th-century Prallsville Mills, where the show is now on view.
This setting of heavy wooden beams, broad plank floors and windows overlooking the Delaware River enhances the craft objects by emphasizing their materials.
Gears that formerly turned the millstone are still in place to serve as reminders that well-designed, functional objects usually have simple but handsome forms.


THE GUIDE
RUSSIA IN SONG AND POEM
Yevgeny Yevtushenko, the Russian poet, will take part in a three-day presentation of his work at Western Connecticut State University in Danbury.


Soccer for One


TALES FROM THE BABY FACTORY
In the field of infertility, the world of high-tech medicine tends to pay little attention to the emotional factors that can affect hormonal and reproductive functioning that may be blocking conception.
In the last decade, there have been several studies exploring the complex interactive nature of emotions and physiology unique to each individual.
The studies indicate that every physiological state can be influenced, positively or negatively, by a person's emotional state.


Street Fashion; Animal Look-Alikes That Never Hiberate
Leopard spots, once limited to fall and winter fashion, have become year-round staples.
Leopards and other spotted cats are protected under endangered-species and wildlife laws, but the fashion world is happy with realistic imitations printed, stenciled and knitted on every conceivable fabric: thick, plush fake fur, say, or diaphanous chiffon.
One of the most popular styles is the knitted leopard pattern on a honey-colored background from Azzedine Alaia (top right and bottom, far left).
Many women are wearing their leopard-patterned accessories as exotic accents to black clothes.
Others are flinging leopard scarfs over beige jackets.
A young man in a white suit even carried a leopard-print knapsack.


REALLY COOL CARS
I think the marketers of the hydrogen-powered car should keep one point in mind.
The day the consumer becomes dissatisfied with the performance of these vehicles will be the day they call them "hydrogen bombs." But right now, there's no need to go ballistic over it.
PAUL B. TURNER Suffern, N.Y.


George IV of England, Sovereign Collector and Showman
Remembered more as a passionate collector than as a ruler of the British empire, George IV was a man of sumptuous taste.
His flair was demonstrated in the 18th-century French treasures he bought to fill Carlton House, his London mansion.
In 1820, after becoming king, he demolished Carlton House, because it was too small for his exquisitely inlaid cabinets, Sevres dinner services and gilded clocks, and began to significantly enlarge Buckingham Palace.
But he died in 1830, before the renovation was completed.
Now scores of George IV's finest possessions are assembled in the Queen's Gallery at Buckingham Palace here in "Carlton House: The Past Glories of George IV's Palace," the largest exhibition of this collection ever held.
The show, which opened in January 1991 and remains through October, covers a 40-year period when, as the Prince of Wales and later the Prince Regent, George was on a nonstop shopping spree.
During that time he furnished both Carlton House and the more exotic Brighton Pavilion in Brighton.


Supply of Stocks Rises to Meet Demand for Cash
Supply will rise to meet any demand.
That may not be true for all businesses, or for all time.
But it certainly helps explain what has been going on in the stock market in 1992.


Deborah Corio Has Wedding
Deborah Anne Corio, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Raymond Corio of Manhasset, L.I., was married yesterday in Mitchellville, Md., to William Emil Danner Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Danner of Bethel Park, Pa.
The Rev.
Henry Brinton performed the Presbyterian ceremony at the Newton White Mansion.
Mrs.
Danner, 24 years old, is an account coordinator with CMF &amp; Z Public Relations in Washington.
She graduated from the University of Maryland, as did her husband, and from the Fashion Institute of Technology.
Her father is an assistant to the sports editor at The New York Times.


Ralph Batch, Leader in Creating Lotteries for States, Is Dead at 79
Ralph F. Batch, a pioneer in the development of state lotteries, died on Monday at the Northfield Manor Nursing Home in West Orange, N.J.
He was 79 years old and lived in Short Hills, N.J.
He died of complications from a stroke, his family said.


Revival for Old-Style Pop Art
MONDAY -- Michael O'Donoghue, a collector of paint-by-numbers pictures, celebrated the 40th anniversary of the art kits with an exhibition of 225 of his pictures, on view through today at the Bridgewater/Lustberg Gallery at 529 Broadway (Spring Street).
There are serious colletors of these pre-Pop Art pictures, which were the brainchild of Richard Hess who, in 1952 at the age of 18, created the first kit for the Palmer Paint Company.
The fashion designer Todd Oldham was at the opening with a woman wearing one of his jackets with beaded paint-by-numbers pictures on it.
The pictures have been selling at flea markets and garage sales for 25 cents to $5.
TUESDAY -- The research and education programs of the New York City division of the American Cancer Society benefited from a dinner-dance and silent auction at the Supper Club.


CULTURAL BAGGAGE
Ehrenreich is pleased that her children do not feel deprived because they were brought up in a nonreligious home and do not have an "ethnic or religious identity." But why does she agree with them that "the world would be a better place if nobody else did, either?"
I have often encountered this attitude, always in people with a weak or nonexistent religious or ethnic identity.
I have heard some people referred to as being "too Jewish," and I have heard some say that if blacks did not isolate themselves so much, they would be doing themselves a favor.
These comments display an ignorance of the experience of minorities in our society and of how integral their religion or their ethnicity is to their identities.


Jennifer Greenman to Wed in July
Mr. and Mrs.
Frederic E. Greenman of Wellesley, Mass., have announced the engagement of their daughter Jennifer Susan Greenman to Christopher Andrew White, a son of Prof. and Mrs.
James J. White of Ann Arbor, Mich.
A July wedding is planned.
Ms.
Greenman, 26 years old, graduated from Amherst College, as did her fiance, and is a candidate for an M.B.A. at New York University.
Her father is a senior vice president and the general counsel of New England Electric System in Westborough, Mass.


The Tuberculosis Failure
While public officials napped for the last decade, tuberculosis, once thought headed for elimination in the United States, surged back in a new and more dangerous form.
TB's return was accelerated by the spread of the AIDS virus, and the overlap in epidemics has greatly complicated efforts to control both diseases.
Belatedly, Federal and local officials, who had been fixated on the AIDS crisis, have now begun to respond to the new threat from tuberculosis.
But their latest proposals for controlling the disease fall far short of what's needed.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
TAKING BACK MY LIFE By Nancy Ziegenmeyer with Larkin Warren. Summit, $20.


Review/Music; Mambo Becomes King On Mondays at S.O.B.'s
S.O.B.'s, which is already a simulated tropical dance hall, now compounds the fantasy on Monday nights.
For its Mambo Monday series, it becomes the Club Tropica, with pink flamingoes out on the sidewalk, goldfish swimming in snifters on the tables, and a house band, the Club Tropica Orchestra, on stage wearing uniforms with frilly sleeves and playing mambos and rhumbas.
While the Village Gate's long-running Salsa Meets Jazz series, also on Monday nights, has built an audience of aficionados, Mambo Mondays is for newcomers who might have seen "The Mambo Kings." It offers mambo lessons (from 6 to 8 P.M.) before the performance and flirtatious, hip-swiveling dance routines by the Eddie Torres troupe at the end of each set.


Topics of The Times; Merciful End on Broadway
Japan-bashing appears in many places -- political speeches, books, car advertisements.
But it's disappearing from Broadway.
"Shimada," a play that mercifully opened and closed within three days, was a shallow drama about a Japanese company that buys an Australian bicycle company.
"Shimada," a hit in Australia in 1987, had a stellar cast, including Ellen Burstyn, Ben Gazzara and Mako.
Its theme, however, was undisguised xenophobia: Japan will someday rule the world.


Michael Bailey to Marry Laura Bull
Dr.
Sherman M. Bull and Dr.
Marcia Bull McCrum, both of New Canaan, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Laura Catharine Bull, to Michael Robert Bailey, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Wendell Bailey of Willow Springs, Mo.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Bull, 28 years old, is a vice president of the LCP Group, a New York real-estate investment concern.
She graduated from Middlebury College.
Her father is a surgeon in private practice in Stamford.
Her mother is chief of cardiology at Stamford Hospital.


Some Avoid Treasuries
For investors who want to apply ethical criteria even in investing cash they may need soon, there are "socially responsible" money funds.
The Working Assets Money Market Fund, for example, avoids United States Treasury securities, "which are used primarily to finance a Federal deficit caused in part by wasteful defense spending," its prospectus says.
It favors issues of the Federal Farm Credit System, used to finance agriculture, and of the Student Loan Marketing Association.
Calvert Social Investment Money Market Fund in Washington and Working Assets in San Francisco are expensive.
Calvert's charged expenses equaled 0.88 percent of assets and Working Assets' were 1.04 percent, compared with 0.63 percent for money funds on average at the end of 1991.
That helps to reduce their yield.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: President's Family; One of Bush's Campaign Advisers Is Also His Son
The crowd at the Rotary Club's weekly luncheon in this small East Texas county seat was up and applauding before the guest speaker had a chance to say a word.
With an aw-shucks toss of his head, the man at the podium said, "When you are Nolan Ryan's boss and Barbara Bush's son, people treat you the nicest ways."


Counting Iran's New Arms Is the Easy Part
Iran is rearming, but what does that mean?
Does it signal a relentless quest by Iran to regain preeminence in the Persian Gulf, and thus to impose its will on the region?
Or is Iran simply assembling enough of a military force to deter aggression by its neighbors?
The answer probably lies somewhere in between.
It is difficult to divine a country's intentions from its arms purchases, but intelligence officials are trying to do just that by scrutinizing every delivery, sale, contract and secret visit for clues about Iran's military potential.
Interviews here and in Teheran, with officials of a number of countries, illustrate a range of views on the usefulness of Iran's arms purchases, on Iran's military ambitions and on whether the country is justified in rearming at all.


Player Hurt in Accident
An L.P.G.A. tour golfer, CATHY GERRING, was burned yesterday afternoon when a flame from an alcohol burner shot across a buffet table as she waited in line, officials of the Sara Lee Classic tournament in Nashville said.


Easy Ways to Be Sure Mowers Start Again
UNLESS engine-powered yard-care equipment like mowers, string trimmers, shredders and garden tillers are stored and maintained with care, the day will eventually come when, on pulling the starting cord or turning the key, nothing will happen.
Before starting an engine that has been stored over the winter, check that the crankcase contains oil.
If it does not, fill it with fresh oil of the type specified in the owner's manual.
If the manual cannot be found, ask at a lawnmower- or small-engine service center about which oil to use.


Billboards: Weapons of Guerrilla Art
What some people might call mischief, six artists here call "guerrilla action."
They created a statue of Senator Jesse Helms of North Carolina, then smashed it on the steps of the United States Capitol during an anti-censorship rally.
They once chained a 46-foot banner of headless suits across Broadway and Wall Street, halting morning rush-hour traffic to protest "the mindless omnipotence of corporate America."


Bridge
The world's oldest tournament bridge player died in Torquay, England, in November at the age of 105.
Her name was Julia Galt Chadwick, and she was a remarkable woman.
On her 100th birthday she walked a mile and then concentrated fiercely for four hours in a mixed pair championship.
She was born in London in 1886 and married a Church of England curate, Perceval Chadwick, just before the outbreak of World War I. A decade later she played whist and belonged to a card club, although, she explained in old age, "in those days it was not proper for any lady, particularly a vicar's wife, to play cards at a club."


The View From: Kensico Cemetery; Notables Buried in a Place of Surprises
THE world knows them for their works or for the special ways they made their mark while alive.
But for county residents, the famous who are buried here are also neighbors in death.
Their permanent resting place is the Kensico Cemetery, just off the Bronx River Parkway in the hills of central Westchester.
Kensico's late greats may not have lived in the county, but they or their relatives were attracted to the area.
The grass, the trees, the proximity to highways -- these are the attributes cited in cemetery brochures that stress the serenity, not to mention the convenience, of grave sites here.


Data Update
NATIONAL HOUSING TRENDS
*4*(In thousands of units, seasonally adjusted annual rates)
Feb. 92
Feb. 91
Change
Starts
1,283
1,008
+27.3%
Completions
1,051
1,097
- 4.1%
Sales
613
490
+25.1%
*4*Source: Census Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
8.94
9.00
9.75
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.18
6.20
7.41
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
8.80
8.85
9.58
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.91
5.98
7.31
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
8.82
8.93
9.58
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.06
6.16
7.20
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
9.06
9.10
9.95
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.56
6.59
7.70
*4*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
4.14
4.25
6.26
National Mortgage Contract Rate
8.15
8.15
9.26
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes.  (Source: HSH Associates)


Seeing Bali as a House Guest
DRESSED in a sarong, Anak Agung Anom waited for me in her family compound, which was my home for five days in Bali last August.
I was getting a lesson on the porch of her house, which doubled as a dance studio and was decorated with poster-size photographs of her three daughters -- each in a different dance pose.
As we began the lesson, Anom took her position behind me, guiding my wrists and arms through the difficult movements, and chanting rhythmically in my ear, "ta TONG, ta TONG" This hands-on method has been used for centuries in Bali to teach the courtly and highly stylized legong dance.
But I soon understood why it is traditionally mastered in youth: while my confidence waxed under Anom's tutelage, my limbs obstinately strayed each time she let go.
When I sought out home stays on a recent trip to Bali, I hoped to avoid large commercial resorts and sample a low-key side of the island and its people.
I never imagined that I would wind up taking lessons from a former legong dancer, or occupy a private bungalow perched on the edge of a rice paddy.


Diary of a Bournonville Banquet
As Yves Montand once remarked about love affairs, nothing replaces the passion of the beginning.
In 1979, foreign critics and balletomanes at the Bournonville Centenary Festival in Denmark were smitten with the unsuspected delights of August Bournonville's 19th-century ballets -- some never seen abroad.
The frisson of discovery could not be reproduced for everyone at the Royal Danish Ballet's second Bournonville Festival, held March 28 to April 4, again in Copenhagen's Royal Theater.
Yet the entire event, brilliantly organized by Frank Andersen, the company's director since 1985, was even richer, and a sustained love of Bournonville explained why so many 1979 veterans returned.
"Others dance with their feet; here they dance with their body and spirit," an Italian colleague declared.
A Frenchman murmured: "It's the bella danza. You don't see it elsewhere."


Scott Cornish to Wed Lori Lavelle
Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Lavelle of Secaucus, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Lori Ellen Lavelle to Scott Charles Cornish, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
C.
Samuel Cornish of Brockport, N.Y.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss Lavelle, 30 years old, manages the photography department for Nickelodeon's Nick at Nite, a late-night television program.
She graduated from Monmouth College.
Her father is an engineer for American Telephone and Telegraph in Newark.
Her mother, Diane Lavelle, is a consultant to the New Jersey chapter of Child Assault Prevention, a nonprofit child-abuse awareness program based in Trenton.


Dickerson to Raiders? Whoa, Say the Colts
AL DAVIS, the owner of the Los Angeles Raiders, has specialized in reclamation projects and disgruntled Indianapolis Colts running back ERIC DICKERSON wants out of Indianapolis so badly that he would reportedly consider a million-dollar salary cut.
Sounds like a perfect match, no?
No, says Colts General Manager JIM IRSAY.
Irsay denied Friday that any trade was in the works and said that MARVIN DEMOFF, Dickerson's agent, had told the Colts that Dickerson would report to minicamp next month.


Red Sox Are the Subject of a Custody Battle
The nighttime scene has the stark hues of an Edward Hopper painting: the chartreuse and tan of the diamond, the clean whites of the home team, the red of the pulsating Citgo sign beyond the famous left-field wall.
Another season of baseball has begun in Fenway Park in Boston, and despite the bluster of a New England April, the fans are out in force.
After all, they have endured fates far worse than a little freezing rain.


CAMPUS LIFE: Minnesota; Cultural Center For the Disabled Prompts Debate
Disabled students at the University of Minnesota are awaiting university approval to open their own cultural center, which they describe as the first of its kind in the nation.
The plan raises questions about the role of student cultural centers and whether people with disabilities share a unique culture.
Four cultural centers already exist on campus, all for ethnic minorities.


Hollywood Goes Batty for Vampires
Horror.
Blood lust.
Eroticism.
The promise of eternal life.
Welcome to the dark, alluring world of the vampire.
Since the 1930's, when a caped Bela Lugosi swooped onto screens, declaring, "I am Count Dracula. I bid you welcome," that world has been a familiar movie backdrop.
But vampires -- a veritable staple of the horror genre -- have historically materialized in B-movies and, more recently, direct-to-video quickies.
Now the genre is getting a shot of fresh blood with some high-profile projects from major studios.
Consider Columbia Pictures' $40 million "Bram Stoker's Dracula," directed by Francis Ford Coppola.


The Anatomy of Joy
We are a nation born of Puritanism and bottle-fed on priggishness, so perhaps it is no surprise that science has applied far more zeal to the anatomy of melancholy than to understanding unfettered joy.
Researchers have analyzed the stress response in exquisite detail.
They know that perpetual surges of adrenaline, noradrenaline and cortisol sear the body like a drizzle of acid, and they believe that chronic stress, along with its loyal comrades hostility anger and depression, can sicken and even kill us.
Scientists suspect the sensations like optimism, curiosity and rapture - the giddy, goofy desire to throw wide your arms and serenade the sweetness of spring - not only make life worth living, but also make life last longer.
They think that euphoria unrelated to any ingested substance is good for the body, that laughter is protective against the corrosive impact of stress, and that joyful people outlive their bilious, whining counterparts.
Researchers who followed a group of medical students over 25 years found that among those who had rated on the easy going end of a test measuring temperament, only 2 percent had died by age 50.
By contrast, 14 percent of those who had scored as churlish and hostile had died.
By what happiness is healthy, and what the body is actually doing when it is exulting itself, science has only the most suggestive of clues.
Endorpohins, the brain's indigenous version of opium, and the chemicals reputedly behind the runner's high, are turning out to have less to do with joy than with easing the perception of pain.
Another compound receiving some attention is oxytocin, a small hormone secreted by the pituitary gland and the possible mediator of feelings of satisfaction and harmony.
But most experiments thus far have been limited to rodents, and scholars of behavioral medicine seem reluctant to hunt for the human version of a cuddle drug.
"Our focus is always on what's making people sick so we can fix it," says Dr.
Redford B. Williams of Duke University Medical Center.
Sadly, too many scientists describe happiness from a negative perspective.
By this logic, happiness is healthy because it spares us the enfeebling impact of anxiety or inspires us to cultivate such worthy habits as eating vegetables, avoiding liquor and cigarettes, and sleeping eight hours a night.
Yet even the grimmest researcher knows that real joy is not the lack of stress but its own decidedly active state of possession, the ripe and gorgeous feeling that we are among the blessed celebrants of life.
"You have a delicious, as opposed to a vicious, spiral of emotions," says Dr.
William F. Fry Jr., a psychiatrist at Stamford University Medical Center.
Researchers complain that one reason they have trouble understanding happiness is that it is a difficult emotion to recapitulate in the laboratory.
"If we could come up with an easy experimental manipulation to make subjects happy," says Dr.
Williams, "we wouldn't be sitting around here studying anger and depression."
One state of joy that scientists have been able to capture in the laboratory is laughter.
Sustained hilarity, it turns out, is among the more agreeable forms of aerobics.
The muscles of the abdomen, neck, and shoulders rapidly tighten and relax; heart rate and blood pressure increase; inhalation and expiration become spasmodic and deeper.
When laughter subsides, blood pressure and pulse are likely to fall lower, often more salubrious levels than before the merriment began.
"One hundred laughs is equivalent to 10 minutes of rowing," says Dr.
Fry.
Laughter also helps gird against discomfort.
In an experiment at Allegheny College in Meadville, PA., a group of students was shown a videotape of Bill Cosby while a control group viewed a videotape on plants in hanging baskets.
Both groups received mild but increasingly insistent electrical shocks and were told to signal when the pain grew too great to bear.
Perhaps to nobody's astonishment, the Cosby watchers were able to endure a significantly higher jolt than were the plant viewers - although how much of the latter group's agony resulted from the tedium of their enforced entertainment cannot be vouched for.
Even when studying jocularity, researchers cannot help but consider its downside.
Among the relatively scant listings on laughter in the scientific literature are an inordinate number about "pathological laughter," cases of psychiatric patients who laugh to mask miseries, or brain-damaged patients who laugh for no reason.
One paper describes a man who arrived at an emergency room in Ohio after having accidentally inhaled a mild insecticide.
The patient had no symptoms beyond slight numbness, tremors and uncontrollable laughter.
Doctors could find no physical or neurological damage, but the man continued to laugh for 55 minutes, to the point where he complained his abdominal muscles were killing him.
He was given a tranquilizer intravenously, his laughter ceased, and the doctors sent him home, no doubt with frowns of triumph plastered firmly on their faces.


Dinkins Barnstorms, and the Barn Burns
In what initially appeared to be a major turnaround for financially strapped New York City, Mayor David N. Dinkins spent much of last week announcing good budget news in a political barnstorming act that took him from the Bronx to Brooklyn and back to City Hall.
In a series of optimistic speeches, he announced that libraries would be open longer hours, that new health clinics would be built, new tuberculosis programs would be created, and other improvements in city services would be made.
But the recovery abruptly dissipated by week's end when the Dinkins administration, seeking to quell growing euphoria over the news, said that despite a big budget surplus the city was still in poor fiscal health and could not afford to share any of its windfall with the many constituencies who emerged to lay claim to it.


He'll Always Have Vienna
ON MOZART
A Paean for Wolfgang.
Being a Celestial Colloquy, an Opera Libretto, a Film Script, a Schizophrenic Dialogue, a Bewildered Rumination, a Stendhalian Transcription, and a Heartfelt Homage Upon the Bicentenary of the Death of Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart.
By Anthony Burgess. 160 pp.
New York: Ticknor &amp; Fields. $19.95.


Wall Street; At HMO America, the Drag of Rebuilding Reserves
The coming week should be interesting for investors in HMO America, a Chicago-based health maintenance organization, which has been battered by market uncertainty about an overdue actuarial report on the adequacy of its 1991 reserves.
A company spokeswoman said on Friday that the report had been filed with state regulators on Wednesday and entailed no changes in 1991 figures.
First-quarter results, released on Friday, showed that reserves had been increased from year-end 1991 levels.


Italy's President, Like Premier, Quits
Italy's political turmoil deepened today when the country's quixotic President, Francesco Cossiga, announced his resignation a day after Prime Minister Giulio Andreotti also quit.
The nation was in effect left leaderless in the hands of the paralyzed and fractured Parliament that was voted into office early this month.


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester; Can Revenue Ease Resistance to Industry?
THE rural Town of Oxford, just over the Fairfield line in New Haven County, maintains a low profile.
Its 8,685 residents enjoy 33 square miles of unspoiled countryside and want to keep it that way.
But next month, when the new town budget is proposed, they will face a projected 50 percent rise in taxes from the current 21.73 mills to around 31.
It could change their minds about continuing to resist industrial development.


Anne Person to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas Person of Syosset, L.I., have announced October wedding plans for their daughter Anne Kasper Person and Thomas Allan Worcester, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas Worcester of The Woodlands, Tex.


Senior Admission
To the Editor: In the Letters to the Editor of the Dec. 29, 1991, Travel section there appears a disingenuous excuse of the Italian Government Travel Office for not providing senior discounts, freely available to European nationals, to Americans visiting museums, etc. in Italy, namely that they are provided on a reciprocal basis to countries that admit Italian seniors.
When I visited Theodoric's tomb in Ravenna, I experienced this discrimination; my cousin, an over-60 British subject, was admitted at a discount and I paid the full fee.


Children's Books
GHOST CATCHER
By Dennis Haseley.
Illustrated by Lloyd Bloom.
Unpaged.
New York: A Laura Geringer Book/HarperCollins Publishers:


Surgery for Pagliarulo
Minnesota third baseman MIKE PAGLIARULO will undergo surgery Tuesday to have a bone fragment removed from his right hand and will be lost to the Twins for at least four weeks.


Easy Ways to Be Sure Mowers Start Again
UNLESS engine-powered yard-care equipment like mowers, string trimmers, shredders and garden tillers are stored and maintained with care, the day will eventually come when, on pulling the starting cord or turning the key, nothing will happen.
Before starting an engine that has been stored over the winter, check that the crankcase contains oil.
If it does not, fill it with fresh oil of the type specified in the owner's manual.
If the manual cannot be found, ask at a lawnmower- or small-engine service center about which oil to use.


The Soul Is Part Of the Action
TURTLE MOON
By Alice Hoffman. 255 pp. New York: G. P. Putnam's Sons. $21.95.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on April 5 about help for the Long Island economy misattributed plans for a study on converting the economy from reliance on the military.
Russell M. Moore, a professor at Hofstra University (not Henry Schein Inc., a medical-supply manufacturer), will examine strategies of American companies and compare them with enterprises in Russia and Ukraine.


Editors' Note
A front-page article last Sunday profiled Iran's President, Ali Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani.
In late editions the headline said Mr.
Rafsanjani had sketched a vision "of a moderate, modern Iran."
As the article noted, Mr.
Rafsanjani appears to be trying to reach out to foreign investors and to show the world that he is a reliable leader.
At the same time, he has said he does not seek to "Westernize" Iran, and he has continued harsh revolutionary policies and has refused to rescind the death sentence imposed against the writer Salman Rushdie for "blaspheming" Islam in his novel "The Satanic Verses."


Cease-Fire Holds in Yugoslav Republic
A tenuous cease-fire held across most of Bosnia and Herzegovina today, but a month of fighting has left Western diplomats and relief officials pessimistic about future prospects in the former Yugoslav republic, including a refugee crisis that is being described as one of the most serious in Europe since World War II.
In Sarajevo, the Bosnian capital, where the cease-fire was negotiated by a European peace mission on Thursday, sporadic gunfire that broke out overnight ceased by daybreak today, encouraging many of the city's 560,000 residents to venture into streets that had been the scene of heavy fighting earlier in the week.


Body Builders Resist Law Against Steroids
ALTHOUGH a new law is aimed at body builders who peddle anabolic steroids, no one at the hard-core gymnasiums is worked up over it.
"The cops have got their hands full with chasing down cocaine," a body builder who insisted on anonymity said.
"They're too busy to worry about steroid deals."


In Buffalo, Tricky Political Ground
Early last week, as hundreds of demonstrators on both sides of the abortion issue gathered here, Elizabeth Holtzman stepped off the campaign trail for a morning of solidarity.
Arm in arm with dozens of be-jeaned abortion rights advocates, the elegantly dressed New York City Comptroller -- who is one of four Democrats seeking the United States Senate seat held by Alfonse M. D'Amato, a Republican -- announced that she had come to show support for women's rights and to help keep anti-abortion protesters from blocking access to Buffalo's downtown clinics.


Rounds and Rounds They Go, So Get Set
When the National Football League draft kicks off today in Manhattan, a flurry of trades and surprises is expected as each of the 28 teams tries to cash in on an offering complete with big-play players and potential stars.
Of course, the eventual flops are there, too.
N.F.L. teams hope to avoid mistakes, and the fact that 34 college juniors have entered this draft helps to make it especially deep through the first three rounds.
Few would be surprised if 8 to 10 juniors are selected in the first round or if the top five picks are all juniors.


Social Events
La Mama Celebration
April 27 -- For 30 years La Mama Experimental Theater Club has been a creative force, with its innovative works and support for full-time resident companies.
Ellen Stewart, La Mama's founder and artistic director, will be honored at a benefit at the Ballroom, Fifth Avenue at Ninth Street.
Cocktails at 7 P.M. will be followed by dinner and entertainment.
Tickets, $200, from (212) 254-6024.
New Play and a Party
April 27 -- Plays for Living, founded by actors to portray family and community problems, is celebrating its 50th anniversary with a premiere and party benefit at the Hudson Theater at the Hotel Macklowe.
"Still Growing," by Mark Alton Brown and Dee LaDuke with Philip Bosco and Elaine Stritch will be performed at 6:30 P.M., followed by a cocktail party and dinner.
Tickets, $150 for performance and cocktails, $350 for performance, cocktails and dinner, from (212) 689-1616.
Helping Former Prisoners
April 28 -- The 148-year-old Women's Prison Association and Home seeks to help women recently released from prison to become self-sufficient and re-enter society.
A benefit dinner for the organization's additional programs of helping former prisoners with AIDS will be held at the delegates' dining room at the United Nations.
Cocktails at 6:30.
Tickets, $250, from (212) 535-8977.
To Aid Parkinson's Patients
April 29 -- The 1992 awards dinner and dance of the Parkinson's Disease Foundation will be held at the Pierre starting with cocktails at 7.
John Catsimatidis, chief executive of the Red Apple Group, which runs food-store chains, will be honored.
Robert Merrill and Page Morton Black will entertain.
Black tie.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 735-0759.
For Guild for the Blind
April 29 -- The Metropolitan Division of the Jewish Guild for the Blind will hold a party at Au Bar, 41 East 58th Street, for single men and women in their 30's, 40's and 50's.
From 7 to 10 P.M., there will be an auction, open bar, hors d'oeuvres and dancing.
Tickets, $110, from (212) 769-6239, or $125 at the door.
National Health Watch
April 29 -- Health Watch, which seeks to improve the health and longevity of blacks and other minority groups, is holding an awards dinner and dance at the Starlight Roof of the Waldorf-Astoria, starting with cocktails at 7 P.M.
Tickets, $350, from (212) 972-2260.
Junior League Boat Ride
April 29 -- The Junior League of Brooklyn will celebrate its 82d year of volunteer work with a ride aboard the Andrew Fletcher, a paddle-wheeler.
Boarding is at 8 P.M. at Pier 16 at the South Street Seaport Museum.
The boat ride around the harbor with dancing, desserts and champagne ends at 10:30 P.M.
Tickets, $50, from (718) 624-3288, or $55 at the boat.
Party for Class Company
April 29 -- To support its programs for developing new playwrights, directors and actors, the Manhattan Class Company will hold a benefit starting with the 8 P.M. performance of "Death and the Maiden" at the Brooks Atkinson Theater, followed by a cocktail reception at B. Smith's, Eighth Avenue and 47th Street.
Tickets, $125, from (212) 727-7722.
Maurice Sendak Honored
April 29 -- The Graham-Windham child- and family-welfare agency, founded 186 years ago, will honor the children's illustrator and author Maurice Sendak at its annual awards dinner.
The evening, with cocktails at 7 followed by dinner and dancing at the Plaza, will benefit renovation of the agency's 90-year-old residences in Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y.
Black tie.
Tickets, $325, from (212) 529-6445, extension 318.
Columbia Medical Salute
April 30 -- The Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center will hold a black-tie dinner and dance at the Waldorf-Astoria to benefit its Neurological Institute.
Maureen McGovern will entertain.
Cocktails at 7 P.M.
Tickets, $350, from (212) 972-2268.
Publishing Help for Diabetics
April 30 -- The New York chapter of the Juvenile Diabetes Foundation will hold its annual black-tie Publishing Industry Ball at the Pierre.
Cocktails at 6:30 P.M. will be followed by dinner, dancing and entertainment by Rob Bartlett, a comedian.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 689-2860. 'Frankenstein' Helps Charity
April 30 -- Family and Children's Services of Stamford, Darien and New Canaan, Conn., will benefit from a reception from 6 to 7:30 P.M. amid the sprawling household clutter, valuable and otherwise, of United House Wrecking in Stamford, followed by an 8 P.M. showing of Mel Brooks's "Young Frankenstein" at the State Cinema in Stamford.
Tickets, $20 for reception and movie, $10 for movie alone, from (203) 655-0655.
Vision Fund Banquet
April 30 -- The Vision Fund of America is holding its annual awards banquet to benefit the Lighthouse National Center for Vision and Aging.
Cocktails at 6:30 P.M. precede dinner, dancing and entertainment by Alan King.
Tickets, $350, from (212) 808-0077.
Children's Aid Fund-Raiser
May 1 -- A black-tie benefit for the Children's Aid Society's mobile health unit, which provides preventive health services to more than 10,000 of New York City's poor children each year, will be held at the Board Room Club on the 41st floor at 270 Park Avenue (48th Street).
There will be an open bar, hors d'oeuvres, dancing and passes to the Country Club after the benefit from 9 P.M. to 1 A.M.
Tickets, $75, from (212) 949-4934, $90 at the door.
Dance at Art in General
May 1 -- While its state financing has been cut in half, the number of budding artists seeking to show their works at Art in General has doubled, so the gallery is holding a fund-raising party.
There will be dancing to the Marvelettes as well as D.J. music from 8:30 P.M. to 1 A.M. around the corner from the gallery at 80 White Street, two blocks south of Canal Street between Broadway and Lafayette Street.
Tickets, $30 at the door.
Information: (212) 219-0473.
D.A.R.
School Party
May 1 -- The New York chapter of the Daughters of the American Revolution will have a cocktail buffet from 6:30 to 8:30 P.M. at the English-Speaking Union, 16 East 69th Street.
The party is for the D.A.R.'s educational programs, including the support it provides to two schools in the Appalachians in South Carolina and Alabama and financial awards to graduates of the military academies.
Tickets, $25, from (212) 685-5734; $30 at the door.
Afternoon Tea and Hats
May 1 -- Tea and an auction of 50 hats by milliners and artists will be held at the Odeon, 145 West Broadway (Thomas Street), from 4 to 6 P.M. to benefit the Under One Roof theater company.
Tickets, $50, from (212) 219-1166.
Ella Fitzgerald Concert
May 2 -- The historic and community preservation work of the New York Landmarks Conservancy will benefit from a 7 P.M. cocktail party in the Grand Lounge of Radio City Music Hall, followed by the 8 P.M.
Ella Fitzgerald concert in the hall and concluding with a 10 P.M. supper in the Pegasus Suite of the Rainbow Room.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 921-9070.
Pan Asian Theater Benefit
May 2 -- The Pan Asian Repertory Theater will celebrate its 15th anniversary with a benefit opening-night performance of "Fairy Bones" by Laurence Yep.
The 8 P.M. performance will be followed by a champagne reception at the theater, Playhouse 46, in St.
Clement's Church, 423 West 46th Street.
Tickets, $50, from (212) 505-5655.
Dance for Boys Harbor
May 2 -- The junior committee of Boys Harbor, an educational youth agency for boys and girls in Harlem and the Bronx, will hold a Salute to Spring dance from 9 P.M. to 1 A.M. at the Unitarian Universalist Church at 76th Street and Central Park West.
Tickets, $35, from (212) 427-2244; $45 at the door.
Tada Birthday Party
May 3 -- Tada, an ensemble theater company whose performers range in age from 6 to 17, is holding an eighth-birthday benefit party at La Belle Epoque, 827 Broadway (12th Street), from 6 to 10 P.M.
There will be an open bar, buffet dinner and entertainment by the company as well as several grown-up Broadway performers.
Tickets, $125, from (212) 627-1732.
Downtown-Midtown Party
May 3 -- The New Museum will celebrate its 15th anniversary with a cocktail party and auction from 5 to 7 P.M. at the museum, 583 Broadway (Houston Street).
Guests will then be bused to the Rainbow Room for dinner, a continuation of the auction of contemporary works, and dancing until midnight.
Black tie.
Tickets, $100 for party at museum, $350 including party at Rainbow Room, from (212) 219-1222.
Cinematic Greenwich Village
May 3 -- The Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation will hold a champagne benefit highlighting Hollywood's portrayals of the area.
The party will be from 5 to 8 P.M. at Industria Superstudio, 775 Washington Street, between West 12th and Jane Streets.
Tickets, $50, from (212) 924-3895.
Aiding Mental Health
May 3 -- The Riverdale Mental Health Association will hold its annual spring benefit at Tavern on the Green.
Cocktails at 6:30 P.M. will be followed by dinner, dancing and entertainment.
Tickets, $175, from (212) 796-5300.
Afternoon for the Family
May 3 -- The Friends of the Children's Art Carnival, a 22-year-old community outreach program of the Museum of Modern Art, will offer music, magic, art, food and other attractions from noon to 6 P.M. at the Manhattan Center, 311 West 34th Street.
Tickets, $45 for adults, $20 for children under 12, from (212) 234-4093, or $50 for adults, $20 for children, at the door.
Volunteers for Earth Action
May 3 -- Ed Begley Jr. and Robert F. Kennedy Jr. are among those to be honored at a benefit awards dinner of Earth Action, a three-year-old volunteer group concerned with environmental and social issues.
The benefit starts at 4 P.M. at Bridgewaters at the South Street Seaport.
Tickets, $75, from (212) 563-5991.
Coalition for Shelter
May 4 -- The Neighborhood Coalition for Shelter, an Upper East Side organization of religious and community groups and individuals that maintains two residences for homeless people, is holding a theater benefit starting with a buffet from 5:30 to 7:45 P.M. at B. Smith's, Eighth Avenue and 47th Street.
Guests will then walk two blocks to the Eugene O'Neill Theater for the 8 P.M. performance of "Five Guys Named Moe." Tickets, $175 for dinner and show, $100 for show alone, from (212) 535-8977.
A private bus will drop guests off along Park Avenue (cost $5) after the play.
Church Auction
May 5 -- The Jan Hus Presbyterian Church, at 351 East 74th Street, will hold its annual auction to benefit its numerous community programs.
Items may be seen starting at noon, with dinner served at 5:30 P.M.; auction at 7 P.M.
Suggested contribution for the dinner is $7.
Information: (212) 288-6743.


Percolating With the Sounds of Zaire
One of the strengths of African pop music is that its performers can move around vast territories and cultivate many styles.
Although the band leaders Samba Mapangala and Remmy Ongala were born in Zaire, they have flourished on foriegn soil.
For the last 10 years, Mr.
Mapangala and his Orchestre Virunga have turned out international hits from Nairobi, Kenya; and Mr.
Ongala and the Super Matimila Band have become such adored fixtures in their home base of Tanzania that the music scene there is unimaginable without them.
Mr.
Mapangala and Mr.
Ongala are expatriates, but their groups have developed a distinct zest because the leaders have stayed relatively close to home.


CAMPUS LIFE: George Washington; Forensic Sleuth Wants 42d Whack At Borden Case
Dead men, and women, do tell tales when James E. Starrs rattles their bones.
A professor of law and forensics at George Washington University and one of the nation's leading experts on the use of forensic evidence in court cases, Professor Starrs spends much of his spare time applying new technology to old, unresolved mysteries.
Now, he is bringing the cold shovel of science to the rescue of Lizzie Borden, the 32-year-old spinster from Fall River, Mass., who may or may not, as the macabre rhyme goes, have taken an ax:
And gave her mother 40 whacks.  When she saw what she had done  She gave her father 41.
Miss Borden was acquitted at her 1893 trial but died in 1927 still very much a subject of debate.
Books, plays, an opera, a ballet and a musical revue have grappled with the guilt or innocence of the reportedly ax-wielding Sunday-school teacher.
As a preliminary step in his Borden investigation, Professor Starrs has used ground-penetrating radar to determine whether the skulls of Andrew and Abby Gray Borden, the victims, rest in their grave with their bodies.
The skulls were used as exhibits in Miss Borden's celebrated criminal trial.
Results of the professor's radar test show that the skulls might have been reunited with the bodies, he said.
Professor Starrs has located the purported murder weapon, a hatchet that has been preserved since the trial, and says he hopes to use "tool-mark analysis" to determine if chips in the hatchet's blade match the wounds on the skulls.
Professor Starrs's ventures are financed in part by a nonprofit corporation that he founded, Scientific Sleuthing Inc.
It publishes The Scientific Sleuthing Review, a newsletter that circulates to about 1,000 forensic-mystery buffs.
He has participated in or led teams in investigations of the kidnapping of Charles Lindbergh's baby, the Sacco-Vanzetti case and Alfred Packer, who was convicted of killing and eating five companions during an 1874 snowstorm.
Most recently, Professor Starrs exhumed the body of Dr.
Carl A. Weiss, who was accused of assassinating Senator Huey Long of Louisiana in 1935.
His findings indicate that there is "grave and persuasive doubt" that Dr.
Weiss committed the crime.
Most of the bullets fired in retaliation by the Senator's bodyguards, Professor Starrs said, appeared to have struck Dr.
Weiss in the back, although bodyguards testified that Dr.
Weiss faced them when they fired.
Interested in Poe and Hoover
Other mysteries that Professor Starrs wants to dig into include Edgar Allan Poe's death in 1849, popularly ascribed to a four-day drinking binge and a weak heart, and the 1972 death of J. Edgar Hoover, the director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
Mr.
Hoover, who was 77, had not been ill, yet no autopsy was performed.
A science student at Niagara University for two years, Professor Starrs eventually graduated with a degree in English from St.
John's University in Queens, and St.
John's Law School.
At George Washington, he specializes in criminal law.
In the early 1970's, he says, a representative of the F.B.I. inspired him to spearhead the development of a master's degree program in forensic science for the agency.
"I've literally gone back to school to try and find out about the new technologies in the field," said Professor Starrs, who laments that most of his law students have no science training.
"It is deplorable because many of these students are going to be prosecutors and defense attorneys and are going to have to use scientific evidence."


A Worldly Half-Owner
Sheik Mohammed bin Rashid al-Maktoum isn't your basic, everyday, I've-got-the-horse-right-here kind of owner.
And that may be appropriate, because Arazi isn't your basic everyday horse, and the $9 million the sheik paid to Allen Paulson last year for 50 percent of the horse isn't your everyday half-share.
The sheik is an urbane 42-year-old graduate of Cambridge, the brother of Sheik Maktoum al-Maktoum, the ruler of Dubai, and the Minister of Defense of the United Arab Emirates.
But he is well known as one of the world's most involved horsemen, a man who bought his first thoroughbred in 1976 and went on to build a horse-racing empire.


Mets Left With Smiles, if No Umbrellas
One split-second decision followed another and so one breathless instant unfolded into the next for the Mets.
Catch, spin, throw, leap, throw, stretch, pray.
The official scoring went 1-6-3.
And so the final scoreboard read Mets 3, Phillies 2.
"I didn't even think," said Jeff Innis, the pitcher who initiated the double play that ended the eighth inning, and the last gasp, for the Phillies.


N.F.L. Draft; Help! The Giants Need Somebody
By the time the Giants make their first pick in today's National Football League draft, 13 players will have been chosen.
They are sure to include such blue-chip prospects as Steve Emtman, Quentin Coryatt, Troy Vincent, Terrell Buckley and Sean Gilbert on defense and Desmond Howard, Vaughn Dunbar and Bob Whitfield on offense.
But there will be plenty of potential stars left.
So the Giants may be able to get David Klingler of Houston, the best quarterback in the draft; or Derek Brown of Notre Dame, the best tight end; or Kevin Smith of Texas A&amp;M, probably the third-best cornerback, or the monstrous Chester McGlockton of Clemson, one of a slew of current or potential defensive ends.


A Katmandu Hotel Lives Up to Its Name
THAT man with the mop of curly black hair and the most fashionable clothes in Katmandu is in orbit again around the garden cafe.
Quick-stepping from table to table, he greets his guests in half-a-dozen languages and as many national styles: a handshake here, a namaste there, kisses for the Europeans.
The waiters get nervous.
The man in motion sees everything they wish they had noticed first: an empty coffee cup, a missing fork, an uncleared platter, the birds eyeing an unattended sugar bowl.
For about a dozen years this exuberant innkeeper, Utpal Sengupta, has been at work perfecting a little Nepali hotel with character and class, the Shangri-la, nestled in lawns and flower beds near the edge of Katmandu.
He doesn't own the Shangri-la (which is not part of the Asian chain of the same name); he is the manager.
But he is proof again of how a person of personality and flair can turn a simple place to stay into a kind of zany home for an eccentric extended family of world travelers.


Proposal for U.S. Open Is Sweetened
A vacant waterfront tract in Queens, overgrown with weeds and ridden with rubbish, would become New York City's newest park in a disputed plan to expand the site of the United States Open tennis tournament.
The tournament, one of the world's premier tennis events, takes place in the National Tennis Center in Flushing Meadows-Corona Park in Queens, two miles from the shorefront tract.
Under a proposal announced last week, the tennis center would expand on additional land it would be permitted to lease in Flushing Meadows-Corona.


RECORD BRIEF
Garland Jeffreys: 'Don't Call Me Buckwheat' RCA/BMG 61112; all three formats.


Japanese Live Longer, the U.N. Finds
The Japanese live longer than anyone else on earth, with an average life expectancy of 82.5 years for women and 76.2 years for men, according to a new United Nations report.
The World Health Organization's latest statistical year book -- a 350-page compendium of information about why and when people die -- says French women have the second longest life expectancy at 81.5 years, while American women trail in 16th place, living 78.6 years on average.


Not Nixon's Slogan
To the Editor:
Edwin Murray Hood makes an interesting point in "When Presidential Slogans Meet the Realities of Government" (letter, April 12) in his argument that campaign slogans often "collide with the realities" and "soon vanish like fleeting apparitions."


CAMPUS LIFE: Syracuse; An Offbeat Style Draws Students To a Professor
On Tuesdays and Thursdays, from 1:15 P.M. to 2:10 P.M., Laurence Thomas transforms the 350-seat Syracuse University auditorium into something of a boot camp.
The 42-year-old philosophy professor paces the aisles like a drill sergeant, spitting out questions, calling out names and unearthing students hiding in the back rows.
"What would Aristotle say about homosexuality?" he thundered to a recent class.
"What is the difference between truth and blind faith?"


Yen Loses Ground As Mark Gains
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
134.50
134.00
138.30
per Dollar
German Mark
1.6509
1.6695
1.7515
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.1871
1.1823
1.1523
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.6740
1.7450
1.6885
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$336.30
$337.00
$353.50
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Brazilian Visas
To the Editor: I had a dreadful experience trying to get to Rio de Janeiro.
As we boarded the Aerolineas Argentinas flight, two and a half hours late out of Kennedy International Airport on Jan. 29, it was the beginning of a nightmare.
I was stopped at Brazilian Customs in Rio and asked for a visa.
I said I didn't have one; I had traveled to Rio 22 times before without a visa.
Neither my travel agent, City Tours, nor the Aerolineas Argentinas representative, who checked my passport on at least three occasions, told me I needed one.
The Customs agent kept saying it was the fault of the New York agent of the airline for not telling me this.


U.S. Sanctions Against Haiti Seem Ineffective
American diplomats here are expressing growing exasperation as their efforts to reverse the violent army coup here last September have either backfired or gone virtually ignored by forces opposed to the return of the elected president, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide.
Most political, military and business leaders here have stubbornly held out despite a punishing, five-month old trade embargo, repeated hints at armed intervention and most recently the cancellation of American visas for a score of wealthy Haitians thought to have supported the coup.


The Island That Fell From Grace
ONLY MAN IS VILE
The Tragedy of Sri Lanka.
By William McGowan. 397 pp.
New York: Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $25.


Corrections
A brief review of "Carnival Culture: The Trashing of Taste in America" on April 12 misstated the first name of the book's author.
He is James B. Twitchell.


Jets Rely on Picking Best of the Rest
Being at the middle of the pack in the National Football League's college draft has its advantages and disadvantages.
The position allows you to get a player that might slip through the earlier part of the draft, but it can also be too late for a team to get exactly what it needs, forcing it to take the dreaded "best player available."
The New York Jets, selecting No. 15 today, will face that uncertainty when it comes time to make their choice in the first round.
In terms of preparation, the position has made for some interesting juggling by Jets player personnel officials, but it hasn't paved the way for concrete planning.
Right now they're operating in the B.P.A. (Best Player Available) mode.


POSTINGS: Srodmiescie Office Tower; A U.S. Touch for Warsaw
An American-style office building offering advanced technology and telecommunications systems of the kind available in New York is being developed in Warsaw.
The 250,000-square-foot, 10-story building is a joint venture of U.S Business Centers, of Washington, and the Srodmiescie (Central) Business District of Warsaw.
The tenants, who will be asked to pay about $50 a square foot, about $20 more than prime space in New York now costs, are likely to be American and other foreign companies that want to do business in Poland, as well as Polish enterprises.
The principals of U.S.
Business Centers are Craig A. Nalen, former president of the U.S.
Overseas Private Investment Corporation, and J. K. Holman.
They and other American investors will provide part of the financing for the $55 million project and the rest will come from the Polish Development Bank.


Political Talk
A Judicial Misstatement
For those who heard him, it certainly seemed as if the chief judge of the New York State Court of Appeals, Sol Wachtler, was thinking aloud last week when he referred to Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo as "Judge Cuomo."


Stupefying Rhythm
To the Editor:
In considering Louis Simpson's essay ("The Stupefying Rhythms of Neville Dane," March 1), one wonders whether the reclusive and late-blooming poet Neville Dane might have had dyslexia or a related perceptual problem that would cause mental reversals.


P.&amp;G. Takes On the Supermarkets With Uniform Pricing
Using its enormous clout in the marketplace, the Procter &amp; Gamble Company is taking a bold step to simplify the Byzantine system of American grocery pricing.
Though the move could reduce the wild swings in consumer food prices, replacing them with what the industry calls "everyday low prices," it could also squeeze supermarket profit margins.
Throwing out its old price list on nearly half of its products over the last few months, Procter &amp; Gamble has set lower wholesale prices on goods ranging from Jif peanut butter to Cascade dishwashing soap.
But the savings have not made supermarkets happy.
Procter &amp; Gamble has also slashed the generous discounts it used to persuade grocers to stock up on its goods.


S. G. Gunn Weds Dr. Angela M. Lijoi
Angela Marie Lijoi, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Salvatore Lijoi of Suffern, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Stephen Gerard Gunn, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Walter Gunn of Red Bank, N.J.
The Rev.
Mark Confroy performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of the Sacred Heart of Jesus.
Dr.
Gunn, 32 years old and a major in the United States Air Force, is a pediatrician at Langley Air Force Base in Hampton, Va.
She graduated from the College of Mount St.
Vincent and received an M.D. from Georgetown University.
Her father, who is retired, was a teacher and a principal in the North Rockland, N.Y., school district.
Her mother, Josephine Lijoi, retired as a librarian with the Suffern Free Library.


Nina Szarkowski to Wed in August
Mr. and Mrs.
T.
John Szarkowski of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter Nina Anson Szarkowski to Adrian Holdship Jones, the son of Dana Hyde Burden of Southampton, N.Y., and Peter Dalzell Jones of New York.
The prospective bridegroom is the stepson of Christina C. Jones.
An August wedding is planned.
Miss Szarkowski graduated from Yale University, as did her fiance.
She is studying for an M.B.A. at Columbia University.
Her father is director emeritus of the department of photography at the Museum of Modern Art in New York.
Her mother, Jill Anson Szarkowski, is an architect in New York.


Immigrants Jam Schools, Invigorating a System
Despite turn-of-the-century photographs of hollow-eyed Jewish and Italian children gazing at their teachers with gratitude and zeal, history presents a less rose-tinted picture of immigrants in the New York public schools.
The swarms of children in the Lower East Side ghetto were often crammed into classrooms of 60, and truancy and delinquency were rife.
Reading and math scores plummeted and history classes were curtailed so more English could be taught.
A 1911 Teachers College study shows that only 60 percent of elementary school children went on to high school; even the most ardent pupils had to work to support their families.


At Work; Caterpillar's White-Collar Lessons
The contrast in images couldn't be harsher.
Two weeks ago, the strikers at Caterpillar gathered in lines five-angry-and-noisy-men deep at plant gates.
Last week, solidarity made moot, they shuffled back to work, accepting Caterpillar's terms while talks on a new contract continue.
Middle-class, white-collar workers may see nothing but losers and monster-truck-racing fans in the group, instead of events involving an institution that once wielded the power to protect its members from portal to portal and cradle to grave.
Why should a corporate employee care whether a company breaks with its tradition of relatively cordial worker relations to play hardball and bring a manufacturing union to heel?
Labor economists and employment experts warn that the experience of Caterpillar's workers may be a harbinger for white-collar employees.


Thousands Lose Homes In Mortgage Foreclosures
FROM one end of the state to the other, thousands of New Jersey residents -- owners and renters -- are losing their homes as banks and other lenders foreclose on delinquent mortgages.
The number of properties sold at public auction to satisfy unpaid mortgages has doubled and even tripled in some counties over the last few years.


Dr. Ruth Kelly Wed in Capital
Dr.
Ruth Anne Kelly, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William Thomas Kelly of Elkton, Md., was married yesterday to Dr.
John Thomas Queenan Jr., the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Queenan of Washington.
The Rev.
Allen C. Mitchell officiated at the Dahlgren Chapel on the campus of Georgetown University.
Mrs.
Queenan, 32 years old, graduated from Georgetown University and received an M.D. from the University of Maryland.
She and her husband are chief residents in gynecology and obstetrics at Johns Hopkins Hospital in Baltimore.
Her father is the president of Kelly Heating and Air Conditioning in New Castle, Del.
Her mother, Ruth A. Kelly, owns O'Donnell &amp; Company, a tax consulting concern in Elkton.


ABOUT NEW JERSEY
HARD by Route 30, heading into the west side of Atlantic City, there is a whisper of a hero.
It's not much of anything now -- a shabby brick grandstand, a cheap corrugated steel roof curling up on itself like the fingers of an angry fist, blown-out windows and trash and weeds down where the grandstand meets Indiana and Huron Avenues.


Made in America: Asia's School Success
For years Americans tired of hearing about Asian educational success comforted themselves by saying Asian methods could never work here.
How, after all, could free-spirited, individualistic American children learn the way Asian students do, studying in lock step, sacrificing play for hours of homework, pressured by intrusive parents, sometimes driven even to suicide?
But a growing number of scholars paint a startlingly different picture of Asian schools, showing that they are run on the very principles American educators endorse but usually fail to practice.
Chinese and Japanese elementary school children, they report, have less drill, more time for play, and more opportunity to solve problems creatively than their American peers.


Life Can Really Be Ugly
WRONG
Stories. By Dennis Cooper. 165 pp. New York: Grove Weidenfeld. $18.95.


Headliners; Is It So, Joe?
Catherine M. Abate was just beginning to settle into her new job as New York City Corrections Commissioner last week when her father's past came rapping at the door.
A law-enforcement official who declined to be named called reporters to revive reports that Ms.
Abate's father, 89-year-old Joseph F. Abate, was until a few years ago a high ranking member of a Lucchese family of the New Jersey Mafia.
In the 1980's, Mr.
Abate was identified as the man who settled intra-Mafia disputes in the Atlantic City area.
Ms.
Abate, whose 20 years as a criminal defense attorney include 14 years at the Legal Aid Society and two years as city Probation Commissioner, said she had never heard such talk about her father.
A reporter who interviewed her in 1976 recalled her asking that charges about Mr.
Abate be left out, but Ms.
Abate said she had no such memories.
She said it was a "ridiculous" notion that her father, "suffering from senility," could have been a Mafia chief.


Burmese Rulers Releasing a Dozen Political Prisoners
After years of mounting international pressure over its dismal human rights record, the military Government of Myanmar said yesterday that it had released a dozen political prisoners and would allow the family of Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, the detained opposition leader and winner of the 1991 Nobel Peace Prize, to visit her.
The offer to visit Mrs.
Aung San Suu Kyi, who has been under house arrest since 1989 and won the peace prize for her nonviolent campaign for democracy in her homeland, was quickly accepted by her husband, Michael Aris, a Briton who is a visiting professor of Tibetan and Himalayan studies at Harvard University.


Tech Notes; Closing In on Solar Energy
There is no trick to gathering energy from the sun, but at what price?
Solar Kinetics Inc. of Dallas, under contract with the Department of Energy's Sandia National Laboratories, has built a "stretched membrane parabolic dish" to concentrate solar power using something cheaper and lighter than the glass now employed.
The latest material is a metal foil about as thick as a good-quality plastic garbage bag, coated with the same material used in children's helium balloons.
The dish makes a rigid connection with the support structure in only one place, at the rim.
That rim forms the outside of what looks like a giant bicycle wheel, with the foil hanging between the spokes.
The area under the foil is draped with another cover, and a small fan creates a light vacuum inside, to keep the foil rigid.


Ally of Major Is Named Hong Kong Governor
Christopher F. Patten, who as chairman of the British Conservative Party ran Prime Minister John Major's campaign for re-election this month, has been named Governor of Hong Kong, which will be handed over to China in five years.
Mr.
Patten lost his own seat in the House of Commons in the elections on April 9 and had been mulling over his future.
The Hong Kong governorship, a prestigious civil-service position, removes him from British politics, at least for a while.


This Sand Was Made For You And Me
We regain a little of our innocence during the hours we preen, play and rest at the beach.
The photographer Elliott Erwitt captures that innocence while often poking gentle fun in ELLIOTT ERWITT: ON THE BEACH (Norton, $39.95).
These pictures are not portraits or art photographs or messages in bottles.
They are sly "snaps," as the photographer refers to them, which is not to say they are not marvelous compositions of texture and opposition.
The photographs have a witty spontaneity, yet they are well-observed commentaries from a man with an impish affection for his subject and a keen eye for the ridiculous.
These beaches are not remote coves, rare and scenically spectacular; they are the common beaches from around the world.
The people Mr.
Erwitt photographs are variously dressed: a picture taken in Brighton, England, in 1956 shows a man in shirt sleeves, tie and trousers, escorting his children in an afternoon of play; another, taken in Ile du Levant, France, in 1968, shows a couple with nothing on at all.
Some of the nicest photos are of dogs frolicking.
And there is the unexpected: a boy walking a pig on a leash.
Mr.
Erwitt's photographs make us feel the way we do while on the beach: ready for anything, willing for a few hours to assume a more benevolent and tolerant view of our fellow man.


Gretchen Haas To Wed in Fall
Mr. and Mrs.
Edward L. Haas of Bryn Mawr, Pa., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Gretchen Lind Haas, to Mark Theodore, a son of Drs.
Charles and Pauline Theodore of San Diego.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss Haas, 25 years old and a graduate of the University of Richmond, is an M.B.A. candidate at George Washington University.
Her father is a partner with Ernst &amp; Young in Philadelphia.


Taipei's Unsettled Soul
THE snakes writhe and the crowd shrinks back.
Then the restaurateur picks up one snake from the open table top and stretches it to its full length of about four feet.
The crowd -- with the anticipation and horror of a mob at a lynching -- steps forward to watch as he uses a pair of scissors to skin the snake and squeeze the blood from its still squirming body.
Barbarous, no doubt, but a more effective attention-getter than any neon sign.
As the restaurant's proprietor raves about the wondrous medicinal effects of snake blood (supposedly good for the stomach, gallbladder and male virility), several men step forward and order a glass, and the big spenders splurge on a bowl of snake soup as well.


Edna Levine, 75, a Psychologist Who Founded Programs for Deaf
Edna Simon Levine, a psychologist who founded many programs to help deaf people, died on April 7 at Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan.
She was 75 years old and lived in Manhattan.
She died of a heart ailment, a friend said.


Susan Stone to Wed
Richard M. Stone of Princeton, N.J., has announced August wedding plans for his daughter Susan Frances Stone and Aaron Joseph Driben, a son of Stanley B. Driben of Pembroke Pines, Fla., and Marjorie J. Driben of Chestnut Hill, Mass.


Japan's Rigged Casino
As rigged trading went, it was remarkably uncreative, as though getting caught were not a concern.
An official of the Daiwa Securities Company, Japan's second-largest brokerage house, had approached a prominent corporation, Tokyu Department Store, and proposed that Tokyu pay 90.5 billion yen (about $675 million) for securities whose market value was only 30 billion yen.
According to Tokyu, Daiwa promised it would repurchase the securities later, at a price that would guarantee Tokyu a small profit.


Breeze Lets Conner Play Catch-Up
A nearly breathless breeze turned the tables on the America's Cup teams today, setting up victory conditions for the defense and challenge finalists who have known mostly losses since the series started a week ago.
Stars &amp; Stripes won a highly tactical battle in winds that threatened to die to a whisper.
But Italy's Il Moro di Venezia could not maintain its early advantage over favored New Zealand.
A 3-to-7-knot westerly wind looked kindly on Stars &amp; Stipes, the defense boat that can be expected to out-perform its rival, America , in a light and shifty breeze.
The combination gave Dennis Conner and his Stars &amp; Stripes team a 2-minute-18-second victory over Bill Koch's America  .
The finish improved Stars &amp; Stripes to a more respectable 2-4 record in the 7-of-13 defenders finals.


Headliners; No Admission
So what is it with the Greenwich Hospital in Connecticut?
Dr.
Gary Blick, who is a gay internist about one-third of whose 1,100 patients are H.I.V.-positive, says his admitting privileges were cut off at the hospital last year because of the nature of his practice.
Hospital administrators are edgy about having too many homosexuals around, Dr.
Blick contends, especially ones with AIDS.
The administrators say the issue is not AIDS, but "quality of care," and that is about as specific as they will get.
While Dr.
Blick's suspension is being appealed -- he'll sue if he loses, he said last week -- there are rumblings in Hartford about a big expansion that the hospital is planning.
A state legislator with a finger on the hospital licensing button has asked that the contretemps at Greenwich be "looked into" pending approval of the expansion.
Dr.
Blick thinks he knows what the problem is.
"I'm gay and I'm Jewish and I'm treating AIDS patients," he said.
"And that does not go well at Greenwich Hospital."


Bridgeport U. Approves a Pact with Unification Church Affiliate
Facing an enormous debt and few other options but to close, the trustees of the University of Bridgeport formally approved a financial agreement yesterday that would bring the private university under the control of an affiliate of the Unification Church.
The agreement, with the Professors World Peace Academy, would give the ailing university an immediate infusion of $20 million and the promise of $30 million in cash and tuition revenues over the next several years.
But it would also give the academy the power to approve appointments to the university's board of trustees.


Deborah Buhl to Wed in September
The engagement of Deborah Elizabeth Buhl to Lieut.
Thomas M. Bacigalupo of the Navy, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles A. Bacigalupo of Towson, Md., has been announced by her parents, John D. Buhl of Vienna, Va., and Elizabeth S. Buhl of Falls Church, Va.
A September wedding is planned.
Ms.
Buhl, a graduate of George Mason University, is a manager of information systems for American Telephone and Telegraph in Vienna.
Her father is the president of Buhl Electric Company, an electrical contracting concern in Sterling, Va.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Senate Race; CAMPAIGN NOVICE IS LEADER IN POLLS
Pennsylvania, a state that had never been known for being daring or innovative in politics, may be about to give the nation another political jolt.
Lynn H. Yeakel, a 50-year-old fund-raiser for women's charities, began campaigning for the Democratic nomination for the United States Senate three months ago with no direct political experience, no organization and no name recognition.
Now, as Tuesday's primary looms, she appears to be surging into a strong position.


The Man at the Controls of Arazi's International Team
From 35,000 feet over the Arizona desert, you can't even spot it on the ground.
But you can spot it on the map.
It is one of the hundreds of radio navigation checkpoints that mark your path circling the globe.
And from the pilot's seat in the Gulfstream IV jet, which he built and tested and flew to 35 international speed records, Allen E. Paulson once more mingled two of his passions in life: fast airplanes and fast horses.
He made a note of the name of the checkpoint so he could one day bestow it on one of his race horses.
He had already done it for horses named Dinard and Cudas.
And after he bought a weanling in Kentucky for $350,000, he named the baby horse for the checkpoint in the Arizona desert: Arazi.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: April 26, 1992
Weeks
On
List
Fiction
1
13
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
2
2
THE SECRET, by Julie Garwood. (Pocket, $5.99.) A 12th-century English belle finds romance.
3
13
FRIED GREEN TOMATOES AT THE WHISTLE STOP CAFE, by Fannie Flagg. (McGraw-Hill, $6.95.) Life in rural Alabama.
4
2
"H" IS FOR HOMICIDE, by Sue Grafton. (Fawcett, $5.99.) The private eye Kinsey Millhone on the trail of perpetrators of an insurance scam.
5
51
THE PRINCE OF TIDES, by Pat Conroy. (Bantam, $5.99.) Complex family relationships in South Carolina's low country and New York City.
6
10
LOVES MUSIC, LOVES TO DANCE, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Pocket, $5.99.) Two women get caught in the snare of a serial killer.
7
4
BODY OF EVIDENCE, by Patricia D. Cornwell. (Avon, $5.99.) Probing the grisly death of a writer.
8 *
1
AS THE CROW FLIES, by Jeffrey Archer. (Harper Paperbacks, $6.50.) Inspired by his grandfather, a London vendor, a man strives to create the biggest store in the world.
9 *
5
LONGSHOT, by Dick Francis. (Fawcett, $5.99.) An author of survival guides attempts to write about the world of horse racing.
10
1
THE SEERESS OF KELL, by David Eddings. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $5.99.) The fifth volume in the fantasy series "The Malloreon."
11 *
1
SKY MASTERS, by Dale Brown. (Berkley, $5.99.) The United States Air Force goes to the aid of the Philippines in a war with China in 1994.
12 *
4
PASTIME, by Robert B. Parker. (Berkley, $5.99.) Rescuing a woman from her shady boyfriend.
13
1
THE DISINHERITED, by Peter David, Michael Jan Friedman and Robert Greenberger. (Pocket, $4.99.) New adventures of the "Star Trek" crew.
14
2
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Wynwood, $9.95.) Racial tensions surface during a trial.
15
10
HEARTBEAT, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $6.50.) A chance meeting of a man and a woman brings them long-sought happiness.
16 *
6
THE SHERBROOKE BRIDE, by Catherine Coulter. (Jove, $5.99.) A tangled romance in which a man marries the sister of his intended bride.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,050 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
Weeks
On
List
Nonfiction
1
2
JFK: CONSPIRACY OF SILENCE, by Charles A. Crenshaw with Jens Hansen and J. Gary Shaw. (Signet, $4.99.) A Dallas surgeon tells what he observed while treating the dying John F. Kennedy and Lee Harvey Oswald.
2
49
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
3
7
YOU'LL NEVER EAT LUNCH IN THIS TOWN AGAIN, by Julia Phillips. (Signet, $6.99.) Life in Hollywood as experienced by a producer.
4
6
IF YOU REALLY LOVED ME, by Ann Rule. (Pocket, $5.99.) The bizarre family relationships behind the murder of the wife of an entrepreneur.
5
1
AMERICA: WHAT WENT WRONG? by Donald L. Barlett and James B. Steele. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $6.95.) How the practices of Washington lawmakers and Wall Street deal makers have benefited a few Americans at the expense of most.
6
41
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France, as described by an Englishman.
7
10
IRON JOHN, by Robert Bly. (Vintage, $11.) The passage of the male from boyhood into manhood, as practiced in various cultures.
8 *
442
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist. (LP)
9 *
128
LOVE, MEDICINE, AND MIRACLES, by Bernie S. Siegel. (Harper Perennial, $8.95.) The importance of a patient's mind and emotions.
10
2
FIRE IN THE BELLY, by Sam Keen. (Bantam, $12.50.) The changing role of the male in today's society.
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
37
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
2
6
ATTACK OF THE DERANGED MUTANT KILLER MONSTER SNOW GOONS, by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $8.95.) "Calvin and Hobbes" cartoons.
3
85
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.50.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
4
66
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles for success.
5
1
LIVE AND LEARN AND PASS IT ON, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Morsels of what they've learned about life, from people aged 5 to 95.


CAMPUS LIFE: Skidmore; Students Start Fund to Enhance Curiculum
A group of Skidmore students have decided that while talking about a multicultural curriculum is cheap, financing research into multicultural course materials is a more effective way to change the curriculum on campus.
Those students, banded together in the year-old student group called Risen (for Reforms in Student Education Now), recently presented a $600 check to Skidmore's board as the first installment of a fund to expand the multicultural aspects of faculty research.


New Heyday of Gnostic Heresies
In August, when Operation Rescue militants assaulted abortion clinics in Wichita, Kan., President Bush's Justice Department sided not with the Federal judge who had ordered that the clinics be kept open and whose jurisdiction it was, but with the mob itself.
The President urged the Operation Rescue stalwarts to soften their protests, but otherwise he gave them his approval.
Many of the same activists are involved in the current Operation Rescue campaign in Buffalo, but the national election is now eight months closer and the Justice Department is more reluctant to intervene.
It is an apt moment to consider again what might be called President Bush's linked emblems, the Flag and the Fetus, respectively the Cross and the Divine Child of what we may yet learn to call the American Religion, of which the Reagan-Bush Republican party has become the secular branch.


Hose Takes a Walk on the Wild Side
Everything goes in hosiery today: bold colors, lightweight opaque tights, racy variations of fishnet and pale colors in sheer stockings.
Sid Smith of the National Association of Hosiery Manufacturers says, "The challenge is in keeping colors, patterns and styles fresh."


WHERE THE MONEY WASHES UP
Steve Lohr's article "Where the Money Washes Up" (March 29) notes that the Cayman Islands have become a world-class financial center because overseas investors use the tiny British colony to avoid paying taxes and to shield their money from changing political currents.


Ms. Morgenson, Editor, Marries
Gretchen Cooke Morgenson, a daughter of Rebecca A. Morgenson of Oxford, Ohio, and Donald F. Morgenson of Waterloo, Ontario, Canada, was married yesterday to Paul John Devlin Jr.
He is a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Devlin of Gulfstream, Fla.
The Rev.
Daniel Gallagher performed the ceremony at St.
Thomas's Episcopal Church in Amenia Union, N.Y.


Not Stuck at the Gate, and Flying in First-Class Stalls
When Arazi flies the Atlantic from Paris to Louisville today for his date with destiny, he will travel the equine equivalent of first class on a chartered DC-8, with his groom in attendance and with two high-priced traveling companions in the adjoining stalls also headed for the Kentucky Derby.
No other Atlantic travelers are likely to be treated so royally for seven and a half hours, and no other travelers are likely to pay $20,000 apiece for the privilege.


Trying to Separate Myth and Reality in the American Dream
YOU can, too, deduce the universe from a grain of sand or, in the present case, an era from a single image.
"The Bank That Failed" by Arthur Rothstein is a perfect example.
Taken in 1936, when Mr.
Rothstein was working in Kansas for the Farm Security Administration, the photograph epitomizes the Depression.
It also seems to augur the future, as did a recent gesture made by one of the banks in Manhattan -- a dinky Snickers Bar for every customer.
Then again, as Yogi Berra is reported to have said, the future ain't the same as it used to be.


Paintings of America And Photos of Mexico
WITH paintings, as with individuals, the face can be familiar but not the name.
This is very much the situation now in the Benton Museum, at the University of Connecticut in Storrs.
The current show, which was organized by Hildy Cummings, the museum's curator of education, and Helen Fusscas, a former art dealer, includes 48 painters.
None of them are superstars, although some enjoyed fame in their own time and have made a comeback, while others have remained in limbo.
But still, the revisionist spirit behind the show is not the kind that revives reputations better left for dead.
The curators have chosen artists who, in Mrs.
Cummings's words, "did not change the course of American art but whose talent and vision greatly enriched it."


For Tsongas, a Question of Timing
A favorite pastime among political soothsayers is pondering not only what seems probable at the polls but also what might have been.
What if Paul E. Tsongas had stayed in the race for President?
The disclosure of a recurrance of Mr.
Tsongas's cancer five years ago has led both his backers and detractors to re-evaluate just how viable a candidate the former Massachusetts Senator would have been, and whether he will still be able to wield wide influence within the Democratic Party.


Battle-Scarred Lawmakers Head for the Exit
WHEN John J. Tiffany 2d arrived at the Capitol almost 30 years ago to begin his first of 15 terms as a legislator, the General Assembly met once every two years, and for only four months.
Last year the General Assembly met for 11 months because of a long-running budget battle, and this year legislators are bracing for another run-on session.


In Tasmania, It's Teatime
NO one knows what the world smelled like before cars, incinerators, factories and the effluvium that arises when millions of people are concentrated in a few square miles.
But I can guess.
It smelled like Tasmania.
The air, in fact, is what I cherish most about the place: air that seems to scour the lungs, polish the skin, rub the eyes to brightness.
I went to Tasmania because I was visiting a daughter in Australia, and New Zealand was too far away for us to tour.
It was as simple as that.
Our only booking was for the plane tickets, and our only information was garnered from Robert Hughes's "Fatal Shore" and some brochures from Tourism Tasmania.
Which is why we spent our first night in Hobart sleeping in two little rooms over a pub.
Dire Straits, the British rock group, was in town and the audience -- as eager for entertainment as Jane Austen's Bennet family was for the ball at the assembly room -- had come from miles around.


The RX-7 Pares Down for Serious Fun
Wednesday was Earth Day, and that seemed a good time to stroll the aisles of the New York auto show, poking here and there and paying attention to the efforts that most manufacturers are making to come to terms with the environment.
The show at the Javits Convention Center is America's oldest if not its biggest, and it will fold the tent on 1992's outing tonight, ending a nine-day run in which it seemingly returned to its roots.
As in that first show at Madison Square Garden -- by all accounts, one of the big society events of 1900 -- electric cars have been the hot ticket and alternative-fuel systems abound.


Noted With Pleasure
The Responsibilities of a Poet
Dylan Thomas argued that poets who succumb to the allure of the difficult are in danger of losing their audience, and something essential in their art.
This is from a 1946 radio program, included in "On the Air With Dylan Thomas: The Broadcasts," edited by Ralph Maud (New Directions).


Award Winner's Recital
Angelica Lozada, a soprano who was the winner of the 1991 Artists International Distinguished Artists Award in Voice, will give a recital at 7 o'clock tonight at Merkin Concert Hall, 129 West 67th Street, in Manhattan.
Accompanied by Dale Dietert, Ms.
Lozada will sing works by Rossini, Poulenc, Delannoy, Canteloube, Nin and others.
Tickets are $13.
Information: (212) 283-3425.


Topics of The Times; A Park Reborn
Midtown Manhattan has sorely needed a living room for a long time.
Now, in Bryant Park, it has one at last.
After a four-year restoration, the park, adjacent to the New York Public Library on 42d Street, has reopened.
Grown-ups now go there to turn their faces toward the sun; youngsters trail timid fingers in the fountain.
Until the park was closed for its $8.95 million renovation (one-third from private donors), it was a sad, shabby place stalked by drug dealers.
Now it's reborn, with a strong police presence, even when closed at night.


The Emperor Has No . . .
To the Editor:
To paraphrase Shakespeare, the gentleman doth protest too much, methinks.
Or does William E. Colby, the former Director of Central Intelligence,
really
have a sense of humor?


Miss Lawless to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Vincent Lawless of Buffalo have announced June wedding plans for their daughter Suzanne Lawless and James Lee Johnson 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Johnson Jr. of St.
Louis.
Miss Lawless, 27 years old, is an admissions assistant at the Buckingham Browne and Nichols School in Cambridge, Mass.
Mr.
Johnson, 28, is an account executive for PC Week magazine in Boston.


Clinton's Standard Campaign Speech: A Call for Responsibility
Gov.
Bill Clinton's standard campaign speech has evolved since October from a broad discussion of policy that was detailed and long-winded to a more focused talk about his vision for America.
For a while, such speechmaking was almost entirely put aside as Mr.
Clinton  spent much of his time explaining himself on personal issues, including marital fidelity and his military draft history.


Q and A
Eskimo Festival in Fairbanks
Q.
We are planning a trip to Fairbanks, Alaska, this summer.
Are there any festivals featuring Eskimo culture, including music and dance? -- Judi Benade, Madison, Wis.


A Dollar and a Dream
A Russian racing yacht that never made it into America's Cup competition may be saved from a San Diego landfill by a British yachtsman who shelled out $1 for it.
The Russian effort fizzled and the 75-foot craft never saw the America's Cup race courses.
But the yacht made a splash with news media reports that it was headed for destruction at a local dump unless a savior was found.


Style Makers; Bryant Renfroe, Hairdresser
Bryant Renfroe has been the hairdresser since 1984 for Kathie Lee Gifford and Barbara Walters.
Until 1987, he worked for Joan Lunden and her staff at "Good Morning America." A telephone call changed his life.
In 1984, he was working at a salon in Orlando, Fla., when the phone rang.
It was Ms.
Lunden, who was about to fly from New York to Orlando to be the host of the Walt Disney Parade, which was going to be televised on ABC.


Billboards: Weapons of Guerrilla Art
What some people might call mischief, six artists here call "guerrilla action."
They created a statue of Senator Jesse Helms of North Carolina, then smashed it on the steps of the United States Capitol during an anti-censorship rally.
They once chained a 46-foot banner of headless suits across Broadway and Wall Street, halting morning rush-hour traffic to protest "the mindless omnipotence of corporate America."


Trenton Hears Projected Bill for Canceling Highway Tolls
In its fervor to cut taxes, cut spending and cut highway tolls, the new Republican majority in the New Jersey Legislature ran into a roadblock this week: fiscal reality.
Cutting or eliminating tolls on the state's two major toll roads, the Garden State Parkway and the New Jersey Turnpike, has become something of a political grail in recent years as motorists fume at the costs, the delays and the congestion.


Red Sox Are the Subject of a Custody Battle
The nighttime scene has the stark hues of an Edward Hopper painting: the chartreuse and tan of the diamond, the clean whites of the home team, the red of the pulsating Citgo sign beyond the famous left-field wall.
Another season of baseball has begun in Fenway Park in Boston, and despite the bluster of a New England April, the fans are out in force.
After all, they have endured fates far worse than a little freezing rain.


Sunday Brunch; A Serving of Romance Is Included (No Charge)
If spring is the time for romance, then selected restaurants around New York City should be in for banner days in the next few months.
Romantic settings can be as hard to define as great modern art, since opinions vary as much as the works themselves.
Yet romantic restaurants seem to have some common denominators: low noise levels, well-separated tables, gentle lighting and perhaps a view.
Here are three suggestions.
Cafe des Artistes
1 West 67th Street, (212) 877-3500 -- With its burnished-wood walls, lead-paned casement windows, bursts of flowers and Howard Chandler Christy's sylvan murals of frolicking nymphs, this restaurant has the warmth of a venerable old cafe in Vienna or Budapest.


An Awakened Church Finds Russia Searching for Its Soul
The great bells of the soaring towers of Ivan the Great burst into life at midnight today, ringing in Easter for the first time in seven decades.
For 400 years before that, until they were silenced by the Bolsheviks, bellringers at all of Moscow's myriad of churches, "numbering 40 times 40," would await the first peal from Great Ivan to proclaim that "Christ Is Risen!" and bathe the city in a joyous clamor.
The great tower was the spiritual heart of Muscovy -- its golden dome was visible from the fringes of the city -- and to this day distances to and from the capital are measured from its base.
It seemed only logical, now that the country is Russia again and the Russian Orthodox Church holds regular services in the Kremlin and even in St.
Basil's on Red Square, that the bells of the Kremlin should once again herald the greatest feast of the Russian land.
But curators of the museum that now occupies the bell tower reportedly were strongly opposed to ringing the bells, fearing they could be damaged.
The Church, however, argued that the bells are a living part of the nation, that the reason they exist is to be rung on Easter night.


Quotation of the Day
"People seem disappointed that we have come upon these resources. They clearly cannot complain about the fashion in which we are using them, and so the only thing left for them is to complain about is how come you got them." -- MAYOR DAVID DINKINS in response to questions raised by reporters about the city's proposed $450 million budget surplus.  [ 32.3 ]


Gare du Nord Gets Face Lift
The 19th-century Gare du Nord in Paris is being renovated.
One section of the refurbished terminal will be only for long-distance trains, including new high-speed T.G.V.'s serving northern France.
Another section will be reserved for traffic to Britain and the Channel Tunnel, and will operate much like an airport with a duty-free area, according to a French Rail official.
The Channel Tunnel is scheduled to open in the fall of 1993; work on the Gare du Nord is expected to be completed by July 1993 in time for the first northern T.G.V.'s.
A row of offices on the mezzanine is being removed to allow natural light to filter through the glass-covered roof, and a parking lot for 1,300 cars is being built underground.


Melissa Simon Wed to W. L. Opalka
Melissa Gail Simon, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Raymond Simon of New Hartford, N.Y., was married yesterday in Utica, N.Y., to Waldemar Leonard Opalka, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Tadeusz Opalka of Utica.
The Rev.
Paul V. Carey performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Holy Trinity Church.
Mrs.
Opalka, 26 years old, is the coordinator of corporate public relations at John Hancock Financial Services in Boston.
She graduated from St.
Lawrence University.
Her father is a professor emeritus of public relations at Utica College of Syracuse University.
Her mother, Lyn Simon, is a lawyer in Verona, N.Y.


All About/Temporary Workers; Filling the Gaps in the Post-Recession Work Force
Stock prices, housing starts and possibly even sunspots are leading economic indicators.
But some analysts suggest watching the temporary services industry to get an even better jump on the news.
Trends in the employment of temporary workers presage shifts in general employment.
Temporaries are the first to go in an economic contraction as workloads dwindle.
"Then, if the work activity continues to drop, layoffs of permanent employees start," said Bruce Steinberg, spokesman for the National Association of Temporary Services, a 1,000-member industry group.
When work begins to pick up, many companies test the waters with temporaries before plunging into permanent hires.


Style Makers; Lori Duffy, Shoe Designer
Lori Duffy confesses to an obsession with shoes since she was a child in Glasgow.
Now 23 years old, she wouldn't compare herself with Imelda Marcos, but she admits to always having a closet full.
As a Scot, perhaps she just naturally came by the unorthodox idea of making shoes out of salmon skin.


MEMO TO THE REPUBLICANS
In "Memo to the Republicans" (March 15), Roger J. Stone says President Bush must "portray the Democrats . . . as a party bereft of new ideas." But what's wrong with old ideas like fair taxation and public assistance to the less-advantaged?
And how "new" are current Republican slogans like "Get Big Government off Our Backs?" They'd make the 19th-century robber barons proud!
JOHN GLASEL New York, N.Y.


Teams Use Veterans As Budget Controls
Faced with the continuing escalation of salaries, clubs indicated last winter that they would take a two-pronged approach to countering the problem.
They signed what was probably a record number of veteran players to minor league contracts and others to low-salaried contracts, and they appeared set to shed fringe veterans earning high salaries in favor of young players earning the minimum or close to it.
Rosters are dotted with veterans playing for meager salaries.
Bob McClure and Rich Gedman, for example, have 27 years of major league service between them, and the St.
Louis Cardinals are paying them a total of $400,000.
But a check of opening-day rosters shows that contrary to popular impression, the major leagues have not become younger.


Miss Viola Wed To M. G. Keane
Janet Marie Viola, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Viola of Rockville Centre, L.I., was married there yesterday to Dr.
Martin Gerard Keane, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert N. Keane, also of Rockville Centre.
The Rev.
Donald Babinski performed the ceremony at St.
Agnes Cathedral.


Lori Garthaffner and Philip Treglia Are Wed
Lori Anne Garthaffner, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John Garthaffner of Island Park, L.I., was married yesterday in Valley Stream, L.I., to Philip Anthony Treglia, the son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Eugene Treglia.
The Rev.
Theodore J. Le Ture officiated at Holy Name of Mary Roman Catholic Church.


Officers Rescue Contractor's Son Held by Chinese Gang in Dispute
It began as an ordinary transaction between the owner of a Chinese restaurant and a contractor he hired to remodel his business.
But when the restaurateur said he was cheated in the deal, he did not turn to that well-worn American institution -- the court.
Instead, the police believe, the restaurateur, a Chinese immigrant, hired a notoriously violent street gang to collect his money by kidnapping the contractor's son.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  OAKLAND ATHLETICS -- Activated Terry Steinbach, catcher, from the 15-day disabled list.
Optioned Henry Mercedes, catcher, to Tacoma of the Pacific Coast League.
National League  NEW YORK METS -- Placed Dave Gallagher, outfielder, on the 15-day disabled list.
Purchased the contract of Jeff McKnight, infielder-outfielder, from Tidewater of the International League.


A Raucous Scene for Alternative Rock
AT a club named Siberia in Levittown, the disk jockey plays music by obscure bands like Skinny Puppy and Mr.
Bungle.
Dancers are decked out in motorcycle jackets, combat boots and asymmetrical haircuts.
Just about the last place you would expect to find an alternative-music club like Siberia is in a shopping center on Hempstead Turnpike.
Combining rock, punk, heavy metal, dance, pop and rap, alternative music defies convention.
Considered too experimental for top-40 radio, the music thrives on the airwaves of college radio stations and some commercial outlets, including WDRE-FM in Westbury.


Ms. Boxley Plans Wedding
Mr. and Mrs.
George Boxley of Washington have announced the engagement of their daughter, Marlinda Anita Boxley, to Norman Orlando Hemming 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Hemming Jr. of the Bronx.
An August wedding is planned.
Ms.
Boxley, 24 years old, teaches social studies at Boys and Girls High School in Brooklyn.
She graduated and received a J.D. from American University.
Her father is a real-estate developer in Washington, where her mother, Martha Boxley, is the administrator of Dunbar High School.


Loesser Is More


Streetscapes: 40 East 70th Street; A Growth Plan for a Neo-Georgian Garage
THERE'S a charming little neo-Georgian garage at 40 East 70th Street next to the Explorers Club between Park and Madison Avenues whose single story may soon grow to six.
Built in 1918, it is one-half of an unusual block-through, town house-garage complex.
The Austrian Consulate, which owns the complex, plans a five-story addition to the garage.
Since the block is in the Upper East Side Historic District, the project must be reviewed by the Landmarks Preservation Commission.


Style Makers; Uta Szczerba, Sculptor in Leather
Uta Szczerba is a sculptor -- a sculptor in leather.
In her native Poland she worked with more conventional materials, but 10 years ago she began playing with leather.
She shaped it; she painted it; she added appliques.
"Every year I think it got better," she said.


TALES FROM THE BABY FACTORY
Ellen Hopkins's "Tales From the Baby Factory" (March 15) was a brave and honest article.
Although it feels better to hear the success stories, there seem to be more stories of pain and despair.
I, too, am a casualty of the technological advances in solving infertility issues.
My husband and I were diagnosed 10 years ago, and underwent attempts using Clomid, Perganol and HCG, numerous intrauterine inseminations (then called artificial inseminations), using donor sperm both frozen and "fresh," and, lastly, two very difficult cycles of in vitro fertilization.
We finally, with much torment and some relief, abandoned this path.


Subway Worker Stops Attack
An 18-year-old man took a bottle of vodka from a sleeping homeless man, doused him with it, and then tried to set him on fire in a subway train in Brooklyn early yesterday morning, the transit police said.
The train's conductor intervened before the man's clothes ignited, Albert O'Leary, a transit police spokesman, said.


Fresh Dishes From the Chengdu Region
CHENGDU has come to Long Island.
It is at J. J. Hwang in Merrick.
Even for those Chinese food aficionados who think they know it all and have tasted it all, Chengdu is an unknown.
The menu explains that Chengdu is the economic and cultural center of China's Sichuan Province and that its food is the most elite and revered of Sichuan-style cooking.
Although the difference between Chengdu and familiar Sichuan fare is subtle, it does not take an expert to recognize that J. J. Hwang is no routine suburban Chinese restaurant.


Balance of Power
MOST PEOPLE who know me also know my friend David or know, at the very least, that someone with that name owes me $6,000.
When the meter first started running, I was living in Hoboken, N.J., and chipping away at freelance articles about pop stars, performance artists and vintage clothing stores.
David was ensconced in the empty, white house he rented in Connecticut while writing a novel he believed would shortly make him rich.
Our first transaction seemed wondrously simple: David needed some money so I wrote him a check.
Unfortunately, where male friendships are concerned at least, power relations can get awfully slippery.
A check, it turns out, is never just a check.
David and I have known each other for six years, and our egos have been doing a pas de deux just as long.
In 1986, while I was a junior at Brown University, I heard the extraordinarily distressing report that a student on my very campus had sold a short story to a certain high-minded weekly.
I had never read the magazine, but I knew it was not to be taken lightly.
The day the relevant issue arrived at a newsstand, I bought it, slumped down at the back of a lecture hall and pored over the story, which concerned a college student who owed someone a great deal of money.


Shubert Opera Offering 'Boheme' in New Haven
THE Shubert Opera Company is preparing its period sets and costumes and rehearsing with the New Haven Symphony for its fully staged production -- with English supertitles -- of "La Boheme" by Puccini.
The Metropolitan Opera mezzo-soprano Lili Chookasian, who is also a Shubert Opera board member, will serve as host of a free "Opera Overture" at noon today at the theater in New Haven.
She will discuss the opera event with the production's conductor, Anton Coppola; the director, James DeBlasis, and the sopranos singing the roles of Mimi and Musetta, Katherina Luna and Carolann Page, respectively.
Students may attend the 7 P.M. dress rehearsal on Wednesday without charge; information about seating at the rehearsal is available by calling 624-1825.
The regular performances follow Friday evening at 8 and next Sunday afternoon at 2; for information on those call 562-5666.
The Wesleyan Chamber Choir, joined by a 19-year-old student pianist, Yuki Shimada, and his teacher, Sanda Schuldmann, are performing the "Liebeslieder Waltzes" of Johannes Brahms at the Pomfret School Chapel at 3 P.M. today.
The program, part of the Chamber Music Plus series, also features the cellist Harry Clark and includes works of Scriabin and Paul Ben-Haim.
It will be repeated in Crowell Hall at Wesleyan University in Middlletown at 8 P.M. on Friday, and again next Sunday at 3 in Christ Church Cathedral in Hartford (232-0085).


PARIS PASSION
AT LEAST 200 YOUNG PEOPLE STOOD OUTSIDE THE ISSEY Miyake show.
They weren't buyers, and held no press cards or tickets, but they pushed and panted to get in as if Miyake was throwing in a jacket with each press kit.
Similarly eager throngs blocked the entrances to the shows of Yohji Yamamoto and Paul Smith and turned the street where Jean-Paul Gaultier was showing into a steeplechase.
It's not like this in Milan.
New York doesn't have the passion.
But in Paris, where men in certain cafes discuss fashion as heatedly as soccer and socialism, designer claques have the tacit blessing of fashion houses.
Why not?
These groupies don't believe one wears a suit.
One wears a Yohji.
So pick your philosophy with care.
THE INNOVATORS: Though idolized and scandalized, Gaultier makes news with everything he does, for good reason.
There is as much talent as provocation in his sly variation on a classic Donegal suit -- with tight pants.
Regimental vests cover tailored, sleeveless shirts.
Form-fitting waistcoats flaunt leather sweat shields.
There are vest-backed sport jackets and a trench coat that buttons to the floor or full-splits to the waist.
Naturally, what gets press is all the exaggeration: chap-pant skirts, bustier vests.
Gaultier must set them out like traps to see who falls into them.
Why else does he grin at the end of each show like a creature out of Lewis Carroll?


Losing Weight Can Mean Changing Your Life; What Works
To the Editor:
As co-author with Dr.
Herman Tarnower of "The Complete Scarsdale Medical Diet," I take issue with the heads of an anti-diet group in New York you describe in your April 12 front-page article: "They require members to stop dieting, accept their bodies and eat whatever and whenever they want." You do not mention what percentage of members manages to reduce and stay slim.


Tallying The Human Factor
To the Editor:
Regarding Robert Campbell's essay "A Logo of the Past on the Screen of the Present"  [ March 29 ] , in which he discusses Robert A. M. Stern's office tower on the corner of Berkeley and Boylston Streets in Boston: What is left out of the photograph accompanying the essay is the more-than-20-story-high office buildings running a full city block on either side of the Stern structure, part of an insurance company's complex of buildings.


Cornices
To the Editor:
Our office has been extensively involved in the restoration of the historic building fabric of New York City.
This work has included numerous cornice reconstructions and the restoration of the facade elements in proximity to these cornices.
Our findings of actual field conditions and our investigations of the original detailing of cornices have without question led us to conclude that these cornices provide weather protection to upper facade elements.
It also appears that in most cases this protective function was at least a part of the intended purpose of the cornice.


Making a Difference; A Hot Chip Called Flash
In personal computer circles, the debate has long raged: When, if ever, would chips replace disk drives for storing data.
Last week, a group at the Intel Corporation led by Richard Pashley had the answer: Sooner than you think.
Using a new type of chip called a "flash memory," Intel introduced a 20-megabyte memory card that will sell for $611, or about twice the price of a hard disk with the same capacity.
That's a low enough premium that makers of notebook computers, palmtops and other portable devices are likely to accept the new device for its many advantages over magnetic media.
These include greater durability, higher speed and lower power consumption.


Belinda Keeps the Pirates Purring
Pirates 1, Cubs 0
CHICAGO, April 25 (AP) -- Stan Belinda relies on a simple philosophy as the closer for the Pirates.
It goes like this: "My stuff is good enough to get 'em out, so just throw strikes."


Tapping a Spanish-Language Market
SHOPPING in these yellow pages, your fingers do the walking over such listings as abogado, dentista and escuelas de karate.
The first of its kind in the county, Paginas Hispanas is an independently published phone book for Spanish-speaking residents and the idea of four brothers and their mother who emigrated from Uruguay to the United States 17 years ago.
"Now it's our turn to tell our fellow Spanish-speaking residents, 'Don't be a stranger in your new land,' " said 36-year-old Miguel Castagna, the youngest brother and the one who convinced his family that the time had come for a second-language phone directory in Westchester.


Showcase Reflects Island's Changes
THE history of Tulip Tree Hill in Lattingtown reflects the Gold Coast, once the setting for numberless sprawling mansions, where residents of distinction enjoyed an opulent style of life.
An estate of more than 50 acres, Tulip Tree Hill has been subdivided and sold in four-acre parcels.
But the sprawling country manor, known today as Lockjaw Ridge, and a separate entertainment pavilion, itself a mansion called Sporting Ridge, are set on rolling hills surrounded by tulip trees and isolated behind a red-brick wall.


Miss Beyersdorf To Wed in July
John P. Beyersdorf and Eunice C. Laughlin, both of Scarsdale, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Susan Chapin Beyersdorf, to Robert John Maes, a son of Robert H. and Ann Maes of Wyckoff, N.J.
A July wedding is planned.
Miss Beyersdorf, 27 years old, is a research assistant at Prudential Securities in New York.
She graduated from Springfield College.
Her father is the associate managing director at the Wertheim Schroder securities company in New York.


Arabian Heights


He Didn't Slash Budgets
The budget news in New York City may not be great, but it is good enough to have banished that grimmest of modifiers: Draconian.
Just months ago, this odd word cropped up to describe every ounce of budgetary pain the Mayor was forced to threaten taxpayers and city employees with.
"Draconian cuts" were just the thing to maintain "fiscal probity" while the city worked its way back to "structural balance."


Ms. Doyle Wed To Steven Froot
Mary Ann Doyle, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas M. Doyle of New Britain, Conn., was married last evening to Steven Ian Froot, the son of Mildred Froot of New York and the late Dr.
Leonard S. Froot.
The Rev.
Henry Fehrenbacher performed the ceremony at St.
Paul's Chapel at Columbia University, assisted by Rabbi Abraham Weisman.
Ms.
Doyle, who is keeping her name, is an associate in the law firm of Debevoise &amp; Plimpton in New York.
She graduated from Trinity College in Washington and received a law degree from Fordham University.
Her father, a retired accountant, was the finance director for the city of New Britain.
Her mother, Winifred M. Doyle, retired as an elementary-school teacher in Bridgeport, Conn.


For One American, Britain Is the Land of Opportunity
Anne Evans wants to go home.
The British Government and tire dealers may be glad to have the 35-year-old American entrepreneur in this industrial city near Birmingham.
But to hear her tell it, she was forced to come here to save her family's eastern Connecticut real estate business, which has been pushed to the brink by the recession.


Clinton's Standard Campaign Speech: A Call for Responsibility
Following is the text of the campaign speech, excluding a brief introductory passage, that Gov.
Bill Clinton delivered at the University of Pittsburgh branch at Johnstown, Pa., on April 22, as transcribed by The New York Times.
. . .
I want to make just a few sort of basic points about this election.
And I'd like begin with two little statistics, one of which was published a day or two ago in America's newspapers and one of which will be out tomorrow.
Statistic No. 1: According to the Federal Reserve Board, 1 percent of America's people at the top of the totem pole now have more wealth than the bottom 90 percent, the biggest imbalance in wealth in America since the 1920's right before the Great Depression.


Breeze Lets Conner Play Catch-Up
A nearly breathless breeze turned the tables on the America's Cup teams today, setting up victory conditions for the defense and challenge finalists who have known mostly losses since the series started a week ago.
Stars &amp; Stripes won a highly tactical battle in winds that threatened to die to a whisper.
But Italy's Il Moro di Venezia could not maintain its early advantage over favored New Zealand.
A 3-to-7-knot westerly wind looked kindly on Stars &amp; Stipes, the defense boat that can be expected to out-perform its rival, America , in a light and shifty breeze.
The combination gave Dennis Conner and his Stars &amp; Stripes team a 2-minute-18-second victory over Bill Koch's America  .
The finish improved Stars &amp; Stripes to a more respectable 2-4 record in the 7-of-13 defenders finals.


As Deng Calls for Reform, China Waits
The aging Mao Zedong, feeling frustrated with the Communist Party bureaucracy in the 1960's, traveled south and used provincial newspapers to launch his calls for change.
The result was the Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution, and nothing in China was ever quite the same.
When the aging Deng Xiaoping felt frustrated with the Communist Party bureaucracy in the 1990's, he too traveled south -- this January -- and used provincial newspapers and television stations to shake up the regime.
But Beijing is still locked in a power struggle, and it is unclear whether Mr.
Deng's efforts to impose his will will have the sweeping effects that Mao's did.


Mexico Delays Releasing Results of Inquiry on Explosions


World Markets; S.E.C. Says No on German Stocks
Rudiger von Rosen, the executive vice charman of the Federation of German Stock Exchanges, was in New York last week pushing the case for direct listing of German stocks on exchanges in the United States.
Why not make it easier for Americans to buy foreign stocks at home?
To achieve this goal, however, agreement has to be reached with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
And from Mr. von Rosen's presentation of the German view, it is clear that the S.E.C. would have to accept German accounting methods, which means less information would be disclosed to American investors.


POWERFUL QUAKE SHAKES CALIFORNIA
A powerful earthquake rattled the northern coast of California yesterday, sending shock waves north into Oregon, east into Nevada and as far south as San Francisco.
The quake knocked pedestrians to the ground, snapped gas lines and ignited fires.
The authorities said 45 people were injured, including eight who were hospitalized, The Associated Press reported, and state officials estimated damage at $3.5 million.


The Phalanx of the G.O.P. Cracks a Bit
Last January, New Jersey's Republican legislative phalanx marched into Trenton with an aura of invincibility.
A landslide victory over the embattled Democrats gave them a bullet-proof two-thirds majorities in both houses, enough to override any veto by Democratic Gov.
Jim Florio, whose own popularity seems stuck several points below freezing.
But three months into the new legislative session, the ground may be shifting.
It is by no means an earthquake, but there are tremors.


Tracy Chapman Tries, Again, To Live Up to Her Reputation
At the Farm Aid benefit concert in Dallas last month, the final few hours were reserved for the really big names: Willie Nelson, Neil Young, John Mellencamp, Paul Simon, Lynyrd Skynyrd and Tracy Chapman.
As the only woman and the only black performer, Ms.
Chapman's inclusion in this elite group seemed impressive.
Mr.
Nelson, Mr.
Young and Mr.
Simon, all protest singers in their own way, have each been performing and recording for more than 20 years, while Ms.
Chapman's career goes back only four years and two albums.
Introduced by Arlo Guthrie as the most important "poet and dreamer of her day," Ms.
Chapman took the opportunity to preview material from her third album, "Matters of the Heart" (Elektra 61215; cassette and CD), due for release this week.
Her new songs are indeed protest songs: "Woman's Work" describes female disenfranchisement, and "Bang Bang Bang" details the problem of crime among inner-city youths.


POLL SHOWS PEROT GAINING STRENGTH TO RIVAL CLINTON'S
Riding a wave of discontent with politics-as-usual, Ross Perot is now the preferred Presidential alternative of more than a fifth of the registered voters, putting him just behind Gov.
Bill Clinton, according to the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll.
More than two-thirds of registered voters admitted knowing little about Mr.
Perot, who has not yet officially entered the race but is considering an independent candidacy.
More than half in the new survey were unable to describe him as a liberal, a conservative or a moderate.
But the Texas businessman is increasingly seen as an option by voters dissatisfied with Mr.
Clinton, the likely Democratic nominee, and President Bush, the poll showed.


Maker of Heart Valve Balks Over Some Warnings
The maker of a flawed heart valve is questioning a Federal order requiring it to notify thousands of patients who received the valve before the age of 50 that they might face a greater risk of a fatal fracture than previously thought.
Last month, the Federal Food and Drug Administration ordered the valve's maker, Shiley Inc., to tell people who have the device about new research that showed the valve was fracturing far more frequently than previously thought and that patients who had received the device before the age of 50 faced higher risks.


Jane C. Bell, Designer, Wed
Jane Canning Bell, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles A. Bell of New York, was married yesterday to James Cammarata, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank Cammarata of New York.
The Rev.
Christopher Brown performed the Episcopal ceremony at Grace Church in New York.
Mrs.
Cammarata, 32 years old, is the president of Bell &amp; Buchanan, an interior design concern in New York.
She graduated from the Fashion Institute of Technology.
Her father, who retired as the executive vice president of Hilton International, is a developer and consultant to the international hotel industry in New York.


Miss Flanagan Wed in Darien
Suzanne Philbin Flanagan, a daughter of William K. Flanagan Jr. of Darien, Conn., and the late Lynn D. Flanagan, was married in Darien yesterday to William Douglas Wright, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
William C. Wright of Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
Bruce Lincon performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
John's Church.
Mrs.
Wright, 25 years old, is the office manager for Metro Pool Inc., a van service in Stamford, Conn.
She graduated from New Hampshire College.
Her father is the associate general counsel of the Walsh Construction Company in Trumbull, Conn.


Clinton's Standard Campaign Speech: A Call for Responsibility
Following is the text of the campaign speech, excluding a brief introductory passage, that Gov.
Bill Clinton delivered at the University of Pittsburgh branch at Johnstown, Pa., on April 22, as transcribed by The New York Times.
. . .
I want to make just a few sort of basic points about this election.
And I'd like begin with two little statistics, one of which was published a day or two ago in America's newspapers and one of which will be out tomorrow.
Statistic No. 1: According to the Federal Reserve Board, 1 percent of America's people at the top of the totem pole now have more wealth than the bottom 90 percent, the biggest imbalance in wealth in America since the 1920's right before the Great Depression.


2 X 2 = 20


Whacking the Suits
Wearing his usual Western attire -- a plaid shirt, jeans and a quilted down waistcoat -- a former rodeo rider named Cy Baumgartner paid a visit to the St.
Louis Art Museum and made an interesting discovery: the horseman in "The Bronco Buster," a bronze by Frederic Remington, was wearing his spurs upside down.
When the real broncobuster (now one word, on the analogy of
gangbuster
) pointed out this gaffe to the curator, his embarrassing revelation was received with a disdain bordering on condescension. Mr. Baumgartner, who now drives an 18-wheel truck but retains his interest in the Wild West, cheerfully waved off the frigid attitude of the museum official with "I've been lied to by
suits
all my life."


Euphoria Is Scarce as Dinkins Loosens Fiscal Belt
Jose Delgado lingered at the doorstep of a decaying South Bronx apartment building last week watching Mayor David N. Dinkins promise millions of dollars in projects.
After a while the politicians dispersed.
The television cameras were packed up.
The onlookers dribbled away.
But Mr.
Delgado remained, as he always does.
"Every time they want to be elected, they come here," said the 41-year-old building superintendent.
"They say they are going to do things to fix the neighborhood, but it's been like this since 1972."


Tech Notes; Better Lineup for The Little Guys
Dennis Crumpler, president of Atlanta-based Xcellenet, likes to talk about the "disenfranchised nine million" and what he can do for them.
His millions are small branch offices and retail outlets like gas stations and fast food restaurants which, for reasons of remoteness or size, are denied access to networks.
And 5-year-old Xcellenet has signed up more than 170 companies with 40,000 computers who use its products to meet networking needs.
Cost of a basic system for 100 users: $28,000.
"The traditional model for the network, a user being connected at all times, doesn't work for those users who only need to be connected intermittently," said Mr.
Crumpler.
Most of those remote users can do all their daily work on a PC or a small LAN.
The problem develops when information, such as sales or inventory figures, must be sent to or received from the home office.
The standard approach -- tedious and expensive -- is to have someone at the branch manually send information or set up the PC and its modem so someone can dial in and get it.


Mount Kinabalu
To the Editor: J. D. Brown's article "Taking on Mount Kinabalu" (March 1) brought back fond memories.
A few years ago, on a business trip to Sabah, I was introduced to Mount Kinabalu as a way to kill the weekend.
Since I grew up in the Himalayas, I have always loved and admired mountains.
The temptation was too much to pass up.


Holocaust Project Fosters Interfaith Spirit
THE Garden of Remembrance, Westchester's official Holocaust Memorial, will not be completed for several months, but the spirit of the project is already very much apparent.
It can be found in the early-morning meetings of an interfaith committee working to write the inscription for the memorial.
It can be seen in the volunteer efforts by people of all faiths to raise funds for the garden and its centerpiece, a 14-foot-high 15-foot-wide sculpture that will rise in front of the County Office Building on Martine Avenue here.
And it is evident in the ecumenical events planned in observance of Holocaust Remembrance Day this Thursday by ministers, rabbis and others countywide.


The Nail-Biting Delays on Mortgages
WHEN Jill and Robert Miller signed a contract for a two-bedroom co-op on the East Side of Manhattan just before Thanksgiving they thought they would be in their new home by now.
But the Millers are still in their rental apartment because the lender from whom they sought a mortgage took so long to handle their application.
They finally got a loan from another bank and closed on the apartment at the end of March.
They will be moving in after renovations have been completed.


Find the Ginger! It's Anxiety Time For an Original.
He starts to scream the minute he opens the door.
Not that he's angry.
It's just that everything he says is delivered at top volume, waving his arms and yelling, as if he's talking to someone across the street, even if you're standing right next to him.
William Finn, who wrote the classic theater song, "Four Jews in a Room Bitching," manages to be all four at the same time.
"Can you believe this place? It's still such a mess, but you should have seen it before I had it cleaned. People walk in here and say, 'Are you sure you're gay?'


ESPN Crew's Mouths: A 4.0 in 40-Word Dash
Back back back back when L.B.J. (Southwest Texas State Teachers College), Nixon (Whittier College) and Ford (University of Michigan) were presidents, the National Football League draft was of moderate global import.
Teams picked.
The news media reported.
Minicams, Mel Kiper Jr. and Madonna had not been invented.
The draft is now covered by ESPN (today, 11 A.M.-4:30 P.M., Eastern time) with more ingenuity and effort than the television networks will plow into this summer's political conventions.
Why not?
The draft is better TV.
More money is made.
More tangible business is decided.
No one argues about party platforms.


Not Nixon's Slogan
To the Editor:
Edwin Murray Hood makes an interesting point in "When Presidential Slogans Meet the Realities of Government" (letter, April 12) in his argument that campaign slogans often "collide with the realities" and "soon vanish like fleeting apparitions."


Russia's Battle for the Land: Can Private Farms Prevail?
The Batyrovs do not have the look of revolutionaries.
They are far more at home at the controls of the tractor that is their pride, or tending the heifers in their new barn.
These, however, could be the barricades of what may be the most fateful struggle under way in Russia, the struggle for the land.


A Device Designed to Help the Urban Athlete Breathe Easier
WITH THE UBIQUITOUS urban challenges of pollution, noise, grime and what passes for air in the city, a run is never just a run, a bike ride is never just a ride.
But now, direct from London, comes Respro to the rescue.
Respro, a mask that claims to filter out "lead, nitrogen oxides, sulfur dioxide, hydrocarbons, particulate matter, ozone, pollen and bacterial viruses," was designed for the city athlete.


Bland Style That Made Desegregation Palatable
No one will ever accuse this city's newly elected Mayor of being a flamboyant politician.
But in a city that has been roiled for a dozen years by tumult over a Federal court order to desegregate housing, many now say that Yonkers could do with less flashy leaders.
In Terence M. Zaleski, a former chemistry teacher and a lifelong Boy Scout who still wears his uniform proudly, they believe Yonkers may have found the bland style it needs.


Accord Is Reached to Ease Canadian Restrictions on Beer From U.S.
In a compromise aimed at avoiding a trade war, Canada and the United States today reached an agreement in principle to ease the restrictions that Canada imposes on imports of American beer.
The accord was reached after late-night meetings in Washington and telephone calls between Washington, Ottawa and the seats of provincial governments in Canada.
President Bush and Prime Minister Brian Mulroney did not directly take part in the talks but had recently discussed the need to reduce trade tensions, officials of both Governments said.


Why It's Proven Difficult To Make Qaddafi Give In
Despite all the maneuvering, the standoff continues over Libya's refusal to surrender two purported bombers of Pan Am flight 103.
So far, say Western officials in London and Rome, there have been no cracks in the embargo mandated by the United Nations Security Council two weeks ago.
But neither has Col.
Muammar el-Qaddafi handed over the two men for trial outside Libya.
Like Saddam Hussein during the gulf crisis, Colonel Qaddafi has elected to hang tough, even though there is little obvious solace to be drawn from the example of Iraq; if a global coalition dominated by the United States could drive Saddam Hussein out of Kuwait by force, it can be reasoned, why should the same array of forces unravel on the far less risky issue of punishing Libya?


Headliners; Campaign Time
Time in prison ends a lot of political careers, but six months behind bars apparently didn't look much worse than recess for Marion S. Barry Jr.
Winding up a term for one misdemeanor count of cocaine possession, the former three-term Mayor of Washington spoke in broad, noncommittal terms about what local offices might be up for grabs this year.
After his conviction in 1990 and subsequent appeal, he seemed a broken man as he headed off to prison last year.
But last week he was met at the Federal prison gates at Loretto, Pa., by five busloads of the faithful.
Stopping for lunch and a bit of rest at Johnstown, the former Mayor told supporters that he felt "better, not bitter" as a result of his prison stay.
Then he told reporters that there seemed to be several City Council seats winnable in the near future and that he might try for one.
Carrying a Bible and wearing a Kinte cloth hat and sash, Mr.
Barry let his supporters say that his first charge at the City Council just might come this year.


POSTINGS: Upper East Side; . . . 8 Co-ops on the Block
When co-op apartments are put on the auction block after a sponsor defaults, it is often a bank, as the sponsor's lender, that has the right to do the selling.
But in an auction on Thursday, the sellers will be shareholders in a 36-unit Manhattan co-op where the sponsor fell behind in maintenance payments.
Eight apartments will be put up for sale by the Woodlands Holding Corporation, made up of most of the shareholders in the building at 114 East 84th Street.


Ms. Horowitz To Wed in Fall
Mr. and Mrs.
Gerald Horowitz of Chestnut Ridge, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Cheryl Ann Horowitz, to Brian Levine, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jesse Levine of Pomona, N.Y.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Horowitz, 26 years old, is an investment banker at Ladenburg Thalmann in New York.
She graduated from Washington University in St.
Louis.
Her father is the president of Tecnimat/TDS Inc., a data communications concern in Englewood, N.J.
Her mother, Caryl Horowitz, is a special-education teacher at Spring Valley (N.Y.) High School.


A Hundred Words for 'Green'
THE ROAD TO EXTREMA
By Bob Reiss. 301 pp. New York: Summit Books.


A Winner for Romero
In the first race at Aqueduct yesterday, Randy Romero rode his first winner in nearly 10 months after recovering from multiple injuries suffered in the latest of his many spills.
"There were times," he said after scoring aboard Future Question, "when I thought I wasn't going to make it back."


Artist Finds a Career in Hook-and-Ladder Heraldry
LIZ HARRINGTON had been spinning gold for the door of the Griswold Volunteer Fire Department's new truck.
Now she was painting a stripe on the door.
Firefighters are "so particular about their trucks," said the 44-year-old artist.
"They're their babies."
Ms.
Harrington works regularly on fire engines and ambulances.
Using paint and gold leaf to reflect light, she decorates the vehicles with stripes, letters, numerals, emblems, even entire scenes.


Italian, French and New American Menu
CHEF MARTIN (named for chef-owner Martin Corso) is a new restaurant in Branford.
It's easy to pass by -- an unprepossessing one-story white building along a commercial strip.
But inside the gaily decorated dining room exudes good cheer, an intangible feeling enhanced by a friendly, eager young staff who have the enthusiasm one associates with 1930's musicals ("Hey gang, let's put on a show").
The one-room dining space has a motley charm, with dark green wainscoting, white wood walls, trapezoidal brick wall panels, cerise wood booths and trim, and a wood planter in the center of the room filled with a small ficus tree and other plantings.
Pale blue tablecloths under glass tops and a candle stuck in a whole artichoke on each table complete the scene.


Review/Music; Hagegard Sings 'Wayfarer' Songs
The final movement of Mahler's First Symphony has some extraordinarily dramatic moments.
It opens with an anxious shock, an exclamation; it marches to a ferocious climax; it even incorporates themes from the opening movement in its drive toward resolution.
After a few detours, it finally reaches a moment of triumph with a fanfare of the horns and swirling strings.
Then all turns into illusion; the security dissipates.
The past recurs with such simplicity that for an instant we seem to have returned to the first movement.
But these echoes of innocent origins have a very different effect than they once did.
Now they are fragmented, troubled, ironic rather than confident.


Review/Music; Diversities Of Chinese Opera
Though Chinese Opera has had fair exposure in New York in recent years, it has been hard to explore the genre in any systematic way.
The fine little Taipei Theater, in the McGraw-Hill Building, 1221 Avenue of the Americas, at 49th Street, may change that.
This week's program of operatic excerpts by the Yen Lan-ching Chinese Opera Troupe, at any rate, could serve as an excellent introduction to the form, affording a quick-paced survey of its wide range of elements, from circuslike acrobatics through robust humor to delicate romance, all presented with light staging and lavish costumes.
Music does not always take the fore in Chinese opera.
In the comedic "Asking the Woodsman," from "Fan Chung-yu," in fact, the music consists mostly of the clashing of woodblocks and cymbals as occasional punctuation for the stylized dialogue of the old woodsman and a young man in search of his wife and child.


The Advantages Of Home Sharing
The March 29 article on home sharing ("Growing Number of People Share Homes for Fun and Profit") performed a valuable service, informing the public about the advantages of home sharing.
Our matching program, Shared Housing for One-Parent Families, operates out of the Women's Rights Information Center in Englewood in Bergen County.
For over six years we have been matching single parents with other single parents or with singles or with seniors.
We assist them in arranging living together agreements that are mutually beneficial, taking into consideration their needs, preferences, habits, etc.


A's Batter Tapani and Twins
Athletics 8, Twins 4
MINNEAPOLIS, April 25 (AP) -- Willie Wilson drove in three runs and Terry Steinbach hit a home run, a double and a single in his first game off the disabled list as Oakland roughed up Kevin Tapani in an 8-4 victory over Minnesota today.


It's Better to Mind Your Own Store
To the Editor:
Over the last 40 years, I have accumulated stock, sometimes 50 shares, sometimes 500, in more than 40 American corporations.
Since retiring, I have had time to study the flood of proxy statements.
In addition to objecting to the unjustified high salaries and other compensation paid to management ("The Corporate Clubhouse"), I am bothered by the ever-increasing compensation for directors.
Most directors have other occupations or enjoy five- or six-figure retirement pay, not to mention stock.
So why the high annual retainers and attendance fees?


If You're Thinking of Living in: Turtle Bay
TURTLE Bay is the site of the United Nations and some of New York City's costliest real estate.
But this small Manhattan enclave on the East River has had an international flavor since 1639, when the ruling Dutch granted two Englishmen the right to establish Deutal Bay Farm in the area.
Some historians say the neighborhood got its name from the Dutch word "deutal," meaning curved sword, for the shape of the shore at the time.
Others insist the English named it for the abundance of reptiles on which they feasted.


Flavoring Chicken, Fish and Pasta With Olives
IT is hard to believe nowadays, but not long ago in the United States it seemed that all olives sprang forth from cans.
Remember those large fat watery ones with uniform shape and no taste?
Now, however, there are endless varieties to choose from.
Olives can be soft and fleshy, bursting open like ripe persimmons; or firm and smooth, or wrinkled and chewy.
Some are shaped like tiny apples; some approach the perfect oval.
The colors are as diverse as the shapes: purplish black, deep blue-green, straw yellow, dark red wine and a spectrum of browns and greens from rich chocolate to chartreuse.


Data Bank/April 26, 1992


Challenge to Northeastern Woodlands
WILL hemlocks go the way of the chestnuts and elm trees?
This is a question on many minds as the Northeast faces another destructive problem of its woodlands.
The challenge is coming from a tiny but devastating insect called the woolly adelgid.
Although the insect occurs both in the East and West, it was not reported in the East until 1951 and it now occurs from North Carolina to southern New England.
Forests are indeed threatened.
But on the home front where a gardener is in control, the trees have a much better chance of survival.
The woolly adelgid is an aphidlike insect with sucking mouthparts.
It feeds on the succulent sweet sap of the young branches and deprives this new growth of its vitality.
It is believed that with this feeding, a toxic saliva enters the tree and causes a rapid desiccation and discoloration of the foliage.
Studies have shown that a mature tree can be killed in four years.


Corrections
A report on the Business Diary page last Sunday about a colorless soft drink from Pepsi-Cola misstated the context for a comment by Jesse Meyers, publisher of Beverage Digest.
In saying, "The brown goods are dying," Mr.
Meyers referred to the hard-liquor market, not soft drinks.


Type A Mom, Type A Baby?
WOMEN WITH one aspect of the Type A personality - loosely identified as a hard-driving nature - tend to have babies who exhibit Type A temperments, according to a study last month in Pediatrics.
Researchers used a psychological test to identify Type A behavior in 60 healthy pregnant women.
Thirty-two were considered Type A based on their answers to such questions as "How do you feel about competition on the job or in outside activities?" Within two birth, the babies with Type A mothers cried an average of 40 percent more than the others - evidence, say the researchers, that the newborns had Type A tendencies, too.


Tale of Two Brides


Mount Kinabalu
To the Editor: The article on climbing Mount Kinabalu brought back pleasant memories of Andrew Whittaker, the birding guide mentioned in your Amazon article in the same issue.
I met him when I visited the Pantanal wetlands region of Brazil three years ago and also found him knowledgeable and enthusiastic.
Based on his suggestions, I visited Borneo last fall, and climbed Mount Kinabalu. (Before going to Brazil, Mr. Whittaker had spent a period of time in Borneo.)
I would agree with J. D. Brown that the Mount Kinabalu climb is a stiff physical workout.
The travel company that I went with, Overseas Adventure Travel in Boston, recommends regular aerobic conditioning prior to the trip.
By following the recommendations, I was able to snap back with fewer ill effects than Mr.
Brown.


Barrie Abajian, Banker, to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Abajian of Franklin Lakes, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Barrie Ann Abajian to Mark Lawrence Roberts, a son of Melvin L. Roberts of Wayne, N.J., and Mrs.
Thomas A. Cuomo of Berkeley Heights, N.J.
A July wedding is planned.
Miss Abajian, 29 years old, graduated from New York University and is an officer at the National Westminster Bank USA in New York.
Her father, who is retired, was a founder of Electro Nucleonics Inc., a maker of medical diagnostic equipment in Fairfield, N.J.


Losing Weight Can Mean Changing Your Life; Medical Reasons
To the Editor:
"A Growing Movement Fights Diets Instead of Fat" (front page, April 12) helps paint a confusing picture in which all diets and all people who are overweight are lumped together in hopelessness.
You make no distinction between people trying to fit into bikinis for the summer and those who face a lifetime battle with their weight for health reasons.


Cynthia Lynch, a Producer, Is Wed
Cynthia Ann Lynch, a daughter of Mary Lee Lynch of Los Angeles and Dr.
Michael J. Lynch of Buffalo, was married yesterday to Jan Frederick van Eck, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John C. van Eck of Scarborough, N.Y.
The Rev.
Gerald McNulty performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of St.
Thomas More in New York.
Mrs. van Eck, 27 years old and a graduate of the University of Southern California, is a producer at Ray Bloch Productions, a business communications company in New York.
Her father is a psychiatrist in Buffalo.
Her mother is a nurse at the Veterans Administration Medical Center in Long Beach, Calif.


Wall Street; A Nasty Mood at Jefferson-Pilot
It shakes one's faith in Southern civility to observe the ugliness of the battle being waged between Louise Price Parsons and the gentlemen who run the Jefferson-Pilot Corporation, a $1.1 billion life insurer based in Greensboro, N.C.
Mrs.
Parsons, a real estate developer in Pawley's Island, S.C., is a substantial shareholder and the granddaughter of one of the company's early chief executives.
She is leading a proxy contest to put up to seven new members on the company's 20-member board.
In the course of that battle, which will culminate at the annual meeting on May 4, she has accused the company of negligently misleading shareholders about important executive compensation arrangements.


TALES FROM THE BABY FACTORY
Hopkins writes: "There are as yet no psychological studies on IVF offspring but therapists . . .  are already voicing concerns." She goes on to quote a therapist who claims that parents of such a child may "feel gypped when the child doesn't measure up. You spent your life savings and what do you have? A kid, that's all."


Alison Willner Weds
Alison Jill Willner, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William C. Willner of South Orange, N.J., was married yesterday to Dr.
Richard Scot Greenberg, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
George I. Greenberg of Fairlawn, N.J.
Rabbi Harvey Goldman officiated at the Hilton at Short Hills in Short Hills, N.J.


CULTURAL BAGGAGE
In response to your author's assertion that discarding the old baggage of culture makes us free, I believe it does.
Without the burden of old values, we are able to think and do more for ourselves and care less for others.


After Years of Aiding Rebels, Little U.S. Influence
As Afghan rebels take control of Kabul, the Bush Administration is exercising little influence after years of doling out military aid to the guerrillas who are now emerging victorious.
In part the reduced American role demonstrates the transience of alliances bought with arms supplies.
American leverage diminished quickly once military aid was cut off last year in hopes of fostering a settlement to the civil war.
But some regional diplomats and scholars also say that as the struggle reaches a climax, prudence may dictate that Washington let events run their own course.


Richter Steps Up And Devils Shut Down
Mike Richter, a somewhat surprising choice in goal for the Rangers, shut out the Devils, 3-0, tonight at Byrne Meadowlands Arena, tying the first-round National Hockey League playoff series at two games each.
As so often happens in post-season play, the big scorers were shut down and the grinding role players got the big goals.
After two scoreless periods, Jan Erixon and Paul Broten beat Chris Terreri early in the third period.
When the Devils pulled Terreri for an extra attacker in the final two minutes, Mike Gartner scored into the open net.


CAMPUS LIFE: Smith; A Recruiting Lure Is Paid Research With Professors
Smith College here is looking for a few qualified applicants among next fall's freshmen class to offer them something not ordinarily given to students: paid research jobs with faculty members.
Applicants will be considered for the newly created Student Research in Departments program, in which 25 students of the expected incoming class of 635 are to be selected to participate for their first two years here and be paid $2,000 a year.


Review/Dance; Chen and Innocence Lost
H.
T.
Chen has grown in sophistication and craft over the years he has been choreographing in New York City, but he has lost none of his sense of vibrant theater and commitment.
Mr.
Chen's new "Double Happiness, 100 Sorrows," presented on Friday night at La Mama Annex, offers a fresh and engrossing look at an age-old subject, the loss of innocence.
Mr.
Chen, a graduate of the Juilliard School and New York University, studied Chinese and Western dance in his native Shanghai and in Taiwan, where he was raised.
His choreography and staging maintain a bold yet delicate balance between the two worlds, as does Bradley Kaus's delightful score for the new piece, which was inspired by life in Shanghai during the 1940's.


WESTCHESTER BOOKCASE
The Hudson River Highlands By Frances F. Dunwell Columbia University Press. 264 pages.
Across time there have been oceans of perceptions about the Hudson River and its Highlands, the area where mountains like Dunderberg, Storm King and Breakneck kneel at the river's banks.
Knickerbocker writers and Hudson River School artists fell under its romantic spell.
Men bled and died for the river in the Revolution.
Robber barons built fantasy palaces along its banks and quarriers gouged and blasted, pocking the face of the Highlands.


Alison Lee Engaged to Alan Tigert
Mr. and Mrs.
Ronald S. Lee of Pound Ridge, N.Y., have announced August wedding plans for their daughter Alison Lee and Alan Andrew Tigert, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Barry Tigert of Markham, Ontario, Canada.
Ms.
Lee, 24 years old, graduated from Ithaca College.
She is an associate member of the Association of Theatrical Press Agents and Managers, based in New York.
Her father is a theatrical producer in New York and London.
Her mother, Patricia Lee, is founder and publisher of Stubs, a seating-plan guide to New York theaters.


Carrie MacLeod To Wed in Fall
Douglas C. MacLeod of Huntington, L.I., and Rowena Agnes MacLeod of New Rochelle, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Carrie Elizabeth MacLeod, to John Francis Moore, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ellis O. Moore of Pelham Manor, N.Y.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Macleod, 27 years old, is a circulation representative at Newsday in Melville, L.I.
Her father is the newspaper's public relations manager.


Just Desserts And the Nets
To the Sports Editor:
I've been following the Nets the last few weeks, enjoying their winning ways, admiring what I considered good play (though not all of it was), only to read that, according to George Vecsey, the thought of the Nets with a chance to make the playoffs was the "ultimate vulgarity of professional sports." I've been puzzled ever since by what he meant.


Easy Ways to Be Sure Mowers Start Again
UNLESS engine-powered yard-care equipment like mowers, string trimmers, shredders and garden tillers are stored and maintained with care, the day will eventually come when, on pulling the starting cord or turning the key, nothing will happen.
Before starting an engine that has been stored over the winter, check that the crankcase contains oil.
If it does not, fill it with fresh oil of the type specified in the owner's manual.
If the manual cannot be found, ask at a lawnmower- or small-engine service center about which oil to use.


Cuttings; A Lively Gardening Dictionary Breaks Fertile New Ground
Mark Griffiths, a young English horticulturist, recently strolled through the wholesale flower district along the Avenue of the Americas in Manhattan, admiring the tropical plants.
"I was absolutely staggered by what I saw there," he said.
"Superb aroids and cycads, and I'm sure some of them were illegal. They were simply too old. No nursery would ever be able to afford to grow them."


Flavoring Chicken, Fish and Pasta With Olives
IT is hard to believe nowadays, but not long ago in the United States it seemed that all olives sprang forth from cans.
Remember those large fat watery ones with uniform shape and no taste?
Now, however, there are endless varieties to choose from.
Olives can be soft and fleshy, bursting open like ripe persimmons; or firm and smooth, or wrinkled and chewy.
Some are shaped like tiny apples; some approach the perfect oval.
The colors are as diverse as the shapes: purplish black, deep blue-green, straw yellow, dark red wine and a spectrum of browns and greens from rich chocolate to chartreuse.


Miss Kahan to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Paul R. Kahan of Stamford, Conn., have announced July wedding plans for their daughter Sharla Beth Kahan and Colin Francis Costello, a son of Drs.
Francis and Mary Ellen Costello of Philadelphia.
Miss Kahan, 27 years old, graduated from Syracuse University.
Mr.
Costello, 29, graduated from Pennsylvania State University.
Both are advertising copywriters in New York, she at Wunderman Worldwide, and he at the Mingo Group.


How the Draft Was Born and How It May End
Any talk of the National Football League going without a college draft is enough to cause heart palpitations among the draftniks around the country, especially those who have turned prognostication on the picks into a cottage industry.
No draft means no more secretive whispers about vertical jumps, 40-yard sprint times and bench presses.
No more scouting combines.
No more draft-day trades.
No more No. 1 picks that don't blossom.
And -- yipes -- no more draftniks on the balcony of the draft room at the Marriott Marquis screaming at their teams for making terrible picks?


Big Space Dish On St. Croix
Tourists and school groups are being invited to look around a huge antenna -- 82 feet in diameter -- at the easternmost end of St.
Croix in the United States Virgin Islands.
This 260-ton steel dish will be used to explore quasars, pulsars, radio galaxies, molecular clouds, galactic nuclei, black holes and other parts of a previously unknown universe.
It will begin operating Friday, according to John A. Williams, the technical specialist who, with the senior technician, Ronald Lindsey, will run and maintain the giant eye to the sky, and escort visitors through it and its adjacent building.
The antenna is identical to eight others operating in New Hampshire, Iowa, New Mexico (which has two), Texas, Arizona, California and Washington.
The 10th and last is being built at Mauna Kea, Hawaii, at an altitude of 12,000 feet, and should be ready next year.
Together, the 10 make up the National Radio Astronomy Observatory's Very Long Baseline Array and make up a single radio telescope.
The St.
Croix project cost $5 million, funded by the National Science Foundation through Associated Universities, which runs the headquarters observatory at Socorro, N.M.


Mahoney Still in Running To Be St. John's Coach
At the rate Brian Mahoney is going, motoring through the streets of Rockville Centre, L.I., as his professional future is being determined, it seems he will soon possess the qualifications for at least one of two positions: head basketball coach at St.
John's or Olympic marathoner.
"He has been double-jogging," his wife, Barbara, said yesterday.
"He comes up with another set of sweat clothes, and out he goes again."


Corrections
A chart on the Money page last Sunday headlined "World Stock Markets" omitted references to both the world index and the Hong Kong market.
A corrected version appears today on page 34.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
THE FRAGILE SPECIES By Lewis Thomas. Robert Stewart/Scribners, $20.


Flute Master Class
The flutist Eugenia Zukerman will lead a master class at 4 P.M. tomorrow at the 92d Street Y, 1395 Lexington Avenue, in Manhattan.
The program, sponsored by the Y School of Music, will feature advanced flute students from the metropolitan area.
Tickets for observers are $10.
Information: (212) 415-5440.


Chess
The two semifinal elimination matches in Linares, Spain, to pick a challenger for the world champion, Gary Kasparov of Russia, are both tied: Anatoly Karpov of Russia and Nigel Short of England stand at 2 1/2-2 1/2 after five games, and Jan Timman of the Netherlands and Artur Yusupov of Germany are even at 3-3 after six games.
Both Karpov and Yusupov started well by winning their first outings, but Short came back to defeat the former titleholder in Game 4, while Timman won Games 4 and 6, and Yusupov won Game 5.


Anita Hill and Revitalizing Feminism
With the lifted chin and steely grace that characterized her televised testimony about Supreme Court Justice Clarence Thomas, Prof.
Anita F. Hill yesterday went before a spirited crowd of 2,100 cheering women in New York who seemed to hold her personally responsible for revitalizing feminism.
Kicking off a sold-out conference at Hunter College in Manhattan, Professor Hill gave a speech labeling sexual harassment as "abuse of power" and "more than just bad behavior" or "misguided romanticism." She specifically avoided talking about herself or Justice Thomas, apologizing to those who wanted "scandalous details."


Knicks Hope to Keep It Rolling
The Knicks opened the playoffs Friday night by giving the Detroit Pistons a hard smack in the face.
Now the Knicks will brace themselves for the Pistons' response.
Even if the stunning 109-75 New York victory did not rattle the Pistons, it certainly rejuvenated the Knicks.
The overwhelming performance showed that the Knicks have shaken off their late-season blues, and that they have reason to feel confident heading into Game 2 of the three-of-five-game series, to be played this afternoon at Madison Square Garden (Channel 4, 3:30).


Just Imagine; It's January 1993 And Ross Perot Is the President
President Perot. President Perot! President Perot?
More than an independent, not even a politician, able to leap ballot access requirements in a single bound, Ross Perot might, just might, get elected President.
And then what would happen?


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Pennsylvania; In Delegate-Rich Contest, Candidates Are Making Very Little Noise
Only three states have more delegates to the Democratic National Convention than Pennsylvania's 169.
But it is difficult to tell that from the desultory activity that has passed for campaigning in the weeks leading up to the state's Presidential primary on Tuesday.
From Independence Hall in Philadelphia to the Golden Triangle in Pittsburgh, from the Poconos to Lake Erie, many Pennsylvanians are unaware of the primary and many others have trouble suppressing yawns.


CAMPUS LIFE: Boston; False-Alarm Film Rises From Ashes Of Dept. Budget
Budget cutbacks at the Boston Fire Department proved to be an educational windfall for Boston University broadcasting students, who outbid local companies to produce a 15-minute video about false alarms.
Because of deep cuts in the fire prevention budget, Elaine Mesiti, the Fire Department Education Coordinator, said she knew she could not afford the $18,000 fee professional production companies charge for an educational video.
So when she wanted to make one about the hazards of pulling false alarms, she turned to Boston University's student-run, nonprofit BUTV Productions.


Hit-or-Miss Rainfall Brings Relief to Part of California
What a difference a year makes.
A year ago today, residents of California's central coast were bracing for yet another miserable parched summer of brown lawns, unflushed toilets and short showers.
Santa Barbara, the hardest hit area in the prolonged Western drought, was even looking to import water from Canada by tanker.
Today, Santa Barbara's main reservoir, Lake Cachuma, is five feet from overflowing, and the city recently ended years of stringent water-use restrictions.
The city is about to mothball a brand new $30 million desalting plant dedicated only a few days ago and, in the starkest turnabout of all, is even talking about selling its surplus water.


Challenge to Northeastern Woodlands
WILL hemlocks go the way of the chestnuts and elm trees?
This is a question on many minds as the Northeast faces another destructive problem of its woodlands.
The challenge is coming from a tiny but devastating insect called the woolly adelgid.
Although the insect occurs both in the East and West, it was not reported in the East until 1951 and it now occurs from North Carolina to southern New England.
Forests are indeed threatened.
But on the home front where a gardener is in control, the trees have a much better chance of survival.
The woolly adelgid is an aphidlike insect with sucking mouthparts.
It feeds on the succulent sweet sap of the young branches and deprives this new growth of its vitality.
It is believed that with this feeding, a toxic saliva enters the tree and causes a rapid desiccation and discoloration of the foliage.
Studies have shown that a mature tree can be killed in four years.


There's No Accounting for . . .
To the Editor:
In his essay "Mr. Berry, Say Hello to Ludwig"  [ April 5 ] , Edward Rothstein asks whether classical music is in some sense superior to popular music.
It ought to be apparent that this question has about as much meaning as asking: Which is better, Spain or Germany?
But Mr.
Rothstein proceeds with it and comes to the unsurprising conclusion that the classical music he likes is superior to popular music.


F.B.I. Doesn't Seek to Impede Technology
To the Editor:
"The F.B.I.'s Latest Idea: Make Wiretapping Easier" (The Week in Review, April 19) may mislead readers on an important law enforcement initiative designed to address some of the adverse effects of the increased use of digital telephone equipment.
Describing our guidelines for legislation as "unclear, open to abuse and possibly retarding the pace of technological innovation" is off the mark.
The purpose of the proposal is to allow law enforcement to have available a critical investigative capability that has proved effective in some of the most violent and difficult-to-solve criminal cases.


Fulton Journal; History Balanced by Iron Curtain Call
The landmark at Westminster College is a church designed by Christopher Wren.
It was shipped here, stone by stone, from London and restored as a monument commemorating the 1946 speech in which Winston Churchill first used the term "iron curtain" to describe cold war tensions.
Of the many notable speakers whose words have since echoed through Westminster, none have caused as much excitement and anxiety as next month's guest, the former Soviet president, Mikhail Gorbachev.


SECT FIGURE DENIES ORDERING KILLINGS
A man who calls himself the Son of God took the witness stand in a Federal courtroom this week to deny involvement in 14 killings, 2 attempted killings and a firebombing that the Government says he ordered to maintain a multimillion-dollar criminal empire.
The defendant, Yahweh ben Yahweh, whose name in Hebrew means God, Son of God, also said he knew nothing about the finances, real estate holdings or management of the sect he founded in 1979.


Technology; Bedside Computers Watch the Vital Signs
The computer chip has invaded the intensive care unit and has helped to change the role of bedside patient monitors from passive registration of vital signs to gathering and interpreting clinical data.
The inexpensive computing power available in microprocessors has driven the capabilities of patient monitors just as it has personal computers.
While the advances may not be readily visible to patients, a single bedside monitor can now perform tasks that once would have been handled only by multiple pieces of equipment.
Using the same Ethernet networking technology employed by personal computers, data from many patients in different rooms can be checked on a single monitor.
The cost is high: $20,000 to $30,000 per bed.


Is Software Soft-Pedaling The Scales?
I recently attended a piano recital I didn't dare review for The Times.
But it gave me more pleasure than most concerts I have heard.
I was deeply moved not only by the way the pianist played, with absolute concentration and an appealing gentleness, but also by the very fact that she played at all.
I never knew that "Long, Long Ago," "Christmas Day Secrets" and a piece called "Musette" could be so involving, that their simple phrases could be so profoundly touching.
But then I had never heard my 8-year-old daughter, Dena, play them in a concert for her family and friends.


Church Windows Form Backdrop for Concerts
HISTORIC Hudson Valley is sponsoring a series of events -- from story-telling to gardening workshops to sheep-shearing demonstrations -- at Van Cortlandt Manor, Sunnyside and its other properties in the county.
And for music lovers, the organization is offering a spring trilogy of Concerts in Color: the tonal delights of Bach, Haydn and other Baroque and Classical composers set against the beauty of the stained-glass windows at the Union Church of Pocantico Hills.
"Visitors will find a tour of this modest stone sanctuary an unforgettable experience," predicted Burns Patterson, a spokesman for Historic Hudson Valley, which operates the church.
"Light is transformed into vivid color inside the church through the windows, which represent the final work of Henri Matisse, completed just two days before his death, and the only cycle of church windows in the United States created by Marc Chagall."


This Time, Another Goalie Is Hero
Through two periods, the game was a goalie's dream, and each goalie was experiencing it: By being flawless, he'd rendered the other team scoreless.
Surely Chris Terreri, playing with an impunity that had seemed to give him immunity from the Ranger sharpshooters for the past two games, felt that way.
Even the Rangers had acknowledged his invincibility, so Terreri could not help feeling he had full control of everything that might happen around his goal.


Flavoring Chicken, Fish and Pasta With Olives
IT is hard to believe nowadays, but not long ago in the United States it seemed that all olives sprang forth from cans.
Remember those large fat watery ones with uniform shape and no taste?
Now, however, there are endless varieties to choose from.
Olives can be soft and fleshy, bursting open like ripe persimmons; or firm and smooth, or wrinkled and chewy.
Some are shaped like tiny apples; some approach the perfect oval.
The colors are as diverse as the shapes: purplish black, deep blue-green, straw yellow, dark red wine and a spectrum of browns and greens from rich chocolate to chartreuse.


Specter of Khmer Rouge
Cambodia today is as peaceful as it has been in many a year.
The rapidly expanding United Nations presence, which is to guide the nation through free elections by next May, appears to be succeeding in keeping the most combative of the four contending factions, the Khmer Rouge and the Phnom Penh regime, from gnawing at the edges of the zones the other occupies.
Although far from resting on their laurels, the top international officials, bolstered by a visit last weekend by Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali, are gaining confidence that the largest and costliest of United Nations peacekeeping operations might realize its mandate.
That is to steer Cambodia peacefully through elections and turn the country over to a government chosen by its people by mid-1993.


Public &amp; Private; Gender Contender
To: Governor Clinton Re: Half the Voters Dear Governor,
How's your sore throat?
What's happening in the Pennsylvania primary?
Is it my imagination or has Hillary been muzzled since the cookies vs. career controversy?
Will Bob Kerrey be your running mate?
There aren't any more bombshells, are there?
How come you haven't noticed us?


Ms. Schlesinger, Editor, Married
Eileen Carol Schlesinger, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Harris Schlesinger of Westbury, L.I., was married yesterday evening at the Pierre in New York to Howard Evan Cotton, the son of Janet F. Cotton of New York and the late Justice Wallace R. Cotton of New York State Supreme Court.
Rabbi Stephen Franklin performed the ceremony.
Mrs.
Cotton is an editor at Pharos Books, a publishing company in New York.
She graduated cum laude from the State University of New York at Buffalo.
Her father is a video producer and director in New York.
Her mother, Evelyn Schlesinger, teaches English at Great Neck North High School in Great Neck, L.I.


BEST SELLERS: April 26, 1992
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
7
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $22.50.) A woman law student seeks to discover the truth about the murder of two Supreme Court justices.
2
1
"I" IS FOR INNOCENT, by Sue Grafton. (Holt, $18.95.) Kinsey Millhone investigates the case of a man once charged with murdering his rich wife.
3
1
ALL AROUND THE TOWN, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) The plight of a college student accused of killing her professor, and the part a childhood experience plays in it.
4
2
11
RISING SUN, by Michael Crichton. (Knopf, $22.) The mysterious death of a young woman leads to an investigation in which technology and the American-Japanese rivalry play major roles. (LP)
5
15
2
JAZZ, by Toni Morrison. (Knopf, $21.) A couple in the Harlem of the 1920's learn again and again that life does not keep its promises.
6
1
FOR LOVE ALONE, by Ivana Trump. (Pocket, $22.) The experiences of a Czechoslovak-born skier married to a wealthy entrepreneur from an old New York family.
7
3
7
THE ELF QUEEN OF SHANNARA, by Terry Brooks. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $22.) The third volume in a series about a fantasy land.
8
5
9
THE ROAD TO OMAHA, by Robert Ludlum. (Random House, $23.95.) A retired general and a lawyer scheme to take possession of Nebraska on behalf of an obscure Indian tribe. (LP)
9
4
18
DISNEY'S BEAUTY AND THE BEAST. (Gallery Books/Penguin USA, $6.98.) A retelling of the classic fairy tale in words and pictures.
10
6
10
VOX, by Nicholson Baker. (Random House, $15.) A man and a woman learn about each other through a telephone conversation on an "adult party line."
11
8
4
ACTS OF FAITH, by Erich Segal. (Bantam, $23.) The stories of three Brooklyn natives, one of whom rises high in the Roman Catholic hierarchy, two who break with their traditional Jewish heritage.
12
13
105
OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr.
Seuss. (Random House, $12.95.) The problems of finding your way through life; in verse and pictures.
13
1
A THOUSAND ACRES, by Jane Smiley. (Knopf, $23.) An Iowa farmer shares his heritage with three daughters.
14 *
9
29
SCARLETT, by Alexandra Ripley. (Warner, $24.95.) The sequel to "Gone With the Wind."
15
7
6
PROBE, by Margaret Wander Bonanno. (Pocket, $18.95.) The crew of "Star Trek" 's Enterprise confronts a force that threatens galactic peace.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
13
REVOLUTION FROM WITHIN, by Gloria Steinem. (Little, Brown, $22.95.) The reflections of a feminist on the struggle to achieve self-esteem.
2
2
23
BACKLASH, by Susan Faludi. (Crown, $24.) A journalist describes a war against women's rights.
3
3
8
DOUBLE CROSS, by Sam Giancana and Chuck Giancana. (Warner, $22.95.) Life in the Mafia.
4
4
6
ROGUE WARRIOR, by Richard Marcinko with John Weisman. (Pocket, $22.) The memoirs of the retired commander of a counterterrorist unit.
5
5
17
BROTHER EAGLE, SISTER SKY: A Message From Chief Seattle, illustrated by Susan Jeffers. (Dial, $14.95.) An environmental warning.
6
6
28
DEN OF THIEVES, by James B. Stewart. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) Plunderers on Wall Street.
7
1
GIVE WAR A CHANCE, by P. J. O'Rourke. (Atlantic Monthly, $20.95.) Satirical essays on recent social and political developments.
8
7
4
THE DISUNITING OF AMERICA, by Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr. (Norton, $14.95.) A historian considers the current emphasis on ethnicity.
9
8
3
REINVENTING GOVERNMENT, by David Osborne and Ted Gaebler. (Patrick/Addison-Wesley, $22.95.) How government should operate.
10
12
23
MOLLY IVINS CAN'T SAY THAT, CAN SHE? by Molly Ivins. (Random House, $23.) Political essays.
11
16
21
MEMORIES, by Ralph Emery with Tom Carter. (Macmillan, $19.95.) The autobiography of a country-music broadcaster.
12 *
1
HIGH TREASON 2, by Harrison Edward Livingstone. (Carroll &amp; Graf, $25.95.) Charges of a cover-up after the death of John F. Kennedy, supplementing the 1989 book "High Treason."
13 *
9
9
UNTO THE SONS, by Gay Talese. (Knopf, $25.) A journalist traces his Italian heritage.
14
15
2
BARCELONA, by Robert Hughes. (Knopf, $27.50.) The story of the Spanish city through 15 centuries.
15 *
10
4
EARTH IN THE BALANCE, by Al Gore. (Houghton Mifflin, $22.95.) The Tennessee Senator discusses factors affecting the environment.
16 *
12
MAUS II, by Art Spiegelman. (Pantheon, $18.) An Auschwitz survivor's story, in comic-book form.
17 *
13
24
TOUJOURS PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Knopf, $20.) The charms of rustic France.
18 *
5
THE END OF HISTORY AND THE LAST MAN, by Francis Fukuyama. (Free Press, $24.95.) Where two powerful historical forces are now leading us.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
10
A RETURN TO LOVE, by Marianne Williamson. (HarperCollins, $20.) Inspirational advice about ways to replace feelings of fear with feelings of love in daily life.
2
2
21
MORE WEALTH WITHOUT RISK, by Charles J. Givens. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) An updated and expanded volume of financial advice.
3
5
21
HOW TO SATISFY A WOMAN EVERY TIME, by Naura Hayden. (Bibli O'Phile/Dutton, $14.95.) Sexual counsel for married couples.
4
4
16
AWAKEN THE GIANT WITHIN, by Anthony Robbins. (Summit, $20.) Ways to take control of your emotional, physical and financial destiny.
5
2
THE ART OF WORLDLY WISDOM, by Baltasar Gracian. (Currency/Doubleday, $15.) Advice on how to live and labor; the work of a 17th-century Spanish Jesuit scholar.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,050 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
And Bear in Mind
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
ELEANOR ROOSEVELT: Volume One, 1884-1933, by Blanche Wiesen Cook. (Viking, $27.50.) A feminist biography that regards its subject not only as a mostly 19th-century woman who invented her own life with very little help, but also as a self-created political figure of considerable significance.
SOLDIERS OF THE SUN: The Rise and Fall of the Imperial Japanese Army, by Meirion Harries and Susie Harries. (Random House, $30.) A history of the state-within-the-state that was the Japanese Army before 1945, addicted to aggression and to exceeding the instructions of its Government.
RETHINKING SOCIAL POLICY: Race, Poverty, and the Underclass, by Christopher Jencks. (Harvard University, $27.95.) Mr.
Jencks, a down-to-earth liberal sociologist, zeroes in on what we know and what we don't about some so far insoluble problems.
LOVE JUNKIE, by Robert Plunket. (HarperCollins, $20.) A comedy of manners, dancing on its toes, about a heroically innocent housewife from Bronxville who falls in love with a gay porno star.
A DAY AT THE BEACH: Recollections, by Geoffrey Wolff. (Knopf, $22.) Nine personal essays, or autobiographical reflections, by a skilled writer who has learned certain lessons in human frailty.
THE FORGOTTEN, by Elie Wiesel. (Summit, $21.) Mr.
Wiesel, whose art is so intensely a witness to the Holocaust, confronts in this novel the horror that befalls a psychotherapist and survivor of the Nazis who is developing Alzheimer's disease.
BLUE GLASS, by Sandra Tyler. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $19.95.) A lovely and unusual first novel that follows the arc of an adolescent girl's changing relationship with her mother without identifying either participant as victim or perpetrator.


POSTINGS: Remember the Automat?; Nostalgic Space for the Gap
When Horn &amp; Hardart closed its last Automat last April, it left fond memories of little pots of baked beans behind coin-operated doors and coffee spewing from dolphin dispensers.
But it stripped its huge corner space at Third Avenue and 42d Street of its Art Decoish fixtures along with the dishes and spoons.
That left a sort of tabula rasa for the next tenant, the Gap, which is now putting its own signature on the space with maple columns, oak display tables and blond wood floors.
By summer, the clothing retailer will open a two-level store there -- 8,500 square feet on street level and 7,500 square feet below.


Sports of The Times; Randolph Is Home in New York
AT first he drove down the F.D.R.
Drive, just to keep the Harlem River between himself and his past.
But some nights coming home from Queens, he couldn't help but take the Deegan right past the Stadium, the only Stadium there is in New York.
"Believe me, every time I go by, I think about it," Willie Randolph said.
"Hey, in some ways I could still be playing there. You look to your right. Maybe you stick your tongue out. You don't want to get mushy and reminiscent, but, yeah, I get goose bumps."


CAMPUS LIFE: Xavier; The M.V.P. Who Inspires As a Counselor
When Sister Rose Ann Fleming came to Xavier University here 10 years ago, she planned to teach English.
But now she is the most valuable player on the men's basketball team.
Coach Pete Gillen named her the Most Valuable Player after the 1990-1 season, the only person to be so honored, for her role in counseling his team.
Not just basketball players receive her advice: all 215 student athletes on campus have the opportunity to talk to her, an opportunity they use often.


Headliners; Big Pictures
The Hollywood of old has not completely disappeared, it's just difficult to spot under that big price tag.
Last week, James Cameron, the mega-writer -producer -director of "The Terminator" and all it begat, shook hands with 20th Century Fox on a five-year, multi-picture deal that the studio said was worth about $500 million.
The fine print was complicated, including shared financing of production costs with domestic theatrical, video and television profits going to Fox.
But foreign rights for techno-thrillers such as "Terminator 2" and Mr.
Cameron's other offspring, tend to provide about 60 percent of the profits.
These rights stay with the 37-year-old producer's Lightstorm production company.
Pies so big are difficult to see, but Larry Kassanoff, who runs Lightstorm, described the arrangement modestly.
"This is, in fact, a deal for the recessionary age," he said, "a deal where each partner puts up a percentage of the money, a deal that allows everyone to share the risks."


Point Man for the Rescue of the Century
WASHINGTON
Michel Camdessus, the head of the International Monetary Fund, visibly winces when he is confronted with some of the harshest criticisms of the fund's attempts to help hard-pressed developing nations by lending money and prescribing economic reforms.
John Cavanagh, an expert on developing countries at the left-of-center Institute for Policy Studies in Washington, says: "The I.M.F. in many ways is like a medieval doctor where no matter what the ailment, you apply leeches and bleed the patient. My experience is they are very successful in steering countries' resources toward paying debts to commercial banks, but they are disastrous in terms of the long-term economic health of these countries."


A Bushel and a Peck for Adelaide
You are going to like faith Prince a great deal in "Guys and Dolls," partly because she is tremendously likable as Miss Adelaide, "the well-known fiancee," but also because there isn't a single performer in the revival that's scampering across the stage of the Martin Beck Theater these nights who comes up to her dimpled knees.
Ms.
Prince is the evening's consistent salvation.
Whenever she's on stage, you will be hard pressed to look at anyone else.
And when she's off in the wings and the show's voltage has started to drop, you'll console yourself with the thought that she'll be back soon and full electrical service will be restored.
Let's face it.
A dismal musical like "Nick and Nora," in which Ms.
Prince played a mousy Hollywood accountant earlier this season, couldn't do her in, so "Guys and Dolls," which is a Broadway classic, can only put her well on the road to stardom.
It doesn't seem reckless speculation to think there would be a lot of heart-shaped candy boxes, gaudy floral bouquets and maybe even a Tony Award in her future.


Paris Museum
To the Editor: The letter from Francesca Blumenthal on the 10th arrondisement (Letters to the Editor, March 29) offers outdated information.
The poster museum is no longer at 18 Rue de Paradis.
Last year the building was being restored for a private commercial venture.
This remarkable building was not a ceramic factory but rather a ceramics showroom for the famous Boulenger Company, which had its factory north of Paris in the town of Auneuil.
The exterior of the building is interesting for ceramics buffs, with beautiful murals and a motto indicating that this ware was the "choice of kings" -- "choisy-le-roi." SUSAN TUNICK Friends of Terra Cotta  New York, N.Y.
Marion Fourestier of the French Tourist Government
Office comments:
The poster museum, la Musee de l'Affiche et de la Publicite, is now again part of the Decorative Arts Museum at 107 Rue de Rivoli.
Shows drawn from the collection of 50,000 posters are announced periodically.
The telephone number is 42.60.32.14.


Aquariums, South and West
The Tennessee Aquarium, said to be the first major freshwater aquarium in the world, is set to open in downtown Chattanooga on Friday.
Through several riverine environments in this $45 million complex, visitors can follow the Tennessee River from its source in the Appalachian Mountains through the Tennessee Valley to the Mississippi Delta.
The aquarium displays over 4,000 specimens of aquatic life, including trout, water fowl, river otters, alligators and the 50-pound blue catfish.
The Rivers of the World exhibit has re-creations of the flooded forests of the Amazon River, the basin of the St.
Lawrence and the Zaire, and other river habitats.
The aquarium is open daily from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M. and, through Labor Day, on Friday until 8 P.M.
Admission is $8.75; $4.75 for children 3 to 12.
Information: Tennessee Aquarium, 101 West Second Street, Chattanooga, Tenn. 37402; (615) 265-0695.


Cavaliers Push Nets Right to the Brink
This time, the Cleveland Cavaliers spread the wealth and were a lot richer for it.
This was no two-man tag team of Mark Price and Brad Daugherty, just extended stretches of full-court domination by one team of another.
Tonight, the Cavaliers demonstrated the difference between a team that wins 57 games and one that wins 40.


CULTURAL BAGGAGE
To the catalogue of multicultural personas, Ehrenreich has posted yet another entry: None of the Above.
Not so long ago, her flight from her lineal matrix would have been thought a matter of bad faith; nowadays, her ethnic nullity is just another tile in the mosaic, suitably burnished, and no less defining than any of the others.
ABBOTT KATZ Brooklyn


Bailout Agency Squirrels Away Over $2 Billion
While attacking Congress for delaying spending authority for the savings and loan bailout, the Bush Administration has managed to squirrel away more than $2 billion to keep the operation going.
Most members of Congress, which approves appropriations for the Resolution Trust Corporation, the agency that oversees the bailout of the savings industry, had assumed that the corporation ran out of money on April 1.


Stupefying Rhythm
To the Editor:
Please inform Louis Simpson that Neville Dane lives in Baghdad.
The reason he resides there is rather difficult to determine, but what I heard on my last visit to Baghdad was that he was gathering material for a series of articles that would stress punctuation over content.
He survived the gulf war by staying clear of any civilian enclosures.
BOB RICHARDS Claryville, N.Y.


Topics of The Times; Justice in Yonkers
It appears that desegregated housing may finally come to Yonkers.
By a 4-to-3 vote, its City Council has approved a plan that has the backing of Mayor Terence Zaleski, the Department of Justice and the N.A.A.C.P.
The plan will be presented to Federal Judge Leonard Sand for approval.
In 1985, Judge Sand ruled that Yonkers had deliberately segregated its schools and housing for nearly 40 years.
A school desegregation plan was implemented, but a housing remedy proved not only elusive but divisive.


W. K. Jenkins to Wed Bonnie Blake
Mr. and Mrs.
Harry G. Blake of Osterville, Mass., have announced the engagement of their daughter Bonnie Jean Blake to William Kinsey Jenkins, a son of Mary Jenkins of Hingham, Mass., and the late Joseph K. Jenkins.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss Blake, 31 years old and a graduate of Lake Forest College, is the executive director of the American Horse Shows Association in New York.
Her father retired as the president and owner of Colony Inc., an industrial gas and welding supply company in Hingham.


The Languid Summer Length
There is something about a length of fabric wafting or clinging around sun-brushed legs that evokes the easiness of the season.
This is the time of year when, to many women, panty hose and closed-toe shoes seem confining, even in the city or the office.
This summer, the pleasures of the longer hemline happen to work with the general fashion formula.
Designers here and abroad have made a big point of showing long skirts in their collections for next fall.
So for anyone considering these longer lengths, summer is the perfect time to experiment.


REALLY COOL CARS
Lesley Hazleton's article "Really Cool Cars" (March 29), discussing the environmental merits of electric and hydrogen-powered automobiles, was excellent.
I agree that such vehicles have the potential to reduce substantially greenhouse gas and air-polluting emissions associated with our nation's vehicle fleet.
However, I take issue with your characterization of hydrogen as "the cleanest fuel possible." In fact, hydrogen has most of the same environmental advantages and disadvantages as electricity for powering automobiles.
Neither hydrogen nor electricity are really "fuels" per se.
Both must be made from some other fuel and are therefore only as clean or as dirty as the fuel used to generate them.


It's the Big Chill for Yankees' Johnson
One minute, you are holding a baseball that feels more like a shot-put because it is so cold.
You forget the chilly weather because you are locked in a 0-0 duel with Ben McDonald and the Baltimore Orioles and you need outs to keep pace.
The next minute, you gaze up at the Yankee Stadium scoreboard and the ball feels heavier and the wind bites even more because you are losing.
You wonder how things crumbled so quickly.
Where did those runs come from?


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a report in the Campus Life pages last Sunday about the State University of New York at Albany misstated the location of an incident in which fraternity members were accused of gang rape of a student.
It was off campus.


Heidi Bruckner, Student, to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
William Bruckner of Longboat Key, Fla., have announced the engagement of their daughter Heidi Caroline Bruckner to Kurt Baran Fliegauf, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward Fliegauf of Berkeley Heights, N.J.
A July wedding is planned.
Miss Bruckner, 24 years old, is studying for a master's degree in early childhood and elementary education at Wheelock College.
She graduated from Middlebury College.
Her father is a stockbroker at Kashner, Davidson Securities in Sarasota, Fla., and the chairman of Medical Indicators Inc., a thermometer maker in Princeton, N.J.


This Week
Rotating Crops
As you plant your vegetable garden over the coming weeks, remember to rotate crops.
Do not plant cabbage, for example, where you did last year.
The same principle holds for tomatoes, peppers and eggplants.
Changing the plots will keep down soil-borne diseases and insect infestations.


Recent Records Favor Nets
To the Sports Editor:
As a longtime New Jersey Nets fan, I have had to endure numerous cheap shots over the years, but George Vecsey's was the crudest and most uninformed ("Nets Prove the Playoffs Are Too Big," The Times, April 19).
While I do not condone the recent actions of Derrick Coleman and Chris Morris or defend the overall management wisdom, let's take a closer look at "this aggregation -- one cannot call it a team -- that does not deserve the playoffs."


CAMPUS LIFE: Alabama; 36 Years After the Hate, Black Student Triumphs
The first black student to attend the University of Alabama will receive her master's degree in elementary education in a few weeks, 36 years after she was threatened and assaulted by rioters, and subsequently expelled by the university's board.
Her daughter, having quietly completed four years of undergraduate study here, will graduate alongside her.
"I didn't know whom to hate," said the mother, Autherine Lucy Foster, who is now a 62-year-old high school English and world-history teacher at Ensley Magnet High School in Birmingham.
"It felt somewhat like you were not really a human being. But had it not been for some at the university, my life might not have been spared at all."


Stupefying Rhythm
To the Editor:
Neville Dane belongs to the ages, Louis Simpson's petulant little piece in defense of the "something to say" poets notwithstanding.
Why does mediocrity always rail against genius?
ROBERT L. KING Toluca Lake, Calif.


Plucky Veteran


'Pecong,' Medea's Tale Retold
WITHOUT revenge, what's the use of hating?
In "Medea" (431 B.C.), Euripides told Greek drama's ultimate tale of hate's inevitable consequences.
Medea, a wronged woman, gets even with Jason, a two-timing man, by, among other treacherous acts, killing their sons.
For the Roman theater about A.D. 60, Seneca, compounding the horror, had Medea hurl their children from the rooftops in full view of Jason -- and the audience.


Talking: Bankruptcy; Problems With Unit Owners
AN explosion in personal bankruptcies is undermining the financial safeguards built into the basic documents that govern co-ops and condominums.
The normal expectation is that anyone who falls behind in paying monthly maintenance fees or common charges can be speedily forced out.
Also, that these fees can eventually be collected through legal action against the delinquent resident.


No Cheers for the Service Economy
To the Editor:
Your rogue's gallery of corporate chieftains ("Pulling Down the Corporate Clubhouse," April 12) made me smile.
Just think, you praised this elite crew to the skies only yesterday and now you scapegoat them for all the ills of America.


The Only Winner in Peruvian President's Coup Is the Military
To the Editor:
The greatest mistake is to think that Peru's choices are between President Alberto K. Fujimori and the previous constitutional order.
"Peru and U.S.: What Course to Take?" (news analysis, April 15) is right to state that a return to the constitutional order is necessary but not sufficient for the preservation of the democracy.


Class Distinction
To the Editor:
When Edward Rothstein defines "high" music as music that requires education, I assume he means a formal education with organized classes and degrees.
It may be that to play the blues, which I assume Mr.
Rothstein would consider "low" music, such a formal education may be unnecessary (some would argue even detrimental).
However, it is naive to think that one just picks up a guitar or sax and begins wailing, with the assumption that anyone could do it.
Indeed, such thinking reminds me of the notion that athletes have "natural" talent, denigrating their devotion to practice and training.


Correction
A brief article on April 12 about three proposals for new malls in White Plains misidentified Albert J. Pirro.
He is a lawyer for the Fashion Mall developers; he is not a partner in the project.


Close Relations


Contemporary Designs in a Historic Setting
THERE is a rich interplay between "Design '92," a show of contemporary crafts, and the 19th-century Prallsville Mills, where the show is now on view.
This setting of heavy wooden beams, broad plank floors and windows overlooking the Delaware River enhances the craft objects by emphasizing their materials.
Gears that formerly turned the millstone are still in place to serve as reminders that well-designed, functional objects usually have simple but handsome forms.


INSIDE
Another California Quake
Three days after a major earthquake shook southern California, another powerful one rattled the state's northern coast.
While relatively few people were hurt, the quake brought renewed fears of the Big One.
Page 18.
Dinkins Defends Surplus
The Mayor said he was puzzled by criticism of how his administration detailed a budget surplus, saying that critics knew of the surplus as early as February.
Page 32.
Acclaim for Anita Hill
Anita F. Hill was greeted by a crowd of New York women who seemed to hold her personally responsible for revitalizing feminism.
Page 31.


After AIDS, Gay Art Aims for a New Reality
I was 17 when i saw "The Boys in The Band," and it just about scared me straight.
This was Pasadena, 1970.
The new future wasn't happening there.
Pasadena was still Buicks and tartan plaid.
Most boys my age were stolid and cheerful as Rotarians, and wore the same shoes.
I was dating girls but I had some questions I hoped the movie might answer.
If you're straight, you may not fully appreciate how terrifying "The Boys in the Band" could be to a guilt-haunted 17-year-old unsure of his sexuality.
In the movie, as in the play, a gaggle of gay men hold a birthday party and take turns demonstrating their crisp, clever self-hatred.
Everyone is witty and empty and howlingly sad.


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ended April 11  MANHATTAN Gramercy Park 215,000
60 Gramercy Park North  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,200-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, dining alcove, renovated kitchen, key to Gramercy Park; maintenance $1,015, 57% tax-deductible (Broker: M.P.R. Ltd.)  Greenwich Village 990,000
67 Charles Street  3-family, 4-story town house; 2 bedrooms, 2 baths, 4 fireplaces in primary duplex; 1 bedroom, 1 bath, 2 fireplaces in other simplex units; rear garden, 20- by 95-ft. lot; taxes $7,000 (Broker: William B. May)  Greenwich Village 222,500
2 Fifth Avenue (8th St.)  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 938-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, manned-elevator, dining area, remodeled kitchen, marble bath, balcony; maintenance $782, 13% tax-deductible (Broker: Kanelba &amp; Robilotti)  Upper East Side 507,000
40 East 61st Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,350-sq.-ft. prewar condo; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, dining area, 2 balconies; common charge $1,661, taxes $6,756 (Brokers: Island Homes, N.Y. Inc./Walter &amp; Samuels)  Upper East Side 850,000
179 East 70th Street  3-bedroom, 4 1/2-bath, 2,600-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, manned-elevator, 2 maid's rooms, dining room, fireplace, terrace; maintenance $2,900, 40% tax-deductible (Broker: Corcoran Group)  Upper West Side 545,000
490 West End Avenue (83d St.)  3-bedroom, 3-bath, 2,000-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, maid's room, dining room, 2 exposures; maintenance $1,107, 40% tax-deductible (Broker: Hunt-Kennedy Inc.)  BRONX  Clasons Point 77,500
1052 Ward Avenue  3-family, semi-attached, brick house; 2 bedrooms in primary unit; 1 bedroom in others; 1 bath in each; 1-car garage, 20- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,800 (Broker: Charles G. Brophy &amp; Associates)  Riverdale 87,500
3875 Waldo Avenue  2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 1,000-sq.-ft. co-op in a prewar building; entrance gallery, windowed dinette, 2 exposures; maintenance $601, 45% tax-deductible (Broker: ERA/Susan Goldy &amp; Co. Realtors)  BROOKLYN  Flatlands 167,500
1366 East 40th Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, single-family, attached, brick Tudor; dining room finished basement, rear deck, 18.9- by 80-ft. lot; taxes $1,000 (Broker: Fogarty Real Estate)  Park Slope 125,000
678 Carroll Street  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,200-sq.-ft. co-op in a 4-family brick building; 2 fireplaces, 2 exposures, exclusive roof rights; maintenace $386, 55% tax-deductible (Frederick Palmer Real Estate)  QUEENS  Kew Gardens 395,000
121 81st Avenue  5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, single-family, detached, stucco and frame house; dining room, fireplace, sun porch, balcony, finished basement, 2-car garage, 60- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $2,200 (Broker: Madeleine Realty)  Forest Hills 350,000
94-19 71st Street  2-family, detached, brick house; 3 bedrooms, 2 baths in primary duplex, 2 bedroons, 1 bath in simplex unit; dining room in each; finished basement, 2-car garage, 60- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $2,500 (Broker: Sarah Jones Real Estate)  STATEN ISLAND  Tompkinsville 132,500
68 St.
Paul's Avenue  2-family, detached colonial; 2 bedrooms, 2 baths in primary unit; 1 bedroom, 1 bath in other; dining room in each; finished basement, 25- by 120-ft. lot; taxes $865 (Broker: Coldwell Banker/DeSimone)  Westerleigh 139,000
2145 Victory Boulevard  3 bedrooms, 2 1/2-bath, single-family, semi-attached, frame house; eat-in kitchen, finished basement, 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,492 (Broker: Century 21/Appleseed Agency)


CAMPUS LIFE: Barnard; Student Collective Writes the Book On Being Female
Inspired by a Duke University woman's handbook, 35 Barnard and Columbia College women have released a woman's handbook of their own, 102 pages covering everything from "coming out" as a lesbian to eating disorders.
"As we were writing this book we were amazed that all of this did not exist in one place that was accessible to women," said Carla Richmond, a Columbia College senior and, as a founder of the Barnard/Columbia Women's Handbook Collective, a coordinator of the project.


Coins
For Buyers and Dreamers
Coin shows are the dress balls of the hobby.
Everyone attending gets a chance to meet other collectors.
Impromptu talks are given on just about every numismatic topic, and scheduled lectures are usually presented in some side room.
Dealers in almost every conceivable type of coin or medal display their pieces side by side with their competitors, and showgoers wander the aisles, fiddling with one coin after another, lusting, dreaming and sometimes buying.


Making a Difference; A 54-Mile Showcase for High-Tech Design
Energy Department contracts for private bidders easily will exceed $4 billion at the Superconducting Super Collider Laboratory, the giant underground atom smasher being built in Waxahachie, Tex., about 25 miles south of here.
But there is more than money involved for some bidders, said Edward J. Siskin, general manager for the laboratory.
The project, to cost a total of $8.2 billion, should give winning bidders the chance to develop new ways to speed construction and assembly work because of the supercollider's massive scale and seven-year construction timetable.


Virginia Gallin Has a Wedding
Virginia Mary Gallin, the administrative assistant to the president of Northern Westchester Hospital Center in Mount Kisco, N.Y., was married yesterday to James John Flood, a vice president of Right Associates, a management consulting concern in New York.
Msgr.
Daniel J. Brady officiated at the Church of St.
Joseph in Croton Falls, N.Y.
Mrs.
Flood, the widow of William H. J. Gallin, is a daughter of the late Mr. and Mrs.
James Bernene and the stepdaughter of Elizabeth Bernene of Simsbury, Conn.


The Druggist's Top 10
HERE IS A LIST OF THE MOST FREQUENTLY PRESCRIBED drugs, based on prescriptions filled by 3,000 retail pharmacies in 50 states, published in American Druggist.
Are these the most effective drugs in their categories?
Not necessarily.
Marketing is an important factor.
Procardia, a heart medicine, made the list for the first time, in part because of a new version that is taken once a day instead of three or four times, according to Reuben Feierman, an industry consultant in New York.
As for Ceclor, he says, its patent will expire soon, and "when a drug is about to go off patent, it's usually heavily promoted."
1991 1990
1. Amoxil (antibiotic) 1
2. Permarin (estrogen supplement) 4
3. Zantac (anti-ulcer) 3
4. Lanoxin (Heart stimulant) 2
5. Xanax (tranquilizer) 5
6. Synthroid (synthetic thyroid hormone) 8
7. Ceclor (antibiotic)9
8. Seldane (Antihistamine) 10
9. Procardia (calcium channel blocker) -
10. Vasotec (vasodilator) -


Children's Books; Bookshelf
Additional titles of interest:
CHINGIS KHAN.
Written and illustrated by Demi.
Holt. $19.95. (Ages 5 to 9) This storybook biography of the Mongol boy Temujin, known to history as Genghis (or Chingis) Khan, contains fascinating detail about nomadic life in Asia in the 12th century.
As head of the Mongol tribes, he led mounted troops into Eastern Europe, China and Persia.
The exquisite illustrations gleam with gold embossing.


Susan R. Ryan Has Wedding
Susan Randolph Ryan, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John M. Ryan of Houston, was married yesterday in New York to Thomas Alfred Sully 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Sully Jr. of Naples, Fla.
The Rev.
Molly McGreevy performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
Luke in the Fields Church.
Mrs.
Sully, 30 years old, graduated from Yale University.
She is an arts consultant in New York.
Her father is an economic consultant specializing in oil.


Fujimori Talks Tough But the Coca Thrives
THREE days after President Alberto K. Fujimori seized almost dictatorial power on April 5, the newspapers here announced a bold move.
The Air Force was being sent into Peru's Upper Huallaga Valley, where the raw material for 60 percent of the world's cocaine is produced.
The mission: control the municipal and clandestine airports used by Colombian traffickers and shoot down any unauthorized air traffic.
A week later, Peruvian policemen stormed the city of Uchiza, the valley's Wild West boom town of drug trafficking and violence.
The two moves, the Government said, showed that Mr.
Fujimori was tough on drug trafficking, a prime reason he gave for his so-called "self-coup," in which he dissolved what he called an obstructionist Congress and corrupt judiciary.


Hayley Makin Has Wedding
Hayley Kershaw Makin, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard C. Makin of Montclair, N.J., was married there last evening to Stephen Pawling Budd, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter C. Budd of Princeton, N.J.
The Rev.
Nicholas E. Cooke officiated at St.
Luke's Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Budd, 27 years old and a graduate of Denison University, is an assistant in the treasury department of Leucadia National Corporation, an investment holding company in New York.
Her father is a senior vice president with Kidder Peabody in New York.


Mutual Funds; It's Earth Day. Where's Your Money?
During last week's Earth Day celebration, mutual fund owners might have wondered if their investments are helping to protect the planet.
More and more believe the answer is yes.
There are now more than a dozen "social conscience" funds, which pick securities according to a company's record in protecting the environment or other ethical or social criteria.
In the last decade, assets managed by these funds rose more than tenfold, to $1.5 billion from $125 million.


Making a Difference; Closing In on Orion
When Victor A. Kaufman teamed up with several well-known entertainment industry executives and investors several months ago to form Savoy Pictures Entertainment, he had in mind gradually building a new motion picture financing and distribution company.
But last week Savoy Pictures suddenly became the leading bidder to rescue the bankrupt Orion Pictures Corporation, a deal that would rapidly accelerate Mr.
Kaufman's growth plan.
Savoy actually made its proposal to rescue Orion several weeks ago.
Orion and its creditors seemed at the time to be well on their way to finalizing a deal with another bidder, the New Line Cinema Corporation.
But last week New Line broke off the negotiations, saying it could not make a deal on the terms being demanded by the creditors.
That left Savoy with the only offer on the table. (Terms of the offer have not been disclosed.)


Amy Veit and George Ludlow Jr. Wed in Denver
Amy Alise Veit, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard F. Veit of Denver, was married there yesterday to George Craig Ludlow Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ludlow of Elizabethtown, N.Y.
The Rev.
John D. Crandall, an uncle of the bridegroom, officiated at St.
John's Episcopal Cathedral.


Remember Those Good Old Bank-Run Days?
To the Editor:
"When Fear Takes Over: A Bank Run" (Business Day, April 3), about the run on a Kansas City bank when confidence vanished, reminds me of a true story from the 1860's.
It happened in a market town in the Cotswolds in Gloucestershire, England, when a rumor sparked a run on the bank, and depositors rushed in and cleared out all the bank's cash.
The time was just before weekend closing, and angry customers who were turned away were told that their needs would be met in full Monday morning.
In those days there was no deposit insurance of any sort.


Angela Guisao Wed in Texas
Angela Guisao, a sales associate for J. C. Penney, and Douglas Lowell Wachtell, a geologist for Union Oil Company of California, both in Midland, Tex., were married in Midland yesterday.
The Rev.
Steven Schorr performed the ceremony at the First Presbyterian Church.
Mrs.
Wachtell is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Juan Guisao of Carepa, Colombia, where her father owns a cattle ranch.
Her previous marriage ended in divorce.


THE WORLD: South Africa; Tunnel's End Near Here?
The twilight of South Africa's cozy whites-only politics arrived last week when five white Members of Parliament from the liberal Democratic Party joined the predominantly black African National Congress.
One of them, Jan van Eck, said they now represented all their constituents, including still-disenfranchised blacks.
Because the congress gained a voice in a parliament that it does not recognize, the five took seats as independents, sitting alongside a legislator who was expelled from the Conservative Party -- for proposing that his party join the negotiations under way for a new non-racist constitution that would give blacks the vote.


Challenge to Northeastern Woodlands
WILL hemlocks go the way of the chestnuts and elm trees?
This is a question on many minds as the Northeast faces another destructive problem of its woodlands.
The challenge is coming from a tiny but devastating insect called the woolly adelgid.
Although the insect occurs both in the East and West, it was not reported in the East until 1951 and it now occurs from North Carolina to southern New England.
Forests are indeed threatened.
But on the home front where a gardener is in control, the trees have a much better chance of survival.
The woolly adelgid is an aphidlike insect with sucking mouthparts.
It feeds on the succulent sweet sap of the young branches and deprives this new growth of its vitality.
It is believed that with this feeding, a toxic saliva enters the tree and causes a rapid desiccation and discoloration of the foliage.
Studies have shown that a mature tree can be killed in four years.


Robert Bechtel, 68, A Retired Executive
Robert W. Bechtel, a retired Dun &amp; Bradstreet executive, died on April 15 at Columbia Presbyterian Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 68 years old and lived in Ridgewood, N.J.
He died of complications after surgery, his physician said.


U.S. and Germany Tussle at Monetary Talks
As finance ministers from around the world gathered here for several days of meetings on the troubled international economy, an unusually harsh dispute between the United States and Germany over their domestic budget policies continued unabated today.
Like the scheduled welcome of Russia and the other former Soviet republics into the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund on Monday, the trans-Atlantic jousting threatens to detract attention from the international lending institutions' traditional clients in the third world.
Planning sessions for the lending institutions' semiannual conference have given little attention to the new problems of the poor countries, such as the drought in Africa, or to their new economic growth.
After years of following the stiff prescriptions of the World Bank and the I.M.F., dozens of them are buying more Western exports.


RESULTS PLUS
RUNNING  Twosomes in the Park


Anita Hill and Revitalizing Feminism
With the lifted chin and steely grace that characterized her televised testimony about Supreme Court Justice Clarence Thomas, Prof.
Anita F. Hill yesterday went before a spirited crowd of 2,100 cheering women in New York who seemed to hold her personally responsible for revitalizing feminism.
Kicking off a sold-out conference at Hunter College in Manhattan, Professor Hill gave a speech labeling sexual harassment as "abuse of power" and "more than just bad behavior" or "misguided romanticism." She specifically avoided talking about herself or Justice Thomas, apologizing to those who wanted "scandalous details."


Just for One Night, It Felt Like 1947 in New York
Depending on how one views such things, the party Hallmark gave itself Tuesday evening could have been considered either a celebration of the 173d Hallmark Hall of Fame television presentation or an affectionate reminiscence of New York City in 1947.
That is the year and the place in which the drama "Miss Rose White," which can be seen tonight at 9 on NBC, is set.
Care to feel old?
The first Hall of Fame, "Amahl and the Night Visitors," was televised on Christmas Eve 1951.
"Miss Rose White," based on the play, "A Shayna Maidel," by Barbara Lebow, tells the story of a Jewish family named Weiss, torn apart by the approach of World War II.
The mother and one daughter disappear; the father and the second daughter, Rayzel, immigrate to America and settle in New York.
There, Rayzel becomes a fashionably dressed modern American woman, who has a promising career as a buyer at Macy's and calls herself Rose White.
And then her sister turns up . . . but enough of the plot.


Ms. Hawley Plans to Marry
Dr.
Adrienne Hawley of Westfield, N.J., and John H. Hawley of Naranja, Fla., have announced the engagement of their daughter Caroline Reyna Hawley to Bradley Boyer Preble, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Wallace L. Preble of Portland, Ore.
An August wedding is planned.
Ms.
Hawley, 23 years old, teaches third grade at the Walnut Avenue School in Cranford, N.J.
Both she and her fiance are summa cum laude graduates of Dartmouth College, where they were elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
Her father is a pilot for the United States Customs Service.
Her mother is a language professor and the language department coordinator at Union County College in Cranford.


CULTURAL BAGGAGE
I was intrigued and pleased by Barbara Ehrenreich's Hers column "Cultural Baggage" (April 5) because I've been fighting ethnic labels since I was 12 or 13, and decided that only
I
had a right to define myself.
It was a lonely position to take.
I am not almost WASP.
I am African-American.
I'm also part Cherokee from both sides of my family.
But so what?


Kari Addington and Martin D'Luzansky Wed
Susan Kari Addington, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald A. Addington of Dallas, was married yesterday in Boston to Martin James D'Luzansky, the son of Dr.
James J. D'Luzansky and Darlene D'Luzansky, both of Scottsdale, Ariz.
The Rev.
Jonathan Young performed the Episcopal ceremony at Old North Church.


Sports of The Times; KnickVid Has Pistons Thinking
IN the chess games advertised as the National Basketball Association playoffs, it's now the Pistons' move.
After the Knicks dominated Friday night's opener, 109-75, the Pistons' coach, Chuck Daly, understood the situation.
"We'll have to make other decisions," he said.


Brown Visits Italian Market in Philadelphia


Sunday Outing; Portholes to the Past At Long Island Museum
A few steps beyond the doors of the Sea Cliff Village Museum, the visitor encounters a gangplank, just past which stand a uniformed White Star Line purser and a passenger in a velvet coat, fur hat and boa.
The gangplank is but a few feet of duckboard, and the purser and passenger are mannequins.
But imagination has been stirred, and the visitor crosses the gangplank gingerly, as if stepping from a Hudson River pier onto the side of a great ship.


After 14 Years, Afghan Guerrillas Easily Take Prize
Kabul fell to Islamic rebels today as rival guerrilla groups swept through the capital and occupied Government ministries and installations.
The capture of the city came after nearly 14 years of civil war against a succession of Soviet-backed Communist Governments.
The Presidential palace, army garrisons and armories, police stations and the television and radio complexes were swiftly occupied by heavily armed guerrillas who met almost no resistance.


Latin America, Once a Pioneer, Plays Catch-Up
Some claim it was a French-born Brazilian, one Hercules Florence, who discovered photography in 1832 or '33, several years before the daguerreotype was announced to the world.
He was either the first or tied for first in coining the word photography.
Florence had difficulty fixing his prints, and as he was without contact with European centers of invention and communication, his name and achievements were ignored in the medium's histories until quite recently.
For that matter, Europe and North America have not paid much heed to Latin American photography in general over the last century and a half, although Daguerre's invention was introduced to South America by 1840 and was soon thriving in many countries.
North Americans have looked harder at pictures made by their southern neighbors in the last years, but few photographers except for Sebastiao Salgado, who was born in Brazil but lives in Paris, and the Mexican photographer Manuel Alvarez Bravo are even known by name to most North Americans.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on the "All About" page last Sunday about equipment leasing misstated rental rates for backhoes at the Hertz Equipment Rental Corporation.
Hertz rents backhoes for $175 to $200 a day.


Sara C. Farrington, 84, An Angler and Writer
Sara Chisholm Farrington, a writer and a pioneer in international big-game fishing, died Thursday at Southhampton Hospital on Long Island.
She was 84 years old.
She died of pneumonia after suffering a stroke, her family said.


From Rider to Royal Trainer
The man who customarily decides when Arazi works, sleeps, eats and races is Francois Boutin, a farmer's son born 54 years ago in the village of Beaunay in Normandy and now probably the most renowned trainer in Europe.
He is a ruggedly handsome, white-haired man who smokes cigars and wears elegant, casual country clothing, and he frequently builds a wall of language around himself by reverting to French.


Mortgage Foreclosure Can Take Up to 2 Years
IN New Jersey these days, the mortgage foreclosure process -- from the filing of a lawsuit to the eviction of tenants or owners from a foreclosed property -- typically takes two years.
A foreclosure action is taken against an owner who has failed to keep up payments on a mortgage loan.
By and large, if a payment is more than 30 days late, the bank or other lender can demand that the entire amount due on the mortgage must be paid immediately.


Reined In by U.S., U.N. Limits Mission to Somalia
The Security Council Friday night authorized a small new peacekeeping operation in the northeast African nation of Somalia, voting to send 50 military observers to monitor a fragile six-week truce between warring factions fighting for control of the gutted capital, Mogadishu.
But because of United States objections, the Council backed off a plan to sent a force of 500 armed troops to protect relief workers in the Somali capital -- a reflection of the Bush Administration's fear that Congress and voters would oppose expensive new peacekeeping bills in an election year.


Clinton's Standard Campaign Speech: A Call for Responsibility
Gov.
Bill Clinton's standard campaign speech has evolved since October from a broad discussion of policy that was detailed and long-winded to a more focused talk about his vision for America.
For a while, such speechmaking was almost entirely put aside as Mr.
Clinton  spent much of his time explaining himself on personal issues, including marital fidelity and his military draft history.


THE GUIDE
BENEFIT ART AUCTION
A special feature of the art auction to be held for the benefit of the Neuberger Museum of the State University of New York at Purchase on May 9 allows individuals to bid whether or not they attend the $100 event.
The items will be on display Tuesday through May 8, when anyone may have a look and enter a base bid and a maximum bid on one or more plates.


Where Fat Frogs Fat and Tasteful Iguanas Win Prizes
TO the best-of-breed judging, Elaine Williams of Bellmore took her pet, not on a leash or in a cage.
She wore him.
Clinging to her chest was a huge blue-and-green iguana named Ichabod.
"He won best of iguanas last year," she announced, proudly stroking the head of what looked like Godzilla's younger brother.
"We're hoping he wins best of lizards this year."


IDEAS &amp; TRENDS: Abortion and the Court; Inside, Decorum; Outside, War
Experienced Supreme Court-watchers know that it is foolhardy to guess what the Justices are thinking about a case from their questioning or demeanor during the oral argument.
But it was hard not to think that the Justices were uncomfortable last week as they considered an abortion-law case from Pennsylvania -- the first in a round of new challenges to Roe v.
Wade, the 1973 opinion in which the Court found a constitutional right to abortion.


Dinkins Says $455 Million Surplus Was Never Secret
Responding to criticism that his administration had failed to detail the size of a budget surplus, Mayor David N. Dinkins said yesterday that fiscal monitors, labor leaders and lawmakers had been told of the projected surplus as early as February.
Mr.
Dinkins said that he was puzzled that the chairman of the Municipal Assistance Corporation, Felix G. Rohatyn, demanded on Friday that the administration explain how it had produced a $455 million surplus, especially since city budget officials had discussed it with Mr.
Rohatyn early last week.


For Tsongas, a Question of Timing
A favorite pastime among political soothsayers is pondering not only what seems probable at the polls but also what might have been.
What if Paul E. Tsongas had stayed in the race for President?
The disclosure of a recurrance of Mr.
Tsongas's cancer five years ago has led both his backers and detractors to re-evaluate just how viable a candidate the former Massachusetts Senator would have been, and whether he will still be able to wield wide influence within the Democratic Party.


Celia Graham Is Married
Celia K. Graham, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert J. Graham of Overland Park, Kan., was married yesterday to Adam R. Tanner, a son of Dr.
Marie Curto Tanner of New York and the late Howard A. Tanner.
The Rev.
Charles McGlinn performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Cathedral of the Immaculate Conception in Kansas City, Mo.
The bride, 29 years old, graduated from Georgetown University and received a master's degree in English literature from Hunter College in December.
Her father is the president of the Landmark Mortgage Company and her mother, Rose Graham, is the president of the Phoenix Packing Corporation, a paper products company, both in Kansas City.


Easy Ways to Be Sure Mowers Start Again
UNLESS engine-powered yard-care equipment like mowers, string trimmers, shredders and garden tillers are stored and maintained with care, the day will eventually come when, on pulling the starting cord or turning the key, nothing will happen.
Before starting an engine that has been stored over the winter, check that the crankcase contains oil.
If it does not, fill it with fresh oil of the type specified in the owner's manual.
If the manual cannot be found, ask at a lawnmower- or small-engine service center about which oil to use.


Mandela Rejects de Klerk's Power-Sharing Plan
President F. W. de Klerk's plan for a popularly elected executive council during the transition to post-apartheid democracy was rejected today by Nelson Mandela, the African National Congress president.
"If accepted, the outcome will not be an interim government that enjoys the confidence of the majority of South Africans, but a slightly refurbished National Party government," Mr.
Mandela said of the plan, under which the elected council members would take turns being president.
He dismissed the idea as a ploy to keep the losers of a free election in power.


Jackson Meets Clinton but Doesn't Endorse Him
Jesse Jackson, who has twice run for President and knows a thing or two about creating mischief within the Democratic party, avoided endorsing Gov.
Bill Clinton today after the two men met here.
Mr.
Jackson and Mr.
Clinton, who have had their share of political friction in the last few months, emerged from a 40-minute meeting in the Governor's hotel suite to declare themselves committed to a joint set of goals that includes defeating President George Bush in November.


Alison Thresher Married in Rye
Alison Penelope Thresher, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James H. Thresher of Rye, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Brett Cameron Doyle, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Andrew C. Doyle of Sarasota, Fla.
The Rev.
Edward Johnston performed the Episcopal ceremony at Christ's Church.
Mrs.
Doyle is an account executive at Professional Group Marketing Inc., an insurance brokerage in New York.
She graduated from Bryn Mawr College.
Her father is a first vice president with Prudential Securities in New York.


Ms. Swartz to Marry
Herbert Swartz of Malibu, Calif., and Charlotte Swartz of Belmont, Mass., have announced August wedding plans for their daughter Cynthia Swartz and Alan Michael Abramson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harvey Abramson of East Brunswick, N.J.
Ms.
Swartz, 29 years old, graduated from Harvard University and is the director of publicity for Miramax Films in New York.
Mr.
Abramson, 33, graduated from Rutgers University and received a J.D. from the University of Bridgeport.
He is a partner in the New York law firm of Schuman &amp; Abramson.


Where a Million Died
A COMPLICATED WAR
The Harrowing of Mozambique.
By William Finnegan. 325 pp.
Berkeley: University of California Press. $25.


Stupefying Rhythm
To the Editor:
How wonderful of Louis Simpson to bring to light again the poetry of Jose Garcia Villa.
It has been many years since "Have Come, Am Here" was published and acclaimed by figures like Mark Van Doren, Edith Sitwell and E. E. Cummings.


Cambodia Hotel
To the Editor: Last spring I was one of the first travelers to stay in the Apsara Villa at Siem Reap, Cambodia, while visiting the temples at Angkor.
I found it very comfortable, indeed luxury itself, to return to hot and cold running water, air-conditioning, minibars, European toilets, etc., after strenuous hours of touring the jungle in 90-degree temperatures.


Who Signed What?
To the Editor:
In your Letters column (March 29), Jason McManus, the editor in chief of Time Warner Inc., denies my account of the contract he drafted that legally gags his managing editors from criticizing "at any time" the company, its products or its employees, officers or directors "to the news media." The wording of these contracts legally applies while the editors are employed by the company and after.
I hate to put it this way, but as he and his colleagues well know, in his denial Mr.
McManus is simply not telling the truth.
Beyond any doubt, I have it all tape-recorded.


This Week's Numbers
Consensus
Last Period
Estimates*
Tuesday
G.D.P., percent change
0.4
2.0
New home sales, percent change
-2.7
1.0
Wednesday
Personal income, percent change
1.1
0.3
Personal consumption, percent change
0.9
0.1
Thursday
Leading indicators, percent change
0.8
0.3
Jobless claims, thousands
404
420
Factory orders, percent change
0.5
1.0
Friday
Construction spending, percent change
-0.4
0.2
Purchasing managers index
54.1
55.0
Monday: World Bank, International Monetary Fund meetings begin  Wednesday: Treasury refunding announcement  Thursday: Chicago purchasing managers survey  (Source: I.D.E.A. Inc.)


CAMPUS LIFE: Cornell; Project Studies Social Adaptation Of Korean Grocers
In an unusual combination of classroom and field work, a Cornell University class here is studying the cultural adjustment of Korean grocers in New York City.
The 15 students enrolled in "Modernization and the Korean Family," 13 of whom are themselves Korean-Americans, spent the better part of their winter break in Manhattan, conducting interviews with 100 grocers based on extensive questionnaires they developed in the fall semester.


CAMPUS LIFE: Northwestern; A Charity That Never Filed A Tax Return
Northwestern University's largest student-run organization, which has raised about $1.5 million for charity in its 18 years of operation, never filed for tax-exempt status and never filed tax returns.
It may thus be liable for thousands of dollars in taxes and penalties, according to tax experts.
If the organization, Dance Marathon, registers now with state and Federal authorities, the $1.5 million could be looked upon as taxable income, or Dance Marathon could ask to be retroactively declared tax-exempt, tax experts say.
Either way, the experts say, it still could be liable for up to $75,000 in penalties.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-17  AFGHAN REBELS TAKE KABUL
The Afghan capital suddenly fell to Islamic guerrillas after nearly 14 years of civil war against a succession of Soviet-backed Governments.
Rebel factions swept through the city and occupied key Government ministries and installations.  1  PERU FIRES ON U.S.
PLANE
An American military transport plane flying off Peru's coast was fired on by two Peruvian fighter jets.
An American crewman was lost, but Washington and Lima both seemed to be trying to minimize confrontation over the incident.  1  BURMA EASES CLAMP ON PRISONER
The Burmese military Government said it would allow the family of Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, the detained opposition leader and Nobel peace laureate, to visit her.
It said it had freed a former Prime Minister and 11 other political prisoners.  3  MANDELA SEES PLOY BY RULERS
Nelson Mandela rejected President de Klerk's plan for a popularly elected executive council during the transition to democracy in South Africa.
The African National Congress leader said it was a ploy to keep the National Party in power.  4  HEADY SPRING IN RUSSIA
It may not be as dramatic as showdowns at the Kremlin.
But in planting on private farmland, the Batyrovs and many other families in Russia are striking at the core of the Communist legacy.  1  TRANS-ATLANTIC BUDGET SPAT
A dispute between the United States and Germany over domestic budget policies threatened to siphon attention from poor countries as finance ministers gathered in Washington for meetings on the troubled international economy.  9  National 18-30  POLL FINDS PEROT GAINING
Riding a wave of discontent with politics-as-usual, Ross Perot is now the preferred choice for President among more than a fifth of registered voters, a New York Times/ CBS News Poll found.  1  Those surveyed in the poll see in Perot whatever they want.  22  RESERVE FUND FOR S.&amp;L.
BAILOUT
While attacking Congress for delaying spending authority for the savings and loan rescue, the Administration has managed to squirrel away more than $2 billion to keep the operation going.  1  THE BATTLE OF BOSTON
As another baseball season unfolds, storm clouds are gathering in Boston.
At issue is the custody of the city's beloved and accursed Red Sox and, most likely, the future of Fenway Park itself.  1  ANOTHER CALIFORNIA QUAKE
A powerful earthquake shook Northern California and part of Oregon, but there were few reports of injuries or damage.  18  A DROUGHT PERSISTS
Heavy rain in February and March ended more than five years of drought in the area around Santa Barbara, Calif.
But the picture elsewhere in the state is not so bright.
The rain fell mostly in the wrong places, along the coast, where there are few reservoirs.  18  THE TALK OF FULTON
Fulton Journal: In the 46 years since Churchill delivered his "Iron Curtain" speech there, a number of notable speakers have followed him to Westminster College in Missouri.
But none have caused so much excitement as next month's guest, Mikhail S. Gorbachev.  18  Regional 31-40  ACCLAIM FOR ANITA HILL
With the lifted chin and steely grace that characterized her televised testimony about Clarence Thomas, Anita F. Hill electrified a crowd of 2,100 cheering, stomping New York women who hold her personally responsible for revitalizing feminism.  31  DINKINS DEFENDS FISCAL MOVES
Responding to criticism that his administration had failed to detail the size of a budget surplus, Mayor David N. Dinkins said fiscal monitors, labor leaders and lawmakers had been told of the projected surplus as early as February.  32  GOOD NEWS?
WHAT'S THAT?
After years of fiscal trauma, and two years of watching the Mayor seem to dispense only things like homeless shelters, New York City residents appeared to be caught off guard last week by Mayor Dinkins's cornucopia of library openings, day-care centers, health clinics and development projects.  32  POLITICS AND ABORTION
As demonstrators on both sides of the abortion issue have gathered in Buffalo, politicians favoring or opposed to abortion rights have found a ready-made platform and a change to raise their profiles.  36  "Guerrilla" artists in New Jersey.  34  Weighing the fate of New Jersey highway tolls.  34  Obituaries 38
Ralph F. Batch, a pioneer in the development of state lotteries.
Edna Simon Levine, a psychologist.
Arts/Reviews 55-56  Fashion 48, 50  Weddings 51-55


Paying Tribute to Wearable Art
Robert Lee Morris is one of those people who manages to combine creativity with commerce.
An influential jewelry designer, the man responsible for Donna Karan's signature jewelry, he also runs Artwear in SoHo, which he founded in 1977 to exhibit and sell the works of other jewelry designers.
To mark the 15th anniversary of Artwear, he has turned it into a gallery for monthlong exhibitions of one-of-a-kind jewelry.
The first show features his own work.
Called "Origins," it includes old and new pieces that he considers representative of his style, a mix of the primitive and the modern, or as he terms it, "a blend of science fiction with the romantic past." He calls himself a metalsmith, not a jeweler, and works mainly in brass, copper and silver.


California Dreaming


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Freehold 90,000
11 Schooner Square  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 4-year-old ranch style condominium; c/a, 1-car garage, monthly maintenance $99; taxes $2,746.
Howell 141,000
72 Glen Arden Drive  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 10-year-old colonial; family room, deck, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $2,600.
Jackson 115,000
108-L Indeiro Road  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 5-year-old contemporary; 2 fireplaces, cathedral ceiling, skylights, family room; $2,300.
Lakewood 90,000
215 Prospect Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 33-year-old split level; fireplace, 1-car garage, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $1,884.
Millburn 251,250
52 Undercliff Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 43-year-old colonial; 2-car garage, deck, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $4,070.
South Orange 245,000
49 Speir Drive  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 46-year-old ranch; c/a, deck, 3-car garage, family room; taxes $7,127.
OTHER AREAS Westbrook, Conn. 116,000
30 Post Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 42-year-old ranch; sun porch, attic storage; taxes $1,933.
Chappaqua, N.Y. 325,000
16 Oak Hill Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 42-year-old Cape Cod; fireplace, eat-in kitchen, dining room, den; taxes $7,100.
East Norwich, L.I. 180,000
146 Sugar Toms Lane  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 32-year-old split level; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 1-car garage; taxes $3,300.


No Hiding Place


How a School District Deals With Death
"Coping With Death of a Classmate"  [ March 29 ]  gives the distinct impression that school districts, Half Hollow Hills, in particular, should be commended for engendering more humane approaches in dealing with death and bereavement in school-age children.
Nothing can be further from the truth, in this care.
As a parent of a child who still mourns a year after the loss of her school friend, I can document the appalling lack of care and consideration exhibited by the H.H.H. school board and administration after the tragic, accidental death, occurring in school, of a child last winter.


Kelley Reagan Has Wedding
Kelley Reagan, a daughter of Mrs.
Ogden Mills Phipps of Old Westbury, L.I., and the late Joseph A. Reagan, was married in Palm Beach, Fla., yesterday to William Stamps Farish Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Farish of Versailles, Ky.
The Rev.
Stephen H. Gushee, an Episcopal minister, performed the ceremony at the Church of Bethesda-by-the-Sea.
Mrs.
Farish, 24 years old, graduated from Rollins College.
She is a research associate at the American Horse Council in Washington.


Bush to Make It Easier To Sell Public Property
President Bush will issue an executive order next week making it easier for state and local officials to sell public assets like airports, roads, bridges and sewage treatment plants to private businesses, White House officials say.
Plans for the order are the latest move in a campaign of deregulation and privatization driven in part by the Administration's ideology but also aimed at showing a President coping with domestic issues in an election year.


Monster Greed
To the Sports Editor:
George Vecsey puts into proper focus the matter of whether a professional basketball team like the Nets belongs in the playoffs.
He writes, "There is some question whether 40-42 teams should even have the chance."


Aquariums, South and West
The Tennessee Aquarium, said to be the first major freshwater aquarium in the world, is set to open in downtown Chattanooga on Friday.
Through several riverine environments in this $45 million complex, visitors can follow the Tennessee River from its source in the Appalachian Mountains through the Tennessee Valley to the Mississippi Delta.
The aquarium displays over 4,000 specimens of aquatic life, including trout, water fowl, river otters, alligators and the 50-pound blue catfish.
The Rivers of the World exhibit has re-creations of the flooded forests of the Amazon River, the basin of the St.
Lawrence and the Zaire, and other river habitats.
The aquarium is open daily from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M. and, through Labor Day, on Friday until 8 P.M.
Admission is $8.75; $4.75 for children 3 to 12.
Information: Tennessee Aquarium, 101 West Second Street, Chattanooga, Tenn. 37402; (615) 265-0695.


Nika Hazelton Memorial
A memorial service for Nika Hazelton, an author and columnist for The National Review, will be held tomorrow at 3 P.M. at the Church of St.
Agnes, 141 E. 43d Street.


A New Mosque for Manhattan, for the 21st Century
Visitors to the prayer hall of New York's new mosque, at Third Avenue and 97th Street, must leave behind three things.
Two are their shoes.
The third is any preconception of what a mosque should look like.
For there are no arches shaped like keyholes and horseshoes here, no walls that glisten with riotously colored tiles or bristle with sinuously organic calligraphy.
This voluminous hall bears little resemblance to its predecessors.
Rather, it is a spare, serene and deliberately modernist work by Skidmore, Owings &amp; Merrill, whose name was once synonymous with the International style.
Simplicity achieved several goals.


Rethinking Risoto
LIKE MANY THINGS APPARENTLY SIMple, perfect risotto is actually a precisely orchestrated minuet.
Elevated by shaved white truffle, exotic seafood or aged Parmesan, the creamy rice dish has risen to aristocratic status.
But risotto remains the revenge of the peasants.
Perfection is completely dependent on rote activity and homely detail.
The maker of perfect risotto chooses the right rice.
He has the patience to stir and stir and stir.
He is a person of simple taste and therefore doesn't overcomplicate the dish.
In northern Italy, the rice capital of Europe, the risotto instinct seems bred in the bone; there, the proper pan and heat level for cooking, the appropriate stirring motion (as well as the proper stirring utensil) are reflexive.
In this region it is rare to encounter risotto less than creamy, each grain a glossy, proud individual, slightly resistant to the tooth, yet tender.
The addenda -- wild mushrooms, shredded game or bone marrow in the cold months, seafood or vegetables in the gentler seasons -- are always in perfect pitch with the day.


WHAT MAKES GERRY RUN?
When I read Susan Ferraro's fine article "What Makes Gerry Run?" (March 22), I could not help thinking that anyone who has overcome adversity and defeat, in the way that Geraldine Ferraro has, should have the guts to make the tough decisions in the United States Senate.
Ferraro has bounced back from an election disaster and major personal challenges, with both a sense of duty and a sense of humor.


REALLY COOL CARS
I am encouraged by the positive treatment your article gave to the subject of hydrogen and fuel cells as part of the emerging electric-vehicle landscape.
All too often, electric cars are described only in terms of batteries and their problems of weight, range and rechargeability.
These are daunting, indeed.
On the other hand, fuel cells and hydride storage open up new vistas.
The problem is, of course, that a viable, practical, rugged fuel cell of the size and performance needed to fit under the hood of the family sedan doesn't as yet exist.
But the race is on, not only here but overseas.
PETER HOFFMANN Hyattsville, Md.


Alternate-Year Parades
To the Editor:
Regarding "New York City Rethinks Parades" (The Week in Review, April 12): Mayor David N. Dinkins could offend everyone or no one (depending how you look at it) and arrange for annual parades to take turns on alternate years.
New Yorkers, accustomed to alternate side of the street parking, can get used to this, especially if it saves the city $4.5 million a year.
MICHAEL YAM New York, April 12, 1992


New York City: Garbage Ostrich
New York City faces a danger as grim as crime and disease.
It could soon find itself strangling on its own garbage.
Even as the volume of solid waste swells, the ways to get rid of it decline.
The last landfill is nearly full.
Recycling efforts are sorely inadequate.
Exporting garbage is becoming ever more costly, and vulnerable to cutoff.
What other option is there?
Incineration, the alternative that City Hall reluctantly selected seven years ago because it had no other reasonable choice.
By agreeing to build several safe incinerators that convert garbage to energy, the city was finally, painfully climbing upward.


New Oars Cut Swath In College Crew
Mankind has been fooling around with oars since the Pleistocene Epoch and now, from a small town in Vermont, there has come a new design that perhaps makes boats row faster.
The qualification is needed because not everyone is convinced.
The new design has caused a controversy in crew racing.
A group of Eastern college coaches is attempting to ban the oars for the remainder of the season.
Others say they will use the oars in defiance of a requested moratorium.


Note to Readers
The Op-Ed page welcomes unsolicited manuscripts.
Because of the volume of submissions, however, we regret that we cannot acknowledge an article or return it unless it is accompanied by a self-addressed, stamped envelope.
If manuscripts are accepted for publication, authors will be notified within two weeks.


Camera
Photokina, the international photo equipment exhibition, takes place every two years in Cologne, Germany.
It is the world's largest photographic trade show, filling more than a dozen huge halls with photo products.
While the exhibition, scheduled Sept. 16-22 this year, is aimed at retailers, individual photographers, both professional and amateur, also attend in great numbers (164,500 visitors attended the last Photokina).
The show is a testing ground for new products and a major selling arena for manufacturers.
And it is important to every consumer because this is where the manufacturers, distributors and dealers show the products they believe will be most desired by the buying public.


House Reopens At Brandywine
The completion of the three-year restoration of the 1745 Gideon Gilpin House, in which the Marquis de Lafayette is believed to have stayed the night before the Battle of Brandywine on Sept. 11, 1777, will be celebrated with reopening ceremonies at Brandywine Battlefield Park, Chadds Ford, Pa., on Friday and Saturday.
Free tours of the simple Quaker farmhouse will be given Friday from 4 P.M. until dark, and on Saturday from 9 A.M. to 5 P.M.
On Sunday the park will resume its regular schedule, presenting tours of Gilpin House and Ring House (Washington's headquarters) from noon until 5 P.M.
The park is open from 9 A.M. to 5 P.M. from Tuesday to Saturday and noon to 5 on Sunday.
Charges for each of the tours are $3, $2 for people aged 60 and over and $1 for ages 6 to 17.


Dr. Julian Fisher Weds Ms. Wallraff
Barbara Jean Wallraff, a magazine editor, and Dr.
Julian Hart Fisher, a neurologist at the Harvard Medical School, were married last evening in Boston.
Rabbi Robert Alper performed the ceremony at the Castle on the campus of Boston University.
Mrs.
Fisher, 39 years old, is the daughter of Dr.
Evelyn B. Wallraff of Tucson, Ariz., and the late Dr.
Charles F. Wallraff, who was a professor of philosophy at the University of Arizona.
She graduated from Antioch College and is a senior editor of The Atlantic Monthly.
Her mother, who is retired, was a professor of microbiology at Pima Community College in Tucson.


The Life Force Has a Headache
LIFE FORCE
By Fay Weldon. 222 pp. New York: Viking. $21.


What Gives 'White Men' Its Spring?
Forget about "Hook." The true story of "Peter Pan: The Later Years" is "White Men Can't Jump," the hit film about two guys who leap through the air and don't wanna grow up.
The Wendys who love them tell these overgrown boys to settle down and get jobs, as any self-respecting mother figure would.
Depicting heroes who are pop-culture Peter Pans is a basic part of the film's appeal, though the message is not overt or even intentional.
"White Men" is, above all, a swift, gutsy entertainment about two playground basketball hustlers who defy racial stereotypes.
As Billy, Woody Harrelson says flat-out that the hip-hopping black players see him as a "geeky white guy." He turns out to be the all-American con man masquerading as an innocent.


In Waiting City, Guns Rule
As soon as the guerrillas' intentions to seize the city today became clear, Government offices, already thinly staffed, emptied immediately.
Phones rang unanswered there and in offices of the once-dominant Watan Party, and there was no sense of any genuine governing authority in the city.
A few traffic policemen in white caps and brown uniforms, unsure of what else to do, still stood around the center of major intersections, desultorily waving traffic along.
But there was little other authority than the guns carried by the guerrillas.


The Robotic Hand That Will Follow Your Every Move
Michael Ali sits at a desk, wearing a white leather glove adorned with a multitude of wires and sensors.
He slowly flexes his hand, then reaches down toward the empty desk.
He closes his fingers and lifts his arm, and a plastic block on the other side of the room is lifted into the air.
He sits back and smiles.
Mr.
Ali is smiling because the first anatomically correct, fully functional robotic hand has mimicked his every move, successfully picking up the block from the table beneath it.


By Spies &amp; Thrillers
Communism, Chinese style, and Communism, Russian style, are examined in two recent thrillers.
THE YEAR OF THE FIRE MONKEY, by Chris Mullin (Chatto &amp; Windus/Trafalgar Square, $23.95), is set in the period between 1949, when Mao Zedong took control of China, and 1971, when President Richard Nixon restored relations with the country.
MOSCOW MAGICIAN, by John Moody (Thomas Dunne/ St. Martin's, $17.95), takes place during the early days of Mikhail S. Gorbachev's ascendancy.
Mr.
Mullin is a Labor Member of Parliament who appears to know a great deal about the Far East (one of his previous novels had to do with Saigon).
He is also a skillful writer who has done his research.
In "The Year of the Fire Monkey," he looks at the cult of personality that pervaded Maoist China, as experienced by a Tibetan boy who has never seen a car, a train, a toilet.
Through a weird set of circumstances, the boy gets involved with the Central Intelligence Agency and one of its insane schemes.
There is a down-to-the-wire sequence in which an assassin has to be stopped.


Vikings Trade Millard
The Minnesota Vikings traded tackle KEITH MILLARD, the 1989 defensive player of the year, to the Seattle Seahawks yesterday for a second-round draft choice.
The pick, No. 39 over all, will be Minnesota's first in today's draft. (AP)


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester; Recent Sales
Essex, Conn. 170,000
47 South Main Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 240-year-old Colonial; wide floorboards, paneled living room, exposed beams, 0.25 acre; taxes $1,630.
Middletown, Conn. 110,000
403 West Street  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 44-year-old Cape Cod; remodeled kitchen, 2-car garage, family room; taxes $2,035.
Westbrook, Conn. 116,000
30 Post Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 42-year-old ranch; sun porch, attic storage; taxes $1,933.
Chappaqua, N.Y. 325,000
16 Oak Hill Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 42-year-old Cape Cod; fireplace, eat-in kitchen, dining room, den; taxes $7,100.
Larchmont, N.Y. 606,000
123 Beach Avenue  6-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 85-year-old colonial; 2 fireplaces, sun room, eat-in kitchen, wine cellar, dining room; taxes $10,637.
Pound Ridge, N.Y. 408,750
Hoyt Road
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 13-year-old colonial; 2 fireplaces, eat-in kitchen, dining room, family room, library, 2 acres; taxes $7,288.
OTHER AREAS Freehold, N.J. 90,000
11 Schooner Square  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 4-year-old ranch style condominium; c/a, 1-car garage, monthly maintenance $99; taxes $2,746.
Howell, N.J. 141,000
72 Glen Arden Drive  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 10-year-old colonial; family room, deck, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $2,600.
East Norwich, L.I. 180,000
146 Sugar Toms Lane  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 32-year-old split level; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 1-car garage; taxes $3,300.


Billboards: Weapons of Guerrilla Art
What some people might call mischief, six artists here call "guerrilla action."
They created a statue of Senator Jesse Helms of North Carolina, then smashed it on the steps of the United States Capitol during an anti-censorship rally.
They once chained a 46-foot banner of headless suits across Broadway and Wall Street, halting morning rush-hour traffic to protest "the mindless omnipotence of corporate America."


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Voters; Perot's Support Is Often Found in Those Who Think They Read His Mind
Ross Perot is drawing much of his support from voters who find in him whatever they want to find, according to follow-up interviews with people surveyed by The New York Times/ CBS News Poll.
Mr.
Perot gets high marks for being "forceful" and "standing for something," the interviews suggested, but when Americans were asked to name specific stands taken by the Texas industrialist, their responses often concerned his record as a businessman or the rescue mission on behalf of his employees in Iran.


Christine Leedy Editor, Is Wed
Christine Leedy, a daughter of Lynn Leedy of New Canaan, Conn., and the late R. Timothy Leedy, was married yesterday to Leo de Wit, a son of Adri and Corrie de Wit of Groede, the Netherlands.
The Rev.
Harvey Guthrie Jr. performed the ceremony at St.
Andrew's Episcopal Church in Ann Arbor, Mich.
Mrs. de Wit, 31 years old and a graduate of Denison University, is an editor in the development office of the University of Michigan, where her husband is a Ph.D. candidate in theoretical physics.
Her father was the publisher and senior vice president of Financial World Magazine in New York.
Her mother is the chief financial officer of Brompton Books, a book packaging company in Greenwich, Conn.


Challenge to Northeastern Woodlands
WILL hemlocks go the way of the chestnuts and elm trees?
This is a question on many minds as the Northeast faces another destructive problem of its woodlands.
The challenge is coming from a tiny but devastating insect called the woolly adelgid.
Although the insect occurs both in the East and West, it was not reported in the East until 1951 and it now occurs from North Carolina to southern New England.
Forests are indeed threatened.
But on the home front where a gardener is in control, the trees have a much better chance of survival.
The woolly adelgid is an aphidlike insect with sucking mouthparts.
It feeds on the succulent sweet sap of the young branches and deprives this new growth of its vitality.
It is believed that with this feeding, a toxic saliva enters the tree and causes a rapid desiccation and discoloration of the foliage.
Studies have shown that a mature tree can be killed in four years.


New Chefs, New Restaurants and Wine Tastings
SPRING is a time of change.
On Long Island this year, that change is not limited to the weather.
In the coming weeks, new restaurants, chefs, menus and events will be surfacing along with the season's flowers.
Wylie's Ribs, a midtown Manhattan institution for 16 years, is opening an East End outpost in Amagansett.
Wylie's Chicken and Ribs, at 521 Montauk Highway, will offer the same menu that is available at its East 50th Street site.


PERU JETS ATTACK U.S. AIR TRANSPORT
An American military transport plane flying off Peru's coast was fired on by two Peruvian fighter planes Friday afternoon, resulting in the loss of one crewman, but Washington and Lima appeared today to be trying to minimize confrontation over the incident.
American officials in Washington expressed concern and said the incident, which involved a C-130 transport plane on a routine counterdrug surveillance mission, was being investigated.


For U.S. Team, It's Not Just a Layup
The so-called dream team that the United States will send into the men's basketball tournament at the Barcelona Olympics may generate a few restless moments before the Games begin July 25.
Although 10 of the 12 positions have been filled with leading players from the National Basketball Association, uncertainty over the physical condition of at least two of them -- Magic Johnson, who has the virus that causes AIDS, and David Robinson, the San Antonio center, who recently had surgery on his thumb -- is expected to shape the consideration given to filling the final two positions.


Amy D. Fassler Has Wedding
Amy Dora Fassler, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James Fassler of New York, was married last evening to Gary Scott Ehrlich, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul Ehrlich of Atlantic Beach, L.I.
Rabbi Jay Sangerman officiated in New York at the Westbury Hotel.
Mrs.
Ehrlich, 29 years old, graduated cum laude from the University of Massachusetts at Amherst.
She is the special-events manager at PSP Sports Marketing, Media and Promotions in New York, where her father is the president of Kraman Iron Works.


An Updated 'Lyndon' Is Coming to the Emelin
IN his newly augmented performance, Laurence Luckinbill makes his L.B.J. a response, in part, to Oliver Stone's "J.F.K."
While "Lyndon," the one-man show that Mr.
Luckinbill has been playing on tour nationwide for more than a year, remains an homage to a misunderstood President Lyndon B. Johnson, it has become, as well, a refutation of a film that implicates President Johnson in a conspiracy to assassinate President Kennedy.
The actor's next stop for his portrayal is the Emelin Theater in Mamaroneck on May 7, 8 and 9.


A Pilgrim's Progress
A friend of hers, the novelist Anne Bernays, tells the story.
Annie Dillard was giving a reading on Cape Cod, Mass., where she has a summer house.
The house is in an area neither fashionable nor thick with writers, conditions that are nowadays often synonymous.
During the question period a member of the audience rose on trembling legs and asked, "But why South Wellfleet?" Her manner -- timid, awed -- was appropriate to a shepherd's asking, "But why Bethlehem?"
To her fans, Annie Dillard is an avatar, or at the very least, as Bernays puts it, "the Mother Teresa of her particular genre." To critics, many of them anyway, she is an occasion for rhapsody -- if not overkill.
Browse through a stack of reviews from this newspaper alone and the names of those with whom she's been compared leap out: Virginia Woolf, Gerard Manley Hopkins, Emily Dickinson, William Blake, John Donne.
Small wonder there hasn't been a day since the publication of "Pilgrim at Tinker Creek" in 1974 when Annie Dillard was out of print.


Business Diary/April 19-24
COMPANIES G.M.'s New Leadership Begins Putting Its Team in Place


A Parents' Guide to Kids' Sports
FOR JENNIFER AND JOHN WALSH OF Princeton, N.J., physical activity is largely a matter of team practices, games and meets.
There's swimming almost every day for Jennifer, 14.
In the fall she also plays field hockey and in the spring she plays lacrosse.
John, 11, practices with his soccer team twice a week; he has a game every Sunday and often a scrimmage on Saturday.
He also plays ice hockey and baseball.
Somehow, he finds time to swim as well.
Gradually, with little fanfare, organized sports have virtually replaced neighborhood pickup games and the informal groups of kids who used to play outside after school.
In a majority of families with young children both parents now work, and they are likely to send the children to after-school programs rather than turn them loose to roam the neighborhood.
And then there's always peer pressure.
If it is an honor to be picked for the soccer team, children will vie to join it and, once selected, will spend countless hours practicing and playing formal games.
Organized sports for children have exploded in popularity.
The number of children playing on United States Soccer Federation youth division teams, for example, grew from slightly more than 100,000 in 1975 to more than 1.5 million in 1989.
The number of girls on softball teams more than doubled from 1980 to 1990, surging from about 306,000 to over 638,000.
"These are really remarkable increases," says Vern Seefeldt, the director of the Institute for the Study of Youth Sports at Michigan State University.
"There are fewer 7- and 8-year-olds today than there were in 1980, yet the actual number in organized sports has increased.
But there is a downside to this burgeoning of organized sports.
Most children start with a burst of optimism and enthusiasm, but most also quit, discouraged and disheartened.
They often develop "such a distaste for the sport that they never want to hear about it again." Seefeldt says.
"They are the lost generation of sports participants."
Parents who wish to help their children stay active in sports need a good sense of what they are physically capable of doing at different ages.
Children who try a variety of activities are more apt to find the ones that suit them best.
And parents should encourage children to play for the fun of it, whether or not they become champion athletes.
The most important of these guidelines, experts say, is to make sure that the sport a child has chosen is appropriate for his or her stage of development.
Many parents try to push their children too far too fast.
DR.
BARRY GOLDBERG, DIRECTOR of sports medicine at Yale University Health Services and a member of the American Acadamy of Pediatrics sports medicine and fitness committee, says, "One of the problems we have is that coaches get the children before they're ready for a sport and then label them as not capable. We see that across the board, in every sport -- kids trying before they are ready."
Different sports require different skills, of course, and children develop at wildly varying rates.
So there are no hard and fast rules about when to let a child plunge into organized sports.
Many pediatricians and other sports experts believe that children should not play regulation games on full-sized fields until they are at least 9 or 10.
Until that time, they should be learning basic skills, such as kicking a soccer ball or hitting a tethered T-ball.
Or they should play modified games that allow everyone on a team to have adequate playing time.
"As soon as you get children involved in an adult model of a game, skill development falls to practically zero," Seefeldt says.
"Children need to be in situations where their participation and ability to learn skills are maximized. In an adult game, you try to throw the ball so the batter can't hit it or kick the ball where it can't be retrieved. With kids, you need to do just the opposite."
The problem is, the recommendations of the experts often don't correspond to reality.
Seven-year-olds play tackle football in full gear, just like children on high school teams, and they have to run 100 yards to score a touchdown.
Ten-year-olds play full-court basketball with 10-foot-high nets.
Seefeldt urges parents to take the initiative and lobby their school districts and local teams to institute modified rules for children.
Until kids' leagues come around to this view, however, here are some general guidelines based on milestones in child development.
Pediatricians have found that children do not have the physical ability to learn the skills needed for organized sports until they are about 5 years old.
And it does not help to coach them when they are too young.
Infants and toddlers are often enrolled in swimming classes, although according to Seefeldt it is "almost impossible to teach the basic competitive strokes to children who are younger than age 5." Toddlers who have practiced throwing a ball turn out to be no better at it when they get older than those who never practiced.
In fact, warns the American Academy of Pediatrics, parents who insist on trying to teach athletic skills to children under age 5 often take all the fun out of the activity and discourage them from taking it up later.
While 5-year-olds can generally learn to catch a gently tossed ball and ride a bike, they are far from ready for actual games, experts say.
Many children do join soccer teams around this age, but Seefeldt describes what goes on at a typical game as "beehive soccer. Everybody is gathered around the ball and there is very little concept of team play." Five-year-olds have particular trouble with sports like baseball, which require not only hand-eye coordination but also an ability to follow a moving ball with their eyes and predict where it will land.
One reason children have such difficulty with these sports is that their eyes are not fully developed.
Children tend to be farsighted, and cannot easily follow moving objects.
It is not until age 6 or 7 that most children's eyes have matured enough to track a ball.
Another problem is that young children are often clumsy and uncoordinated.
Most 6-and 7-year-olds are not coordinated enough to hit a pitched ball with a bat, for example.
Children of this age can learn many basic gymnastics skills, however, like balancing, running and jumping.
Dr.
Goldberg says.
But he is skeptical of gymnastics centers that hoist children on harnesses so they can perform movements that they would otherwise be physically incapable of.
"There is some enjoyment for children in flying through the air," he says.
"But a lot of times it is a more positive experience for the parent, watching the kid go through the motions, than it is for the kid."
Children of 9 and 10 may be able to hit a baseball or shoot a basketball through a hoop, but they often do not have the attention span to concentrate during long practices in large groups.
For this reason, Dr.
Michael A. Nelson, chairman of the committee on sports medicine and fitness of the Academy of Pediatrics, recommends that lessons be no longer than 30 minutes.
According to Vern Seefeldt, even age 10 is too young for any real proficiency at tennis, and he suggests postponing lessons until at least that time.
The game requires considerable handeye coordination, beyond the developmental capabilities of most young children.
In addition, children are ususally expected to play ont he same size court as adults, with the same height net.
Obviously, it is extremely difficult for small children to range over the entire court and hit the ball high enough to clear the net.
While it is true that some children excel at tennis at an early age, experts say this is no reason for parents to push their kids to take lessons too soon.
"When we say there are exceptions like Jennifer Capriati, we need to look at the thousands of players who fell by the wayside to produce one player like her," Seefeldt says.
"We tend to lose sight of the children who never want to play tennis again because they were forced to play before they were ready."
IT IS NOT UNTIL ADOlescence and the onset of puberty that most children really come into their own as athletes.
Their bodies are ready and they have the motivation and drive to practice and succeed in sports they love.
But since children enter puberty at different ages, there are great disparities in abilities among 11- to 15-year-olds.
The best swimmers at this age, for example, are usually taller boys with muscular shoulders and lean bodies.
Small boys who have not yet matured tend to be slower swimmers.
One sport where boys who mature late are at a particular disadvantage is football.
"In football," says Dr.
Goldberg, "where strength is a priority, differentials in size and weight and muscle strength are significant variables." To protect smaller boys, some leagues divide players according to their physical maturity.
The idea is that young but physically mature boys can play with older teenagers, while teenagers who are physcially immature can play with younger boys.
But according to Dr.
Goldberg, older boys rarely agree to play with younger ones.
"You could count on one hand the number of boys who move down," he says.
Football has the highest incidence of injury of all sports in elementary and junior high school, but injuries are increasing even in sports generally regarded as "safe," such as swimming.
As children try ever harder to compete, they can end up overtraining.
Injuries caused by repeated trauma to the body - known as overuse injuries - were unheard of in children only a decade ago.
Now they are a major concern among sports medicine specialists.
Studies of children's sports injuries suggest that many could have been avoided if coaches, who often are untrained parent volunteers, knew more about technique, and if children were not encouraged to train too hard.
Other than learning not to expect too much of children before puberty, parents also have to learn to let children find their own sports at their own pace.
"Every kid has his own medium," says W. George Scarlett, a dvelopmental psychologist at Tufts University in Boston.
"Sports is not sports is not sports. Swimming and biking are worlds apart." Children can usually find their sport if they ahve a chance to try different ones.
Many communities have recreation programs that enable children to experiment with a variety of sports without having to make a major commitment of time.
Dr.
Lyle J. Micheli, a pediatric orthopedist at Harvard Medical School, who is a former president of the American College of Sports Medicine, says parents should not push children into sports they do not enjoy.
Some children love team sports, for example, while others thrive when they can develop their own skills and essentially compete against themselves.
"You'll know pretty quickly whether a kid enjoys a given sport, whether a little girl really enjoys going to gymnastics or whether she keeps finding excuses not to go," Dr.
Micheli says.
What about the child who likes sports but feels hopelessly inadequate?
Extra help and coaching form parents or even other children can frequently help.
It is not enough to tell a child to ignore his or her ineptness, and play anyway, Seefeldt says: "If a child is not skilled, he will be embarrassed in a high-stress situation such as a game." He suggests asking the child's coach or physical education teacher to recommend skills to practice.
Often, the extra help that makes a difference is as simple as playing catch in the backyard or throwing balls to the child to hit.
CHILDREN SHOULD be encouraged to drop a sport, at least temporarily, if they are truly miserable trying to learn it.
Dr.
Goldberg of Yale says that "it is not unreasonable for a parent to say, 'It looks to me like you're not having a good time. Would you like to try something else?"' Parents should never try to coerce a child to stay with a sport because they have spent so much time ferrying him or her to practices and games, or because so much money has been invested in lessons.
In one of the larges and most comprehensive studies of children and sports, involving a national sample of 26,000 boys and girls fromt he ages of 10 to 18, Seefeldt and his colleagues at Michigan State found that by age 15, 75 percent of children who had been involved in organized sports had dropped out.
And, he says, "the earlier they began, the earlier they dropped out."
When the children who remained on teams were asked why they continued to play, one-third of the 10- to 14-year-olds said their parents wanted them to.
Most of the children who had dropped out told the researchers that all the fun had gone out of playing.
They complained that their coaches played favorites or yelled at them or did not allow them to play as much as they wanted to.
Many also said they were required to practice too many hours a week, leaving them no time for other activities.
"There are a lot of practices that are two hours or longer a day," Seefeldt says.
"Many of the kids had practices four days a week and had two games a week. Many were not willing to give up that much time."
EVEN CHILDREN who don't mind devoting hours each day to practices, lessons or meets sometimes get involved in so many sports that, eventually, they have to choose among them.
John Walsh used to swim four or five times a week.
But in recent months he has frequently missed practice in order to have enough time for soccer, hockey and baseball.
Candice Walsh, John and Jennifer's mother, says she won't mind if the children drop most of their teams as long as they continue to exercise and play the sports for fun.
We may never return to the days when children ran outside for a neighborhood softball game before dinner.
But if parents encourage their children to progress in sports at their own speed, if they emphasize the sheer joy of rigorous exercise rather than a single-minded drive for perfection and success, they will help their children develop a love of sports and set them up for a lifetime of physical activity.


Budapest To Be 1996 Site Of World's Fair
Budapest has been approved as the site of the 1996 World's Fair.
The decision last month by the Paris-based Bureau of International Exhibitions settled more than a year of uncertainty about the Hungarian capital's involvement in the fair, which had originally been scheduled for 1995 as a joint project by Budapest and Vienna.
Conceived before the fall of Communism in Eastern Europe, the joint exposition had been envisioned as a symbol of improving relations between East and West and a way to renew cultural links between the two cities on the Danube, which share the history of the Austro-Hungarian Empire but were divided by the Iron Curtain.
But in a referendum last spring, Viennese voters rejected the exhibition, which many thought would draw too many tourists to the already saturated city.


A New F.D.A.-Approved AIDS Test
To the Editor:
In her roundup on AIDS testing ("All About H.I.V. Testing," April 12), Kathleen M. Berry failed to include the most recent AIDS test approved by the Food and Drug Administration.
Fluorognost received approval on Feb. 5 as the first immunofluorescent AIDS test for both screening and confirmation.
It takes only 90 minutes to process, can be used at small health care facilities, doctors offices and blood banks, and unlike the other confirmation test, it posts practically no indeterminate results.
We soon intend to file an amendment to our existing license for Fluorognost to include a test for saliva.
DETLEV BAURS-KREY Southampton, N.Y., April 14  The writer is chairman and chief executive of Thermascan Inc.


5 Charged as Members of Prostitution Ring
A man and four teen-age girls have been arrested on charges that they were members of a prostitution ring that operated out of restaurants and hotels in Queens, the police said.
The man, Wei-Kei Pun, 21 years old, of 74 Forsyth Street in Manhattan, was charged with eight counts of promoting prostitution.
The teen-agers, an 18-year-old, two 17-year-olds and a 16-year-old, all from Flushing, were charged with prostitution.


Making a Difference; Called on the Carpet
Michael B. Kronick got his feel for the carpet industry, and its troubles, early in the last decade as manager of distribution for the Westmills Carpet Company of Calgary.
Westmills later went out of business, one of scores of Canadian carpet enterprises that have disappeared in the rough and tumble of global competition.
Mr.
Kronick, for the past three years executive director of the Ottawa-based Canadian Carpet Institute, saw the problem mostly in terms of unfair competition from the United States.
Last year he got his board to go along with a formal dumping complaint against the Americans.


Afghanistan: From Coup to Rebel Victory
April 1978: President Mohammad Daud is killed in a coup.
The People's Democratic Party of Afghanistan forms a pro-Soviet Government led by Noor Mohammed Taraki.
September 1979: Mr.
Taraki is killed and his former Deputy Prime Minister, Hafizullah Amin, takes over.


How to Speed a Loan Application
LENDERS say borrowers can help speed the approval process for a mortgage by making sure their applications are complete before submitting them.
Most lenders will not start processing an application until a borrower has a signed sales contract in hand.
But it is wise to ascertain what a bank requires before beginning to look for a home.


Review/Dance; The Sounds Of Silence In New Piece
Sara Pearson tackled a complex subject in "A History of Silence," presented by Sara Pearson-Patrik Widrig &amp; Company on Thursday night at Performance Space 122.
The new piece dealt with a variety of silences, from the mute eloquence of dance to the messages hidden between the lines of chatter, tantrums and cliches.
If the parts added up to somewhat more than the whole, there were some very good parts among them.
A young woman speaks her mother's crude complaints about her father, wincing and then angry at them in retrospect, and finally turning them inside out.
Men work on performing skills in several funny duets that drew sympathetic laughter from the dancers in the audience.
Bodies fly against one another, crashing in air and on the floor and winding about one another.


POSTINGS: Lower East Side; A Bath House at Auction . . .
For generations of Lower East Siders who had neither tub nor shower in their tenement homes, the "PVBLIC BATHS OF THE CITY OF NEW YORK" (that was how it proclaimed itself, in elegant lettering over the entry) was a welcome and necessary resort.
But the city got out of the public bathing business years ago and will place the Allen Street bath house on the auction block on Thursday.


The Executive Computer; Side by Side, How the New OS/2 and Windows Stack Up
WINDOWS.
OS/2.
Windows.
OS/2 (as I said last week, when new operating systems arrived from the Microsoft Corporation and the International Business Machines Corporation).
The drumbeat continues.
Which is better?
OS/2, version 2.0, has won this round technically; its true competition, the NT version of Windows, won't be out until later this year.
Windows 3.0, has won the popularity contest to date, and there's every sign Windows 3.1 is on a similar fast track.


Review/Music; Down-Home Guitar With a Backbeat
It's never too late to start a supergroup.
John Hiatt, Ry Cooder and Nick Lowe, three songwriters and singers in their 40's with more than a dozen underappreciated albums among them, have joined the drummer Jim Keltner, a prolifically recorded studio musician, to form Little Village.
The band received an uproarious welcome at the Beacon Theater on Wednesday night.
Little Village, whose members first played together in 1986 for Mr.
Hiatt's album "Bring the Family" (A&amp;M), arrives at a time when mainstream rock has moved far away from blues and country roots.
As rock for younger listeners shifts away from cherished Americana and toward a dislocated, video-era fragmentation, older fans looking for stability and traditionalism have sparked country-music sales and nurtured a blues revival.
Anyone who longs for a down-home guitar twang and a groove with a backbeat will find it in Little Village -- and get something extra, too.


Home Businesses Run Afoul of Zoning
THE rising use of computers and facsimile machines is giving a new impetus to challenges to restrictive zoning rules that seek homeowners from conducting business from their residences.
In the metropolitan area, some communities are responding by re-evaluating their zoning regulations.
But in others they are holding firm, taking the position that an in-home business may generate too much traffic or otherwise disturb the residential character that the zoning bylaws were designed to protect.


Q and A
Changing Ownership Question: I am the sole owner of a co-op apartment and I will be getting married this summer.
What must I do to convert the ownership to both my name and my husband's name? . . .
Janet C. Weinstock, Brooklyn Answer: You will need the consent the co-op's board of directors and, if you have a mortgage, of the lender.
Sybil Pollet, a lawyer who specializes in real estate matters who is a partner in the Manhattan law firm of Pollet &amp; Pollet, said that most co-ops require board approval for the transfer of stock and assigning the proprietary lease.
But in some cases, said Ms.
Pollet, the board's authority is limited when transfers are to spouses.


New Yorkers, etc.
It's possible that there are men and women who never lie, skirt or straddle the truth, or fudge their way around something.
It's possible but extremely unlikely.
And that is undoubtedly a good thing because it would probably be an unbearable world if everyone was always and indiscriminately completely honest.
Think about it.
Would the world be any better, or purer, and would humanity be any happier if, asked for an opinion of a tie or a dress, the interlocutor responded: "It's a disaster, it looks terrible."


Flavoring Chicken, Fish and Pasta With Olives
IT is hard to believe nowadays, but not long ago in the United States it seemed that all olives sprang forth from cans.
Remember those large fat watery ones with uniform shape and no taste?
Now, however, there are endless varieties to choose from.
Olives can be soft and fleshy, bursting open like ripe persimmons; or firm and smooth, or wrinkled and chewy.
Some are shaped like tiny apples; some approach the perfect oval.
The colors are as diverse as the shapes: purplish black, deep blue-green, straw yellow, dark red wine and a spectrum of browns and greens from rich chocolate to chartreuse.


Elise Ora Weinstein To Marry in August
Mr. and Mrs.
Irwin Weinstein of Fresh Meadows, Queens, have announced August wedding plans for their daughter, Elise Ora Weinstein, and Eric Michael Caplan, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Mark Caplan of Concord, Mass.


Review/Music; Past Rhythm-and-Blues With Alexander O'Neal
Alexander O'Neal came out and begged and pleaded and moaned and did just about everything he could to prove his love, down to singing "Oh, baby," hundreds of different ways.
But anybody looking for a standard rhythm-and-blues show at his concert at S.O.B.'s on Wednesday night would have been disappointed: Mr.
O'Neal put on a gloriously strange show, moving from passionate seriousness to Las Vegas pomp to declarations of love clearly disbelieved by everyone, making the veneer of romance that shows like this depend on fall to pieces, gleefully.
Mr.
O'Neal did it all to an adoring audience.
His show was regularly interrupted by men yelling "Alex, you're the man," and "Sing, baby," which broke the seriousness of his love pleadings, making him laugh and fool around with the audience, trading insults good-naturedly.


In the Huxtable World, Parents Knew Best
This week, after eight years of speCtacular ratings and spectacular profits, Bill Cosby will finish up what he had to say on "The Cosby Show."
The series was the most-watched show of the last decade, the comedy seen by more people than any other in television history, the show that resurrected the sitcom as television's most popular genre and the first to portray mainstream black middle-class life.
NBC will broadcast its 198th and final episode Thursday night at 8.
Like the other 197, the hourlong special will emphasize family values, family togetherness and family pride.
"Truthfully, I don't have anything left to say," Mr.
Cosby said.
"That may be why it's not a sad, sad moment. I'm satisfied."


CULTURAL BAGGAGE
Ehrenreich enjoys the luxury of toting no cultural baggage because she lives in a society where the general homogeneity of whiteness does not require it.
African-Americans, Latinos and Native Americans might be capable of shucking the bonds of religious or cultural ritual, but no matter how deeply they might long to join her race of none, they are ethnically trapped by the color of their skin.
Does she not grasp how fundamentally her white skin has bestowed on her the option of freeing herself of it all?


Ralph Batch, Leader in Creating Lotteries for States, Is Dead at 79
Ralph F. Batch, a pioneer in the development of state lotteries, died on Monday at the Northfield Manor Nursing Home in West Orange, N.J.
He was 79 years old and lived in Short Hills, N.J.
He died of complications from a stroke, his family said.


Review/Cabaret; Vic Damone Recalls the Past
Of the many singers who grew up in the shadow of Frank Sinatra in the 1940's, Vic Damone has always come the closest to matching Mr.
Sinatra's fervent tenderness and smoothness of phrase.
But unlike his idol, Mr.
Damone, who is now 63, has retained a remarkable youthfulness of timbre and vocal flexibility.
The singer, who is playing his first New York date in a decade at Michael's Pub (211 East 55th Street), where he will appear through May 10, still incorporates many Sinatra-associated songs in his repertory.
At Wednesday's early show they included "This Love of Mine," "I'll Never Smile Again," "I've Got You Under My Skin" and "Laura."


Manhattan Showcase for Kitchen Designer
"I NEVER thought of myself as a kitchen lady," said Beverly Ellsley, an architectural and interior designer and builder, as she munched thoughtfully on a blueberry muffin in her Westport showroom.
"I am the world's most reluctant cook."
But Mrs.
Ellsley was invited to create the kitchen for one of the most prestigious showcases of interior design, the Kips Bay Boys and Girls Club Decorator Show House in Manhattan.


Miss McNinch Is Betrothed
Mr. and Mrs.
Robert B. McNinch of Lenox, Mass., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Carolyn Paige McNinch, to Alexander Butler Waugh, a son of James C. Waugh of Scarborough, Me., and Dorothy R. Greaney of Andover, Me.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss McNinch, a graduate of Denison University, is known as Paige.
She is a vice president at Lehman Brothers in New York.
Her father and her mother, Susan B. McNinch, own the Eastover Resort in Lenox.


Audubon 'Birds' Book Sells for $4.07 Million
A complete edition of John James Audubon's "Birds of America" was auctioned on Friday for $4.07 million at Christie's in New York, a record at auction for an illustrated book or printed work of Americana.
The four-volume book of engraved images of birds was published from 1827 to 1838.
It was sold, in its original 1839 binding, by the University of Edinburgh to raise money for academic programs.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
HELP FOR BROWN THUMBS
SOMETIMES they have to be soothed -- the frantic callers to the Horticultural Hot Line at the Planting Fields Arboretum.
"I had a man call who was afraid he had planted his bulbs upside-down," said a hot-line answerer, Brendan P. Earls of Baldwin Harbor.
"He wanted to know if that meant the plant would grow upside-down. I told him the bulb would right itself."


Mary MacDonald and Paul Squire Are Married
Mary King MacDonald, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James D. MacDonald of Wilmette, Ill, was married yesterday in Winnetka, Ill., to Paul Donald Squire, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence A. Squitieri of Brooklyn.
The Rev.
Thomas Ventura performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at SS.
Faith, Hope and Charity Church.


Gifted People Who Accepted No Limits
It is very good news on more than one count that, in a discreet and literally subterranean way, the most compelling show of the spring season to date may well be "Theater in Revolution: Russian Avant-Garde Stage Design 1913-1935" at the I.B.M.
Gallery of Science and Art on Madison Avenue at 57th Street.
Ever since the late 1970's, when Soviet museums started to open their windows on the West, something of a feeding frenzy for their works of art has occurred both in the United States and in Europe.


Emy Y. Tseng, Engineer, Wed
Emy Ying-Mei Tseng, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Kwo-Hwa Tseng of Taipei, Taiwan, was married yesterday to Dr.
Linden Tzu-Jang Hu, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Shih-En Hu of Westfield, N.J.
Justice of the Peace Kathleen Murphy officiated at the Boston Harbor Hotel in Boston.
The bride, who is 26 years old and is keeping her name, is a senior software engineer at Wang Laboratories in Lowell, Mass.
She graduated from Brown University.
Her father is the chief of psychiatry at Cathay General Hospital in Taipei.


Losing Weight Can Mean Changing Your Life
To the Editor:
As a nutritionist, I must respond to "A Growing Movement Fights Diets Instead of Fat" (front page, April 12) that no one has found a better, easier way to lose weight than a weight-loss program.
The word "diet" has become almost an insult, associated only with radical weight loss or radical changes in eating habits.
For people looking for an immediate and quick result, such as losing 50 pounds in a week, most diets will not work.


Center to Employ Ex-Soviet Scientists Soon
An international center created to provide scientists in the former Soviet republics with stable jobs over the next two years is likely to open in Moscow next month, and to begin financing specific projects in June, a Bush Administration official says.
Robert L. Gallucci, a State Department official coordinating the effort to create an International Science and Technology Center in Moscow, said the United States, Japan and the European Community had committed a total of about $75 million for the center, which is intended to employ weapons scientists and engineers who might otherwise be tempted to sell their services to potentially hostile countries.


Fatal Crash Puts Focus on Plan to Shut Street
Just three days before the deadly crash in Washington Square Park, New York University officials submitted a proposal to ban traffic from one block of Washington Place: the street where a 1987 Oldsmobile careered out of control on Thursday before plowing into the park.
The proposal was not drafted out of concern for safety, said John J. O'Connor, vice president for university relations.
But he said the crash, which killed 4 people and injured 26, has added new urgency to the university's desire to shut down the street and turn it into a pedestrian mall.


Raskolnikov Says the Darndest Things
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT
By Fyodor Dostoyevsky. Translated by David McDuff. 647 pp. New York: Viking. $30.
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT
By Fyodor Dostoevsky.
Translated by Richard Pevear and Larissa Volokhonsky. 564 pp.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $25.


Turnpike a Road To Improvement
To the Sports Editor:
Calling the New Jersey Nets "a tawdry turnpike franchise" hardly fits a description for a team that has increased its victory total significantly over the last two seasons and is now in the playoffs, having finished with the sixth-best record in the Eastern Conference.
If the Nets' status as one of three sub-.500 playoff teams is so important to George Vecsey, perhaps he should be pointing his criticism at recent Knick playoff teams in 1988 and 1991 that had 38-44 and 39-43 records respectively.
DAVID JURMAN South Belmar, N.J.


CAMPUS LIFE: Swarthmore; In Arts Program, Performance Is Students' Duty
As two young girls cautiously twirl across the spacious dance studio at the East Side Ministries in Chester, Pa., a Swarthmore College senior, Curtis Nance calls out, "When you do that turn, I want you to have an attitude! You're saying, 'It's my turn to party!' "
A sociology/anthropology major who grew up in the projects of Chester, Mr.
Nance returns to his neighborhood every Saturday to teach dance classes free of charge as part of a new course at Swarthmore titled, "Performance as Community Service/Social Change," taught by Paula Sepinuck, an adjunct associate in performance.
Mr.
Nance and the three other students in the course -- Eric Behrens, Darius Tandon and Brent Askari -- are investigating the uses of performing and visual arts in community service programs.


At Home Abroad; More Than Bosnia
As Serbian forces attacked Croatia last year, I asked a British official with much experience in conflict-resolution what he thought Americans and Europeans should be doing.
Without hesitation he replied: "We should tell the Serbs that unless they call off their aggression, we will bomb Belgrade."
It was an answer startlingly at odds with official policy.
The U.S. and the European Community then were refusing to label Serbia the aggressor, and refusing to recognize the republics that had broken off from Yugoslavia.
Our policy was to mediate the conflict from a neutral posture.
The use of force was not in remotest contemplation.


On the Road With Your Children's Children
TRAVEL with your children's children, the best fun in the world, involves a lot of learning by doing, but novices can use some rules to keep the project on the rails.
Some guidelines derive from folklore: Where to find a toilet on Fifth Avenue, for example.
Others appear in books and leaflets as grandparent-grandchild travel increases, and it is booming.
Helena T. Koenig, a travel agent in Chevy Chase, Md., is offering 15 high-end tours in her sixth season of Grandtravel, and she says business has doubled every year since she began, although she expects growth to plateau in the recession.


Robin Moger to Wed in Fall
Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley H. Moger of Purchase, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Robin Lyn Moger, to Michael Harold Maizes, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Howard Maizes of Nanuet, N.Y.
A November wedding is planned.
Ms.
Moger, 29 years old, is a soap opera production assistant at Capital Cities/ABC in New York.
She graduated from Syracuse University.
Her father is a media buyer and television programmer in New York.


The Trick to Understanding Ali
TWENTY-FIVE years ago, when Muhammad Ali was saying "I was the onliest boxer in history people asked questions like a senator," the Government considered him a dangerous role model for young black men who would follow the champion's example and reject the draft, or desert.
That seems so absurd now as Ali, smiley and hushed, comes to town to be patted and patronized, and to perform little hand tricks that demystify magic.
But on April 28, 1967, chill and drizzly in Houston, when Ali refused to step forward and be inducted into the United States Army, the world indeed watched.
Except for a brief demonstration staged by television news producers who needled some black students and secretaries into performing for their cameras, there was little immediate reaction outside the Custom House.


Robin Katz Marries John Moubayed
Robin Deborah Katz, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jerry Katz of Fort Lee, N.J., was married in New York last evening to John Moubayed, a son of Dr.
Samir Moubayed and Sylvia Moubayed, both of Providence, R.I.
Rabbi Richard S. Chapin performed the ceremony at the Metropolitan Club.
Mrs.
Moubayed, 27 years old, is a foreign-currency trader at the Union Bank of Switzerland in New York.
She graduated from Syracuse University.
Her father is a partner in Colorscripts Plus, a printing service in New York.
Her mother, Sandi Katz, owns Design II Associates, an interior design concern in Fort Lee.


To Your Health
HAVING MORE THAN ONE, WITH NO side effects, is now easier than ever.
There are at least three dozen nonalcoholic beers and wines on the market, and some are extremely good.
They allow people who want to limit their alcohol intake to have a glass of something more interesting than mineral water at a dinner party or to segue from regular beer or wine to a healthier drink.
The demand for nonalcoholic beverages began about a decade ago and has been growing here and abroad ever since.
They are consumed mostly by people who sometimes drink alcohol but who, for various reasons, prefer not to have it on particular occasions, according to beer makers.
Limiting alcohol helps control calories: 12 ounces of regular beer have 120 to 150 calories, whereas nonalcoholic beer contains just 60 to 75 calories.
In addition, certain people are advised not to drink alcohol, including pregnant women; diabetics; older people, whose tolerance for alcohol tends to decrease, and many patients on chemotherapy or taking antidepressants, antibiotics or muscle relaxers.


The Global Economy's Engines Are Out of Tune and Sputtering
THE haphazard spectacle of what is called the world economy seems to operate like some Rube Goldberg contraption, with lags and lurches, ups and downs.
An economic surge or slump in one country yields an effect in another, often unforeseen or unintended.
And lately, the machine's engine appears to be sputtering.
In the United States, the economy has recovered from being flat on its back to being up on its knees -- not much of a recovery.
Germany is saddled with a very un-Germanic budget deficit, inflation and high interest rates, mainly the result of generous spending to bring eastern Germany along.
Even Japan has lost its vigor.


Rachel H. Berek To Wed K. .B. Rader
Ellen and Peter Berek of South Hadley, Mass., have announced the engagement of their daughter Rachel Hillary Berek to Kenneth Barry Rader, a son of Harriet and Lawrence Rader of Scarsdale, N.Y.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Berek, 27 years old and a cum laude graduate of Yale University, is senior publicist at Little, Brown &amp; Company in New York.
Her father is the dean of the faculty, provost, and a professor of English at Mount Holyoke College.
Her mother is the news director at Williams College.


Fats and Figures
WE'RE EATING less fat.
Government and industry data show a steeper drop in animal fats than vegetable fats.
Butter use declined from 4.9 pounds per person in 1985 to 4.4 pounds in 1990, while olive oil use rose from about .59 pounds to .8 pounds (1 1/2 cups).


Big Space Dish On St. Croix
Tourists and school groups are being invited to look around a huge antenna -- 82 feet in diameter -- at the easternmost end of St.
Croix in the United States Virgin Islands.
This 260-ton steel dish will be used to explore quasars, pulsars, radio galaxies, molecular clouds, galactic nuclei, black holes and other parts of a previously unknown universe.
It will begin operating Friday, according to John A. Williams, the technical specialist who, with the senior technician, Ronald Lindsey, will run and maintain the giant eye to the sky, and escort visitors through it and its adjacent building.
The antenna is identical to eight others operating in New Hampshire, Iowa, New Mexico (which has two), Texas, Arizona, California and Washington.
The 10th and last is being built at Mauna Kea, Hawaii, at an altitude of 12,000 feet, and should be ready next year.
Together, the 10 make up the National Radio Astronomy Observatory's Very Long Baseline Array and make up a single radio telescope.
The St.
Croix project cost $5 million, funded by the National Science Foundation through Associated Universities, which runs the headquarters observatory at Socorro, N.M.


Corrections
Because of a facsimile transmission flaw, a review of Toni Morrison's "Playing in the Dark: Whiteness and the Literary Imagination" on April 5 misidentified a principal character in Ms.
Morrison's novel "Beloved." She is Sethe, not Bethe.


UP AND COMING: Kriss Kross; Tiny Voices, Funny Clothes
Parents, hold on to those ducats.
Kris Kross, the newest entrant in the teen-age pop race, has arrived in force, and there's a good chance children everywhere are going to be scrambling after the twosome's debut CD, "Totally Krossed Out" (Columbia).
The group consists of two 13-year-olds from Atlanta, Chris Smith and Chris Kelly.
They rap and dance, have an odd way of wearing their clothes and shave lines in their eyebrows.
Their song "Jump" is No. 1 on Billboard's hit singles chart, and the album, which made its debut at the No. 9 spot, has moved up to No. 3.
But it's their penchant for wearing baseball caps, T-shirts and overalls backward -- they call it "the Krossed-out look" -- that's causing tremors in the fickle world of adolescent fashion.
The twosome and their producer "decided we had to do something different, so we came up with the clothes thing," Chris Kelly says.
"You just have to buy them real big, you know?"


Cuttings; A Lively Gardening Dictionary Breaks Fertile New Ground
Mark Griffiths, a young English horticulturist, recently strolled through the wholesale flower district along the Avenue of the Americas in Manhattan, admiring the tropical plants.
"I was absolutely staggered by what I saw there," he said.
"Superb aroids and cycads, and I'm sure some of them were illegal. They were simply too old. No nursery would ever be able to afford to grow them."


Dancing for Human Rights


Jennifer Gay To Wed in July
Mr. and Mrs.
William Gay Jr. of Cold Spring Harbor, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Jennifer Gay to Keith DeAngelis, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
John DeAngelis of Huntington, L.I.
A July wedding is planned.
Miss Gay, 25 years old, graduated from Denison University and is studying for a master's degree in education at Fordham University.
Her father is a limited partner with Mercator Partners, a specialty stock brokerage in New York.


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
East Norwich 180,000
146 Sugar Toms Lane  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 32-year-old split level; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 1-car garage; taxes $3,300.
Holbrook 125,000
20 North 4th Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 26-year-old ranch; eat-in kitchen, finished basement, 1-car garage; taxes $2,700.
Laurel Hollow 735,000  65 Cedarfield Road  6-bedroom, 4-bath, 9-year-old farm ranch; sunroom, library, family room, fireplace, inground pool; taxes $12,500.
Oyster Bay Cove 475,000
17-B Berry Hill Road  5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 24-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 2- car garage, 1.5 acres; taxes $6,600.
Ronkonkoma 110,000
80 Lake Shore Drive  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 21-year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, fireplace, 1-car garage; taxes $3,000.
Selden 120,000
61 Hawthorne Street  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 32-year-old ranch; dining room, den, basement, 1-car garage; taxes $2,500.
OTHER AREAS Westbrook, Conn. 116,000
30 Post Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 42-year-old ranch; sun porch, attic storage; taxes $1,933.
Chappaqua, N.Y. 325,000
16 Oak Hill Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 42-year-old Cape Cod; fireplace, eat-in kitchen, dining room, den; taxes $7,100.
Freehold, N.J. 90,000
11 Schooner Square  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 4-year-old ranch style condominium; c/a, 1-car garage, monthly maintenance $99; taxes $2,746.


Clarinda Hykes Wed in Capital
Clarinda Marie Hykes, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard N. Hykes of Washington, was married yesterday to Donald B. Leka, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Agim Leka of Baldwin, L.I.
The Rev.
Joseph Sobierajski performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Holy Trinity Church in Washington.
Mrs.
Leka, 22 years old, graduated from American University, as did her husband.
Her father is the vice president of finance and administration at the Top Down Systems Corporation, a computer software concern in Rockville, Md.
Her mother, Maria Aurora I. Hykes, is the director of the program development division for the General Services Administration in Washington.


Elizabeth Noerdlinger Plans to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Victor S. Noerdlinger Jr. of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter Elizabeth Noerdlinger to Marc Goldburg, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Arnold Goldburg of Littleton, Colo.
A September wedding is planned.
Ms.
Noerdlinger, 32 years old, teaches art at the Keys School in Palo Alto, Calif.
She graduated from Amherst College and received a master's degree in education from Stanford University.
Her father owns a textile company in New York.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: President's Family; One of Bush's Campaign Advisers Is Also His Son
The crowd at the Rotary Club's weekly luncheon in this small East Texas county seat was up and applauding before the guest speaker had a chance to say a word.
With an aw-shucks toss of his head, the man at the podium said, "When you are Nolan Ryan's boss and Barbara Bush's son, people treat you the nicest ways."


Sunday Menu; Bitter Green Loses Its Bite
Over the last five years, markets carrying rape have increased substantially as more Americans have learned about the virtues of this bitter Italian green.
In this recipe the asparagus and the Gorgonzola sauce take the edge off the bitterness of the green, also called broccoli di rape and broccoli rabe.
As an alternative, Swiss chard has a subtler flavor.
If you use the chard, add 2 teaspoons of lemon juice to the sauce.


Books of The Times; When Democracy Is Sold to the Highest Bidder
Who Will Tell the People  The Betrayal of American Democracy  By William Greider  464 pages.
Simon &amp; Schuster. $25.
In "Who Will Tell the People: The Betrayal of American Democracy," it is William Greider's not altogether startling or original contention that the wishes of the American people are no longer being expressed by what goes on in Washington.
Instead, special interests are getting their ways, particularly monstrous corporations that seek to reach their global tentacles wherever labor is cheap and environmental laws are lax.
Mr.
Greider contends that these groups work their will through money and manipulation.


DOCUMENTS CHARGE IRAQIS MADE SWAP: U.S. FOOD FOR ARMS
For more than two years the United States Government has had evidence that Iraq, in the months before it invaded Kuwait in August 1990, diverted food purchased under a $5 billion American aid program and exchanged it for money and arms in the Soviet bloc and in other countries.
Iraq may have used some of the money, one high-level American Government official wrote in an Oct. 13, 1989, confidential document, to acquire "sensitive nuclear technologies."


James Nelson Wed to Teresa Jacobs
Dr.
Teresa Ellen Jacobs, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
David R. Jacobs of New York, was married yesterday to Dr.
James William Nelson, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Byron L. Nelson of Eugene, Ore.
Rabbi Gerald Weider performed the ceremony at the St.
Moritz in New York.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Senate Race; Republican Incumbent Facing Tough Campaign
Memories of Clarence Thomas's confirmation hearings hang like angry clouds over Senator Arlen Specter, dampening support for him in Tuesday's Republican primary and creating support out of thin air for a potential Democratic opponent, political analysts say.
Lynn H. Yeakel, a Democrat whose name recognition was so low in surveys last month that it fell into the margins of error, has become a strong contender with help from a television advertisement that shows the Senator, a former prosecutor, sharply questioning Anita F. Hill, who had accused the nominee of sexual harassment.


Blaze in Basement Apartment Kills 2 in Brooklyn
A man who was seriously injured in a fire several years ago was killed, along with his handicapped father, in a one-alarm fire in their basement apartment in Brooklyn yesterday, fire officials and neighbors said.
One firefighter was injured in the fire, which broke out shortly after 3 P.M. in the basement of a two-and-a-half-story brick building at 1364 38th Street in Borough Park, fire officials said.


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of April26


World Economies


Dialogue on Aid to Ex-Soviets Bogs Down
More than 50 academics, executives and Government officials bogged down this weekend in a debate over policies that would give the United States a leading role in bringing capitalism and democracy to the former Soviet Union.
The stumbling block was an increasingly familiar problem: the reluctance of many Americans to risk much money on the transition process.
By the end of their three-day conference in Harriman, N.Y., the experts had agreed that a list of policy recommendations would not be enough; their final report, issued yesterday, also had to explain to Americans why their tax dollars should be invested in Russia and the other members of the Commonwealth of Independent States.
The payoff is to be rising American exports, more jobs and new corporate income from investments in Russia.


Ms. Stiebel Is Married
Catherine Lynn Stiebel, the daughter of Gerald Stiebel and Judith Kessel, both of New York, was married yesterday in New York to Jonathan Alan Fiebach, the son of H. Robert Fiebach of Philadelphia and Sandra Axelrod of Elkins Park, Pa.
Rabbi Max Hausen performed the ceremony at the Essex House.


Tapping Russian Oil Is a Multinational Job; OPEC vs. Republics
To the Editor:
To the Editor:
William Safire (column, April 9) supposes that black gold -- oil -- is "how to save Russia." Kazakhstan alone could contain as much oil as Saudi Arabia was presumed to have in 1980 (before effectively doubling its reserves).
Republics from Communist rubble represent the most significant threat to the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries.
The oil infrastructure of the former Soviet republics is in ruins: to replace it (not just repair it) will require investments of $200 billion -- before sufficient oil can reach markets to earn the hard currency required to save Russia, Kazakhstan and the other republics.
Then, after the $200 billion has been spent by the republics, $300 billion more or so will be required to develop extensive reserves of oil and gas: the Tenghiz field in Kazakhstan alone will cost $100 billion.
By the mid-1990's oil will have seen the peak prices of the decade.


Rangers Go Under River And Back Out of Woods
One big playoff victory later, the Rangers looked and sounded again today like a hockey team holding a winning hand.
Coach Roger Neilson guarded against overconfidence after a 3-0 victory over the Devils on Saturday night.
But his general manager and his players were noticeably loose after an optional skate at Rye Playland, and Neilson said the Devils were overdue for some breakdowns in at least three different areas as they approached Game 5 on Monday night of a Patrick Division semifinal series now tied at two games apiece.


Wall Street Gets Its Own Museum
In the narrow streets of lower Manhattan's financial district, the stockbrokers and investment bankers who walk in the shadows of skyscrapers usually have little time to muse on the people and events that came before them.
To someone who lives for the moment that seals a trade or a deal, the notion of history over decades or centuries may seem vague and distant, a distraction from more pressing business.
Wall Street has a short memory.


Devils' Lemieux Gains A Tolerance for Elbows
Nothing bothers Claude Lemieux. Nothing. Just ask him.
Ask him about getting hit in the head so hard by the elbow of Mark Messier that his helmet popped into the air like a cork out of a champagne bottle.
Ask him about how goalie Mike Richter of the Rangers shut out Lemieux and the Devils, 3-0, Saturday night to tie their first-round playoff series at two games each.


Seeking Ways to Avoid Summer of Discontent
THE Rev.
Clarence Norman, pastor of the First Baptist Church in Crown Heights, marveled the other night that the Brooklyn neighborhood was "one of the only truly integrated neighborhoods" in New York, perhaps even in the nation.
Except for one thing.
"Unfortunately we live side by side with very little positive relationship with each other," he said.
"About the only time we really have a relationship is when there's an explosion."


Amid Quake's Aftershocks, Affirmations in California
The earth trembled and roared on Saturday and again and again early this morning, bringing terror and destruction to the north coast of California.
But when it finally stopped on this second Sunday of Easter, the congregation of Our Savior's Lutheran Church gathered to pray on folding chairs in the parking lot beside their wrecked church.
The gold-trimmed steeple was tilted, the pastor's house was knocked off its foundation.
But the Rev.
Gilbert M. Santiago gathered his flock anyway and, under a gray sky, intoned the 46th Psalm: "God is our refuge and strength, a very present help in trouble. Therefore we will not fear, though the earth be moved, and though the mountains be toppled into the depths of the sea." And with that he baptized 3-month-old Morgan Donald Wright over a white porcelain baptismal bowl.


Dance in Review
American Ballet Theater  Metropolitan Opera House
Marianna Tcherkassky and Fernando Bujones began their professional careers with American Ballet Theater in the early 1970's, and their "Giselle" on Friday night testified happily to their years of experience.
Unlike many younger performers, they project strongly throughout the quality of their dancing, the clarity and power of their movement.
Miss Tcherkassky is a model Giselle.
No matter how many times she has danced the title role, she makes its romantic imagery appear fresh, sustaining the choreography's signature.
Her arabesques are deep and perfectly placed while the delicate aspect of the Romantic ethos comes naturally to her.


Richard E. Gerstein, Dead at 68; Prosecuted Key Watergate Figure
Richard E. Gerstein, the longtime prosecutor in Dade County, Fla., who uncovered the first direct links between the Watergate burglary and the White House of President Richard M. Nixon, died early yesterday morning in Miami.
He was 68 years old.
Mr.
Gerstein suffered a heart attack and was dead on arrival at 12:39 A.M. at the Miami Heart Institute, a nursing supervisor, Angela Adams, said.


Quotation of the Day
"It's not healthy for kids to have so little free time. It is not healthy to become completely caught up in competition and status at such a young age." -- IKUO AMANO, University of Tokyo sociologist.  [ A1:4. ]


Perot Votes Would Probably Help Bush
To the Editor:
What those who are intrigued by the idea of a Ross Perot run for the Presidency, whatever their reasons, seem unable to grasp is that a vote for Mr.
Perot in all probability is a vote for George Bush.
If you think carefully about it, you'll see that the natural Perot voter is more likely a disaffected Democratic voter, whether blue or white collar, than a disgruntled Republican voter.
For those who style themselves independents, those specialists in "sending them a message," their Perot vote will produce the same effect.
A high-scoring Perot candidacy means, more than anything else, a Bush plurality in enough of the 50 states to insure a Republican victory.


Dance in Review
New York City Ballet New York State Theater
Judith Fugate and Peter Boal, City Ballet's leading traditional classicists, dance with a serenity, purity and attention to detail that give their performing a luxuriousness that stood out even more as Aurora and Prince Desire in Peter Martins's staging of "The Sleeping Beauty" on Saturday afternoon.
The effect of this slightly streamlined production is rushed and chaotic at times.
The music is played fast.
On Saturday night, there were some strange curdled sounds coming from the orchestra.
But Ms.
Fugate's musical phrasing and the authoritative sweep and passion of Mr.
Boal's dancing brought a still fresh, old-time warmth and spaciousness to the ballet.
In a role debut that was impressively conceived and realized in dramatic terms as well, Mr.
Boal made Desire an unusually complex character whose mime passages with the Lilac Fairy had great depth and poignancy.
There was certainly nothing wrong with the dancing of Kyra Nichols as the evening Aurora, but though she seemed to ride through the ballet on a current of air, the dance skills through which she etches characterizations looked relatively restrained and lacked that extra Nichols magic.
Adam Luders was as elegant as ever as Desire, also a new role, but unexpectedly and enjoyably forceful in his portrayal of the unhappy prince.


Baltimore Stadium Draws Boos From Maryland Taxpayers
To the Editor:
In "Taking a Swing for Cities" (Editorial Notebook, April 8) Robert B. Semple Jr. states that "The voters of Maryland coughed up $200 million through lotteries and bond issues" to finance the new Baltimore Orioles baseball stadium.
He believes this is an example that Michigan and other states should follow.
But the fact is that voters of Maryland were prevented by the state from voting on whether or not to use taxpayer money to build the stadium.
The state fought a lengthy court action to keep the stadium issue from being made a voter referendum.
Rather than offering a good and persuasive argument to spend $200 million for the stadium and allow the voters to decide, state politicians just went ahead and did it.


How Do Japan's Students Do It? They Cram
Like many Japanese, Naoto Eguchi feels relentless pressure to get ahead.
Rising at dawn, he works a full day with his regular colleagues and an additional three hours each evening in special study sessions.
He then does a couple of hours of work at home before going to bed at midnight.
It is a heavy burden for an 11-year-old.


Media Buyers Try to Widen Advance Sale of Prime Time
AS the Big Three television networks debate whether to lengthen the season for first-run prime-time programming, there is increasing discussion about extending the advertising-buying season as well.
For decades, late spring or early summer has marked the opening of what the media and advertising industries call the up-front market -- the sales efforts that ABC, CBS and NBC make for their programs in advance of the annual television season, which has run from September through mid-April.


Cavaliers Display Style That Nets Are Lacking
Danny Ferry, who earns roughly $3 million a year, warms the bench.
Mike Sanders, who last month was imported from a health-club recreation league, plays it cool as the starting small forward.
This paradoxical distribution of minutes at once explains the plight of the Cleveland Cavaliers and how they may have rescued themselves from one of the worst trades in National Basketball Association history.


CHRONICLE
GEN.
H.
NORMAN SCHWARZKOPF, Senator STROM THURMOND and the Nobel Prize winner ELIE WIESEL headed a list of prominent Americans who took the ferry to Ellis Island yesterday to receive medals honoring their achievements in public life.
The 1992 awards were dedicated to Alex Haley, the late author of "Roots," a story of African slaves who became Americans.
Mr.
Haley's daughter, LYDIA ANN HALEY, accepted his award.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-9  CLASHES IN AFGHAN CAPITAL
Hours after triumphant Islamic rebels occupied the Afghan capital, war broke out between two rival guerrilla factions.
The city of Kabul seemed to be without apparent leadership as the thunder of tanks, rockets and rifle fire replaced the guerrillas' celebrations.
A1  U.S.
FEARS DIVERSION OF ARMS
American military experts said they were worried that unused Stinger antiaircraft missiles supplied by the United States to the Afghan rebels could make their way to Iran or to international terrorist groups.
A6
A new governing council has begun talks on rebuilding Jalalabad.
A6  HOW IRAQ SWAPPED BUTTER
The United States has had evidence for more than two years that Iraq diverted food it bought under an American aid program and exchanged it for money and arms in the Soviet bloc, Jordan and Turkey before it invaded Kuwait.
A1  MEXICO BLAMES OIL FIRM IN BLAST
Mexico's Attorney General blamed local officials and the state oil company for the sewer explosions that killed at least 189 people in Guadalajara last week.
A3  THE ROUTINE MIDEAST TALKS
After threats and counter-threats, Arabs and Israeli negotiators will reopen peace talks in Washington on Monday.
What keeps them going is a willingness to do the right thing for the wrong reasons: to keep talking even though no one has any apparent intention of compromising now.
A2  BIG 7 MEET ON AIDING RUSSIA
Finance ministers from the seven largest industrialized nations met in Washington to work out final details of a multibillion-dollar Russian aid package as Russia's top economic official joined them.
A9
An I.M.F. official struggles to school Russia in capitalist ways.
A9  ADRIFT IN ST.
PETERSBURG
A battle swirls around Mayor Sobchak of St.
Petersburg, a lawyer once viewed as a possible successor to Mikhail Gorbachev.
He now seems politically marooned.
A3  JAPAN'S HARRIED PUPILS
The struggle to succeed in one of the world's most competitive societies is starting earlier and earlier.
Nowhere is it more evident than in the popularity of cram schools that train Japanese students for exams for private schools and colleges.
A1  Jet attack in Peru may have resulted from mistakes by both sides.
A9  25,000 join Central Park rally to back ousted Haitian leader.
A3  Tokay Journal: Eastern Europe's greatest wine fights to survive.
A4  National A10-15, B10-12  DEMOCRATS PULL BACK BUDGET AX
Democrats in Congress have backed away from their plans to seek sharp reductions in the military budget next year, overwhelmed by fears of job losses and divisions over how to spend any savings.
A1  PINNING DOWN PEROT
Ross Perot has been reticent about how he would tackle complex national problems as President, but hints emerge from a look at the times he left the business world and moved like a Texas twister into the public policy arena.
A1  LOOKING AT CLINTON'S DONORS
Governor Clinton has received $2.2 million from Arkansas campaign donors, many of whom do business with the state government and depend on the good will of Mr.
Clinton and his political associates.
A15
Abortion may be less powerful, politically, than many thought.  A14
The Thomas hearings haunt a Pennsylvania Senator.  A15  HIDING ABUSED CHILDREN
The kidnapping trial of a Georgia woman has opened a window into a shadowy network set up to hide abused children from their abusers and the legal system.
A1  HARVARD LAW SCHOOL UNDER FIRE
A parody of an article by a slain feminist legal scholar has injected anger into the debate at Harvard Law School over the school's slow pace in hiring women and minority faculty.
A10  PARDON ME, FLIPPER
Chattanooga Journal: The Glenn Miller tune may fade to background music as the city shapes a new civic image around the world's largest freshwater aquarium, opening here this week.
A10  DEFYING THE FORCE OF NATURE
The rugged residents of Ferndale, Calif., have long since become accustomed to earthquakes.
But old-timers said they had never experienced anything like the jolts that hit this weekend.
A12  BLOCKING THE DOOR TO DEATH
Despite the Harris execution, California's other death row inmates are unlikely to face a similar fate any time soon.
B10  Metropolitan Digest, B1 DINKINS'S BUDGET RISKS
With a projected budget surplus, Mayor Dinkins expects to be able to avoid hundreds of millions of dollars in borrowing and to restore some programs he had previously cut.
But proposing an election-year budget the year before an election carries considerable new risks and pressures.
A1  Business Digest, D1  Sports C1-10  Baseball: Cubs stop Pirates.
C6  Embarrassing loss for Mets.
C7  Yanks defeat Orioles.
C7  Royals end 9-game skid.
C7  Basketball: Pistons edge Knicks.
C1  Turnaround for Piston backcourt.
C4  Bulls top Heat again.
C4  Cavaliers' Sanders tough for Nets.
C4  Columns: Anderson on N.F.L. draft.
C3  Rhoden on Riley.
C4  Football: Giants pick Notre Dame's Brown.
C1  Jets take Nebraska's Mitchell.
C1  Redskins get Howard; Dickerson dealt.
C3  Hockey: Relief for Rangers.
C5  Lemieux gains tolerance for elbows.
C5  Red Wings stay alive.
C5  Horse Racing: Derby fever time.
C8  Arts/Entertainment C11-18  Talk of Hollywood.
C11  A Bernstein education center.
C11  NBC donates radio files.
C11  Theater: "Jelly's Last Jam." C11  Word and Image: William Greider's "Who Will Tell the People." C18  Obituaries D12  Richard E. Gerstein; prosecutor helped uncover Watergate affair.
Editorials/Op-Ed A16-17  Editorials A16  Mideast talks: vital signs.
The forgotten talent pool.
Mr.
Perot's ballot blues.
Topics: Refugees.
Letters A16  Leslie H. Gelb: Three Asia hands.
A17  William Safire: Bush's Lavoro scandal.
A17  John T. Noonan: Should state executions run on schedule?
A17  Rodney Ellis: Jim Crow goes to college.
A17


Haute Couture
The first roar of the day is inspired by the Washington Redskins.
They have traded up for the fourth pick, and they use it to select DESMOND HOWARD of Michigan.
A little more than four months after Howard accepted the Heisman Trophy at the award dinner in the same ballroom, he became a Redskin.
And upstairs, three Redskin fans, flying the flag in hostile territory, are jumping and screaming.
RICHARD NADRICH of Forest Hills and MARTY LASKIN of Douglaston, two high school guidance counselors, are standing next to a friend in a skirt, a thick moustache and a hog's snout.


A Boom in Insured Municipals
These are heady days for the municipal bond insurance industry.
So far this year, the six companies that do virtually all the business have backed more than $19 billion worth of tax-exempt issues, 32 percent of the $58.7 billion worth of municipal bonds that have been priced, according to figures from the Securities Data Company.


Beginning of the Ends -- Jets and Giants Pick a Matching Pair
Some fans might have muttered "Johnny who?" after the Jets selected Nebraska tight end Johnny Mitchell in the first round of the National Football League college draft this afternoon.
But the Jets are banking that Mitchell's potential will make his name a household word in the next few years.
The Giants took the best-known tight end in the draft, Derek Brown of Notre Dame, with the No. 14 pick in the first round, just ahead of the Jets' first selection.
But the Jets considered Mitchell, a sophomore who didn't start for Nebraska last season, the better player.


Extra! Extra! Redskins Get Howard, Dickerson Dealt
Only a few minutes had passed and three picks had been made yesterday when the first round of the National Football League draft in Manhattan turned into a topsy-turvy game of bold trades and surprising choices.
When the smoke cleared and the first round had been completed, defensive linemen and defensive backs had emerged as the most popular picks and defensive selections led offensive ones, 15-13.
The stunning picks included the Washington Redskins' leaping grab of the Heisman Trophy winner, Desmond Howard of Michigan, and the Cincinnati Bengals' use of the sixth pick to select Houston quarterback David Klingler.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Independent; Wealthy Should Pay More To Trim Deficit, Perot Says
Ross Perot, the wealthy Texan who is contemplating an independent campaign for President, said today that rich Americans should carry a bigger burden than other people to help erase the Federal budget deficit.
Providing a few more details to his policy leanings, the businessman also suggested on the CBS News program "Face the Nation" that he would lower Federal spending on programs that benefit women, families and children.
He also said he might endorse across-the-board cuts in all Government spending by means of "a real Gramm-Rudman that stops the deficit spending so you don't lose any more financial blood."


Jack Dunphy, 77, Author, Dies; Friend and Chief Heir of Capote
Jack Dunphy, a novelist and playwright who was the author Truman Capote's closest friend and companion for 35 years, died yesterday at St.
Vincent's Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 77 years old, and lived in Manhattan and in Sagaponack, L.I.
He died of cancer, his family said.


Owner, Mainly, of the Gift of Giving
SOME people watch birds. In Lucia Montes's case, the birds watch her.
Twice a day, pigeons and sea gulls flutter about her as she stands on the broken earth of a vacant lot at Brook Avenue and East 156th Street, in Melrose in the Bronx, and tosses them chunks of bread and table scraps.
So accustomed are they to her routine that they swoop down from their perches on nearby rooftops and lampposts when she approaches.


U.S. Officials Say Mutual Errors May Have Led to Incident in Peru
American officials expressed anger today over the attack on an American military transport plane by Peruvian fighter jets on Friday, but said the incident may have resulted from mistakes made by both sides.
Peruvian authorities reiterated their position that the American C-130 was hundreds of miles off course from a routine counterdrug surveillance mission, and that the military command in Lima ordered Peruvian aircraft to fire on it only after the United States crew failed to respond to repeated warnings.


In Communism's Undoing, A Briton Points the Way
John Odling-Smee, director of the International Monetary Fund department that is helping the former Soviet Union, seems too proud -- and presents himself as too practical -- to be daunted by the task of turning the land of the heavy hand into the land of the invisible one.
"If one allowed oneself to be overwhelmed, one wouldn't allow oneself to do anything," the 48-year-old Englishman said.
"But I do recognize it is an enormous challenge. We are doing what we can, recognizing that it is going to take a long time."


Review/Television; George Carlin in an HBO Special
HBO Comedy Hour George Carlin Live at the Paramount  Written by George Carlin; produced and directed by Rocco Urbisci; Jerry Hamza, executive producer.
Tonight at 11:45 on HBO.
George Carlin is at the top of his form these days.
There's a "Zen and the Art of Archery" sureness about himself and his audiences, whether they be the relative handful of cognoscenti gathered in New York last week for a seminar at the Museum of Television and Radio or the thousands of fans cheering on Saturday night for a stand-up special, carried live on Home Box Office, at the Paramount Theater in Madison Square Garden.
A tape of the latter can be seen on HBO tonight at 11:45.
Now in his mid-50's and, with modest ponytail, looking like a well-groomed hippie, Mr.
Carlin has had an unusually public career since starting out around 1960, with Jack Burns as his comedy partner.
By 1962 he was going solo, doing nicely with standard mother-in-law jokes.
But around 1970, with perfect timing, he went hip, complete with tie-dyed shirts, dungarees, long hair, beard, anger, scatology and, unfortunately, a whopping drug problem.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Watch; Clinton Seems Stuck With a 'Why Me?' Look
It was Bill Clinton's big moment.
He was on television.
He had the microphone to himself.
He was about to explain how he planned to conquer the "character issue."
Just then, he was pre-empted by a commercial for EZ-101, a Philadelphia radio station.


Jim Crow Goes to College
Waller County, a rural county 50 miles northwest of Houston, has a long history of depriving blacks of the right to vote.
Even after Federal civil rights and voting rights laws wiped out the last vestiges of Jim Crow laws, the county continued to rebuff efforts of blacks who wanted to vote.
Prairie View A.&amp; M. is a predominantly black state university in Prairie View, which is more than 90 percent black.
Waller County is 51 percent white, 37 percent black and 11 percent Hispanic.
In the 1970's, students went to court to fight a discriminatory voter registration practice: The registrar had responded to their voter applications with a questionnaire asking detailed personal questions, ostensibly to verify residency. (Elsewhere in Texas, registration was automatic when a proper application was received.)


Ashe Case Underlines Intrusiveness of Press
To the Editor:
From "Why Arthur Ashe Kept It Secret" (editorial, April 10) and a news article the same day on how top newspaper editors would have treated the information that the former tennis star had contracted AIDS through a blood transfusion after surgery, it seems editors hold a uniquely potent position in making judgments.
You state that public ignorance about AIDS is primarily what forced Mr.
Ashe underground.
I suspect that he is, like the vast majority of us, simply private about his illnesses and prefers to keep the details quiet.


Same Toil for Many Japanese Students in U.S.
The intense pressure for Japanese children to excel academically and pass competitive entrance examinations by no means diminishes even if they are living abroad.
Indeed, in the New York metropolitan area, a majority of the 5,000 to 6,000 school-age children of Japanese parents attend jukus, or cram schools, like those in Japan.


Sports of the Times; Draft Hints at the Year Of Rookie Tight End
BY now you've heard the annual April cliches that spilled out of the National Football League franchises after yesterday's stock show of campus talent.
In the first round, every team either "took the best athlete available" or "filled a need." After the draft ends today, every coach will profess to be "pleased" with the choices.
But in August, many of the players chosen will have been released.
In a good draft, maybe half a dozen rookies will be on the roster for the season opener.
In three or four years, maybe three or four players from yesterday's draft will still be on the squad.
Sometimes the best athlete available isn't that good.
Sometimes the need isn't filled.


The Deadlock Over Trade Continues
The trade ministers of the leading industrialized nations tried at a weekend meeting here to rescue the faltering talks on streamlining the global trading system.
But they came up with no new ideas for breaking the principal deadlock, on rules for trade in agriculture.
The high-level delegations, representing Japan, the United States, the European Community and Canada, emphasized that the meetings, held at this mountain hot spring resort north of Tokyo, were informal and not intended to draw up concrete proposals.


In St. Petersburg, a Fight Over Power and Property
The prevailing struggle throughout the former Soviet Union, in this post-Communist transition, is over property and power: who rules, how far and over what?
Here in the former Leningrad, where a similar struggle in 1917 was resolved in favor of the Bolsheviks, today's battle swirls around Mayor Anatoly A. Sobchak.
Mr.
Sobchak, an articulate lawyer once considered a possible successor to Mikhail S. Gorbachev, now seems politically marooned amid the many islands and canals of what once again is called St.
Petersburg.


Topics of The Times; April Showers
Spring, which had been acting mostly as a chilly carry-over of the mild winter, finally showed up for real last week, not so much on a 73 degree Tuesday afternoon as on a wet Wednesday morning.
An April rain fell, just heavy enough to be felt and light enough to be strolled in.
In the parks, an uncommon conjunction of yellows brighten the day -- forsythia flowers that have been hanging on through the cool weeks, whole beds of daffodils opening at once, dandelions and marsh marigolds coming out in the damp.
Modest violets were around in immodest abundance and mayflowers spread their little umbrellas of leaves.


Tapping Russian Oil Is a Multinational Job
To the Editor:
William Safire's basic premise in "How to Save Russia" (column, April 9) is right.
The oilfields of Siberia are the best place to nurture the Russian economy and thus its new democracy.
But his proposal of a joint task force from the White House and the Kremlin falls short of providing a catalyst that can team Western oil companies with Russian producers to reverse the slide in the country's oil production and exports.
The obstacles to Western investment in Russian oil involve more than policy confusion in Moscow and bad press there for the most visible United States oil venture.
High political risk, the main thing holding back international oil companies, also comes from a split between Moscow and oil-producing regions over control of resources.
The West Siberians produce most of the oil and gas, and no foreign investment program can succeed without involving them directly.


School Panel Urges Ouster Of a Star
A State Education Department panel has recommended that a Manhattan school district superintendent be stripped of his credentials for failing to disclose a drug conviction to the city's Board of Education and lying about it on his application for state certification.
The superintendent, William E. Ubinas, has 30 days to appeal to State Education Commissioner Thomas Sobol over the recommendation, which was issued on Friday.
If Dr.
Sobol accepts the advice of the three-member panel and revokes Mr.
Ubinas's administrator's certificate, the city's Schools Chancellor, Joseph A. Fernandez, would be compelled to remove him.


4 Charged in Illegal Sperm Bank
The New York State Department of Health has charged two employees of Mount Sinai Medical Center with illegally selling their semen to doctors who then inseminated about a dozen women unaware of the semen's source and safety, health officials said yesterday.
Two doctors also were charged with violations of state regulations on artificial insemination.
The health department also charged Mount Sinai, because some of the inseminations took place there.


Amy Gordon Wed in Virginia
Amy Gordon, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Gordon of Alexandria, Va., was married there yesterday to Bart Lee Kessel, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Philip Kessel of Lancaster, Calif.
The Rev.
Henry A. Baumann performed the ceremony at the Old Presbyterian Meeting House.


Different Areas Breed Different Quakes
The earthquakes that rumbled through Northern California over the weekend are not related to the ones that shook up Southern California several days earlier, scientists say.
The two events happened more than 500 miles apart and, the scientists said, occurred on different kinds of fault zones driven by different forces deep in the earth.


Italians Challenge the Kiwis and Win Twice
Michael Fay and his New Zealand yachting team have again fallen into the lap of an America's Cup controversy.
The Italian team, led by industrialist Raul Gardini, has charged that the New Zealanders are violating rules governing the use of a bowsprit, a bow extension on the Kiwi team's 75-foot yacht.


Corrections
An article on Saturday about American military efforts to halt the flow of lava from Mount Etna in Italy described a military vessel, the Inchon, incorrectly.
It is an amphibious assault ship, not an aircraft carrier.


U.S. Worries Over Missiles It Gave Afghan Rebels
Now that Muslim rebels have overthrown the Government of Afghanistan, American military experts said today that they were concerned that unused Stinger antiaircraft missiles supplied by the United States to the rebels could make their way to Iran or to international terrorist groups.
Moreover, they said, it will be difficult for the United States to recover the weapons, at least any time soon.
The missiles are probably in the hands of several different rebel factions and could be used by the groups as they fight one another for power.
The United States has much less bargaining power with these groups than it once had because it stopped supplying military aid this year.


Afghan Guerrillas Close Off Jalalabad and Seek to Rebuild It
The war in Jalalabad officially ended three days ago when the city peacefully fell to guerrilla commanders.
Today, a new governing council has virtually sealed off the city and begun talks on rebuilding it.
Along once-gorgeous tree-lined boulevards marked with bullet-pocked houses and shattered windows, more than 10,000 armed guerrillas are on patrol.
At checkpoints, only people with specific letters of affiliation to commanders inside are allowed to enter.
Even refugees who had fled the fighting are being turned away.


Wells Rich Greene Plans for 'Disruption'
Not every day does a mammoth multinational agency issue a manifesto declaring its corporate purpose to be "disruption." That, though, is becoming the watchword at Wells Rich Greene BDDP.
The genesis of the mission statement, as described in a new brochure, is a growing belief that "advertising doesn't work as well as it used to," said Kenneth S. Olshan, the agency's chairman and chief executive in New York.


The Talk of Hollywood; Two Huge Agencies Take Care to Match Trappings to Power
At the megapowerful Creative Artists Agency in Beverly Hills, the trappings of power are symbolized by its sleek, rounded building of marble and tinted glass designed by I. M. Pei and its zealously sedate lobby dominated by a 26-foot-tall Roy Lichtenstein mural.
The receptionists just stepped out of Vogue or GQ.
A couple of miles away, the other most powerful agency in town, International Creative Management, which handles a fair share of superstars itself, is in an anonymous box of a building on Beverly Boulevard with cramped offices and a noisy atmosphere.
Jeff Berg, the agency's 44-year-old chairman, insists that the atmosphere at I.C.M. is perfectly fine but the building is not.


Brown Visits Churches in Philadelphia


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  No. 25 for No. 1 Seles  Monica Seles won the 25th singles title of her career, rallying to beat Arantxa Sanchez Vicario, 3-6, 6-2, 6-3, yesterday in the final of the International Championships of Spain at Barcelona.
The victory enabled Seles to move past Gabriela Sabatini into sole possession of third place on the active career victory list.
Seles, the No. 1-ranked women's player in the world, improved to 9-0 against Sanchez Vicario. (AP)  Muster Beats Krickstein: Thomas Muster of Austria beat Aaron Krickstein of the United States, 6-3, 6-1, 6-3, to win the $1.2 million Monte Carlo Open tournament in Monaco.
It was Muster's 11th tournament victory, and the richest of his career.
He earned $170,200, while Krickstein got $89,600. (AP) GOLF  Trevino and Hill on Top  Defending champions Lee Trevino and Mike Hill, despite two bogeys on the front nine, held off all challengers yesterday to win the Legends of Golf in Austin, Tex.
The pair shot a seven-under-par final-round 65 to finish the two-man, better-ball tournament at a 37-under 251.
Trevino and Hill started the final round of the $770,000 event with a four-shot lead after shooting a blistering 60 on Saturday.
But they bogeyed the 400-yard, par-4 fourth hole and the 165-yard ninth.
When Jim Colbert rolled in his eagle putt from the back fringe at the 270-yard par-4 12th, Trevino and Hill appeared in jeopardy of dropping to second -- as they had done last year before rebounding to a two-shot victory.
But they birdied 13, 16 and 18 while Colbert and Tommy Aaron, his partner, could manage only pars on 13 through 17. (AP) Will Takes 3-Way Playoff: Maggie Will shook off a course-record charge by Amy Benz, then survived a three-way playoff on the first extra hole to win the Sara Lee Classic in Nashville.
Will, Brandie Burton and Benz -- who came from even par to establish a course record of nine-under 63 over the par-72, 6,242-yard Hermitage Golf Course -- finished 54 holes with nine-under 207 totals. (AP) FOOTBALL  Surge Defeat Monarchs  David Archer threw for four touchdowns, including three to Carl Parker, as the Sacramento Surge defeated the London Monarchs, 31-26, in a World League game in Wembley, England yesterday.
Archer completed 19 of 27 passes for 243 yards as the Surge (4-2) broke a two-game losing streak.
The Monarchs, playing their final home game this season, fell to 1-4-1.
The Monarchs, who led the league in attendance last year, saw the crowds at Wembley Stadium drop by nearly half this season.
The team averaged fewer than 22,000 fans per game at home, compared with more than 40,000 per game in their championship season of 1991. (AP) Dragons 20, Glory 10: Adrian Jones intercepted two passes and blocked a punt that was recovered for a touchdown as Barcelona defeated Ohio in Spain.
The crowd of 49,675 was the largest in the league this year, breaking the mark of 40,875 set April 14 by the Dragons for a game against the Orlando Thunder. (AP)  SOCCER  U.S.
Gets Foot in Door  The United States qualified yesterday for its third consecutive Olympic soccer tournament, beating Mexico, 3-0, in Bethlehem, Pa., behind two goals from Steve Snow and one from Chris Henderson.
Snow scored with 13 minutes remaining in the first half, beating goalkeeper Miguel Fuentes with a left-footed shot.
Henderson scored four minutes later.
Fuentes was ejected with 10 minutes left for tackling Cobi Jones as he broke past him toward an unattended goal.
Fuentes was replaced by defender Camilo Romero and when play resumed, Snow scored again. (AP)


Tokay Journal; For a Majestic Wine, Here's to More Great Years
Mired in the bureaucracy of converting Communism to capitalism, tugged between Western and nationalist interests, the greatest wine of Eastern Europe is struggling to survive in a changed world.
Tokay, made since the 17th century in the undulating countryside around this quaint Hungarian village, was long the favorite of czars, Austro-Hungarian emperors and the Kremlin.
The Russian court of Peter the Great had an entire troop of Cossacks guard its annual shipment to St.
Petersburg.
Voltaire contended that the wine, distinguished by an intense honeyed richness, "invigorates every fiber of the brain."


Californians Recover From Another Earthquake's Destruction


Leonard Bernstein's Estate Founds Center Devoted to Arts Education
The trustees of Leonard Bernstein's estate have inherited the conductor's capacity to confound expectations.
They have decided to establish an educational center where Bernstein's ideas about teaching the arts can be conveyed to teachers from all over the world.
That is not surprising in itself, given the love of teaching evident in nearly everything Bernstein did, from his television programs and books to his frequent lectures from the podium during his years as music director of the New York Philharmonic.


Protesters Push Empty Wheelchairs in Search of a New Contract


On and Off the Radio: NBC Donates Memories
There are many ways for a radio commentator to land in hot water, but calling Hitler a "madman" is no longer one of them.
In 1939, however, Walter Winchell incurred the wrath of NBC's top executives by lashing out at Nazi officials at a time when the United States was pursuing a neutral foreign policy.
The Winchell flap can be traced in a series of memos that are part of a major collection that NBC donated to the Library of Congress in March.
Part of the company's archives, it comprises 16 gray steel file cabinets and 80 cardboard boxes containing, among much else, the scripts from hundreds of World War II news broadcasts, detailed program notes on NBC radio shows from the 1930's to the 1960's, a complete set of hour-by-hour logs for all radio shows broadcast by NBC and its affiliates from 1926 to 1970 and every NBC press release from the inception of the network in 1926 to the 1970's.


Jack Mintz, 97, Dies; Led Garment Company
Jack Mintz, a leader in the garment industry in the 1930's and 1940's and a real-estate executive until he retired at the age of 95, died on Tuesday at Good Samaritan Hospital in West Palm Beach, Fla.
He was 97 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of pneumonia, his family said.


Kings Of Comedy
When the Jets' second-round pick, Southern California linebacker KURT BARBER, is announced, a voice in the balcony screams: "You're killing us up here!"


Corporate Equity Offerings Scheduled for This Week
The following equity offerings are expected this week:
All Amer Communications Inc., four million common shares. Seidler Amdec Securities.
All for a Dollar Inc., two million common shares. Ladenburg, Thalmann.


9 Motorcyclists Killed at Le Mans
Nine amateur motorcyclists were killed in three sets of accidents here Saturday night, during the 24-hour Le Mans motorcycle race but outside the competition.


Bridge
Two decades ago a young man with bridge in his genes published an interesting collection of deals that deserved more attention that it received.
James S. Kauder, whose mother, Mary Jane Farell, has won several world titles, has now reissued it with a new title, "Creative Cardplay: The Cure for Unimaginative Bridge." It is available for $13.75, including postage, from The Bridge World, 39 West 94th Street, New York N.Y. 10025.
On the diagramed deal the author sat South and landed in four hearts.
The auction showed that there were spades to his left and clubs to his right, so West's lead of the club deuce was an obvious singleton.
Dummy won with the queen, a spade was discarded from the closed hand, and a heart was led to the ten, which won.


Scrubs Clean Up Against Orioles
Buck Showalter promised reserve players they would not fall asleep from boredom this season.
No snoozing in his active Yankee dugout because everybody has a role.
From the leadoff hitter to the 25th man, the rookie manager wants all Yankees to be primed to play.
Who knows when he might need you?
Like yesterday.
Mention Kevin Maas, Andy Stankiewicz and Dion James on opening day and you would have been talking about a whining pinch-hitter, a backup utility man whose airplane ticket to the minors was arriving shortly and a fifth outfielder who had been out of the majors for a season and narrowly made the club.
Less than three weeks later, the scrubs claimed star status.


CHRONICLE
Tonight in Washington, JASON ROBARDS will receive a special award known as the American Express Tribute at the 1992 Helen Hayes Awards ceremonies.
The names of the 19 winners of the Helen Hayes honors will be announced at the presentation in the National Theater, which will be preceded by a dinner for 600 and followed by a gala known as "Washington's largest cast party." The awards are given by the Washington Theater Awards Society.


Military Likely To Escape Cuts In 1993 Budget
Democrats in Congress have backed away from their earlier plans to seek sharp reductions in the military budget next year, making it likely that the final figures will closely resemble those proposed by President Bush.
Lawmakers and senior Defense Department officials still expect sharp bickering over specific programs in the military budget for next year.
But the momentum for deeper cuts, which had built with the collapse of the Soviet Union, dissipated in the last several weeks, overwhelmed by lawmakers' fears of job losses in the defense industry and divisions among Democrats over how to spend any savings.


RIVAL REBELS FIGHT IN AFGHAN CAPITAL DAY AFTER ITS FALL
War broke out in Kabul today, hours after victorious Muslim guerrillas occupied the city.
Throughout the day, two rival rebel groups filled the virtually empty streets with the thunder of tanks, rockets and rifle fire, replacing the celebratory tattoo of flares and tracers that had been launched into the night sky on Saturday.
Kabul remained without any apparent leadership today, despite the announcement that a security council had been formed for the city.
The day after rebels took the capital, residents stayed barricaded in their homes, and shops were shuttered.
Only in the deepest neighborhood alleyways did people venture forth gingerly to observe the new order taking shape around them.
Upper Hand for Northerners
Two major Islamic guerrilla factions are pitted against each other now: Jamiat-i-Islami, led by Ahmad Shah Masood, a member of the Tajik minority from the north, and Hezb-i-Islami, led by Gulbuddin Hekmatyar, a fierce Muslim fundamentalist and a member of the formerly dominant Pathans of the south.
Mr.
Masood's forces have joined with other Tajik and Uzbek fighters in a northern coalition.


Dance in Review
American Ballet Theater  Metropolitan Opera House
With its performance of "Giselle" on Saturday night, American Ballet Theater showed off its fine company and demonstrated the validity of an exchange program.
The title role in this 19th-century classic was portrayed by Susan Jaffe, one of Ballet Theater's own stars.
Ms.
Jaffe's lightness made her a blithe peasant in the first act and an airy spirit in the second.
She was particularly good in the second act when she gave the impression of being whirled about by a sinister supernatural force.


Perot Votes Would Probably Help Bush; Maine's Experience
To the Editor:
On the subject of a Ross Perot candidacy for President: Some commentators have wondered if an independent businessman can win an election and, if so, govern afterward.
We have plowed that ground here in Maine and found it quite fertile.
In 1974, a businessman named James B. Longley ran for governor as an independent.
He defeated both the Democratic and Republican candidates in a general election and proceeded to govern the state well for the next four years.
He had a tough, no-nonsense attitude, similar to that of Mr.
Perot, and probably was not as diplomatically polished as the Texas businessman.


Child Abuse 'Rescuer' Is Now the Accused
For four years, Faye Yager has been the force behind a shadow world, an underground network that she says has hidden more than a thousand abused children from a legal system that too often delivers them to their abusers.
Last week in suburban Marietta, Ga., Mrs.
Yager, 44 years old, went on trial herself, accused of kidnapping and emotional cruelty to the children she was supposed to help.
Prosecutors say that she coerced false statements about sexual abuse and repeatedly threatened two Florida children who were brought to her by a mother who said she was fleeing an abusive husband.
Victim or Vigilante?
Mrs.
Yager faces a possible sentence of up to 60 years in prison, although neither side expects that the maximum sentence would be imposed if she was convicted.
Her supporters say Mrs.
Yager, whose own daughter was sexually abused by Mrs.
Yager's first husband, is the victim of a vendetta aimed at stopping her work.
They note that the kidnapping charge stems from a 45-minute van ride.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  NEW STRATEGY NEW RISKS
For months, Mayor David N. Dinkins has struggled to satisfy fiscal watchdogs without losing the support of the liberal-labor coalition that elected him, seeking permission to borrow hundreds of millions of dollars to keep the city's budget balanced in exchange for a grand scheme to shrink government.
But last week the Mayor basically declared that such help was no longer worth such trouble.
The new strategy, born of political necessity, carries considerable risks.
A1.
AND THE NEW CAMPAIGN BEGINS
As fund-raising events go, Mayor Dinkins's Spring Gala at the Sheraton Hotel tonight will not seem much different than any other, but the dinner is the first major event in his bid for re-election, and it comes at a time when the Mayor is seemingly at a crossroads.
B2.
WORKERS CHARGED IN INSEMINATION CASE


Parody Puts Harvard Law Faculty in Sexism Battle
A parody of an article by a slain feminist legal scholar has greatly increased long-simmering concern at Harvard Law School over the school's slow pace in hiring women and minority faculty members, touching off the angriest debate here in decades.
The bitterness of the dispute has stunned many people at what is generally regarded as the nation's most prestigious law school.
In a daily battle of faxes and memorandums, some distinguished professors have asserted that Harvard is guilty of misogyny, while other scholars say they cannot express themselves without being subjected to an inquisition.
Some students even put up wanted posters for the authors of the parody.


Beware The Draftniks
The Draftniks have returned to Broadway to conduct very serious business.
Far too many game faces have been put on already, even for a football Sunday morning.
They are waiting patiently outside the entrance to the Marriott Marquis to become witnesses to the 57th National Football League Selection Meeting.
They move upstairs, past a sign that says PRIVATE PARTY.
They take their seats upstairs, on the balcony level.
They are armed with sheets of information and more than enough conviction.


Israeli Army Clears Soldiers Of Firing With No Warning
The Israeli Army said today that it had cleared soldiers of allegations by an Israeli couple that the soldiers had shot and wounded two Palestinians in the West Bank without warning.
An officer appointed to investigate the report submitted his findings after questioning the couple as well as the members of an Israeli military undercover unitinvolved in the incident, the army said.


Review/Theater: Jelly's Last Jam; Energy and Pain of a Man Who Helped Create Jazz
On the short list of people who have so much talent they hardly know what to do with it all, count Gregory Hines, the star, and George C. Wolfe, the author and director of the new Broadway musical "Jelly's Last Jam."
Mr.
Hines's brilliance is no secret.
Few, if any, tap dancers in this world can match him for elegance, speed, grace and musicianship, and, as if that weren't enough, he also happens to be a silken jazz crooner, supple in voice and plaintive in emotions.
In the role of Jelly Roll Morton, Mr.
Hines gets to display these gifts to the fullest, not to mention his relatively unsung prowess as an actor.
Even when the band is taking a break, every note he hits rings true.


A World Defined by Dread; For the Young in East New York, Stifled Lives and Dreams
"I don't like funerals," said Mack Chapman, an 18-year-old high school student whose violent neighborhood has made death at an early age a haunting fact of life for him.
"It's a hard thing to think they are putting a friend of yours six feet under the ground."
But in the East New York neighborhood of Brooklyn, Mr.
Chapman dutifully pays his respects to the growing numbers of friends who died before they had a chance to really live.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt *
Dillard Department Stores Inc., Little Rock, Ark., has filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for a shelf offering of up to $300 million in debt securities. *
Johnson &amp; Johnson, New Brunswick, N.J., has filed for a shelf offering of $1.25 billion in debt securities. *
Kansallis-Osake-Pankki, Finland's largest commercial bank, is offering $200 million in 10 percent subordinated notes due 2002 at 99.375 to yield 10.10 percent through J. P. Morgan Securities Inc.
The issue is not required to be registered with the Securities and Exchange Commission, and is rated A-3 by Moody's Investors Service and BBB by Standard &amp; Poor's. *
Tyco Laboratories Inc., Exeter, N.H., is offering $200 million in 9 1/2 percent 30-year notes at 99.763 to yield 9.524 percent through J. P. Morgan Securities Inc.
The securities are rated Baa-3 by Moody's and BBB by S.&amp; P. Common  *
Black &amp; Decker Corp., Towson, Md., is offering 18 million common shares at $23.25 a share, with 14.4 million common shares being offered in the U.S. through Lehman Brothers. *
CCP Insurance Inc., Carmel, Ind., has filed for an initial public offering of 8.35 million common shares through First Boston.
CCP Insurance is the newly organized, specialized insurance holding company for the companies acquired by Conseco Capital Partners L.P. *
Florida Progress Corp., St.
Petersburg, Fla., a diversified utility holding company, has filed for an offering of up to 1.7 million common shares. *
Harman International Industries Inc., Washington, a maker of high-fidelity audio products, has filed for a proposed public offering of 1.75 million common shares through Montgomery Securities. *
Trimas Corp., Ann Arbor, Mich., a diversified consumer products company, is offering four million common shares at $19.50 a share through Lehman Brothers.


Cornell Prevails in Regatta
Cornell was the unexpected victor today in the varsity race among men's heavyweight crews at the Schweppes International regatta on the turbulent Potomac River.
The Big Red defeated Cambridge, Princeton and Yale in the final event of the two-day regatta, which was tarnished by numerous problems and rainy weather.
Radcliffe's outstanding eight won the women's final easily over Yale, Virginia and Navy.


Dunbar Is Fit To Be Bow-Tied
VAUGHN DUNBAR, a running back from Indiana University, appears in evening clothes, and as teams pass him by, that seems when he might be drafted.
He sits in a black tuxedo, with black-and-white checked bow tie and cummerbund, and waits, and waits, and waits.
The Colts, who had talked to him, choose someone else.
So do the Rams, and Steelers, and Falcons.
Finally, 3 hours, 2 minutes and 21 picks into the draft, Dunbar is chosen by New Orleans.


The Jets Drop a Bomb
The Giants, who have incited minor civil disturbances at this event, create cheers with their choice of Notre Dame tight end DEREK BROWN.
Now the Jets, picking 15th, are On The Clock.
The people in green are addressing a need.
"DEE-FENSE," they are screaming. "DEE-FENSE . . . DEE-FENSE . . ."


Treasury Auctions Include One-Year Bills
Treasury financings this week include today's regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills and Thursday's auction of one-year bills.
By late Friday, the rate on the three-month bill outstanding was 3.64 percent and the six-month bill 3.80 percent.
The one-year bill was 4.02 percent.


Knicks Fail to Capture the Moment
Both teams had a final opportunity to win today.
The Detroit Pistons seized it.
The Knicks squandered it.
Thanks to a game-winning 15-foot jumper by Isiah Thomas with 7.6 seconds left, the Pistons escaped Madison Square Garden with an emotional 89-88 victory.


Foreign Affairs; Three Asia Hands
This column was supposed to be about China.
It was going to key off Nicholas Kristof's terrific and alarming articles in The Times recently about China's 50 percent increase in military spending over the last three years and the ardently anti-American tone of its internal debates.
But in calling around to Asia hands, I ran into a still livelier, larger and more worrisome debate.
The experts see Asia bubbling with the kind of strategic turmoil and uncertainty that could inspire high orders of diplomatic tangling and danger.


Blunder on the Basepaths Turns Mets' Rally to Ruin
Bobby Bonilla's final official swing -- a cut that got only air above Mitch Williams's strike 3 forkball -- ended the game.
But Bonilla wasn't done.
He lifted his bat once more and smashed it in the dirt, a cold, lost afternoon's anger in his blood.
Then the Mets, embarrassed, furious 5-4 losers to the Phillies today, had to slink out of Veterans Stadium.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday None Tuesday Gross Domestic Product . . . 1st Qtr.
New-Home Sales . . .
March Wednesday Personal Income . . .
March Thursday Leading Indicators . . .
March Weekly Jobless Claims Factory Orders . . .
March Friday Construction Spending . . .
March


Should State Executions Run on Schedule?
"Treason to the Constitution" is a strong charge.
It was the phrase employed in 1821 in argument before Chief Justice John Marshall to describe a Federal court's failure to exercise its jurisdiction in a case properly brought before it.
On Saturday evening, April 18, a courageous Federal judge, Marilyn Hall Patel, refused to commit treason to the Constitution and, in a suit brought under the Civil Rights Act, ordered a hearing on whether death by cyanide gas was cruel and unusual punishment prohibited by the Constitution.
Her order also affected the execution of Robert Alton Harris, the condemned murderer scheduled to die on April 21.
The state immediately appealed to my court, the Ninth Circuit.
The established standards, built up over the years by the judiciary, are these: First, "cruel and unusual" means "cruel and unusual" in today's terms.
Not even the most doctrinaire "original intent" jurist maintains that the determination is to be made as of 1791, when the Bill of Rights became part of the Constitution.
Since Weems v.
United States in 1909, we have been committed to an evolving standard of human decency.


Nation and New Republic Escalate Their War of Words Over Readers
Arthur L. Carter, publisher of The Nation, and Martin Peretz, editor in chief and chairman of The New Republic, are not coy about their disdain for each other's weekly political magazine or for each other.
"Very, very much to the right in most positions," observes Mr.
Carter about the once-leftist New Republic.


Chattanooga Journal; 4,000 Specimens in a 12-Story Bottle
Perhaps this southeastern Tennessee city is destined forever to be known best for the choo choo that tunefully chugs through Glenn Miller's 1941 recording.
But perhaps not.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Candidate's Record; Perot Goes Heavy on Drama, and Light on Details
Leon Sullivan, a Philadelphia minister who in the past two decades has been one of America's leading advocates for change in South Africa, recalls a conversation he had in the mid-1980's with Ross Perot, the Dallas billionaire who is considering a candidacy for President.
In their discussion Mr.
Sullivan remarked that he doubted any significant improvement would occur in South Africa until Nelson Mandela, leader of the African National Congress, got out of prison.
"If Mandela being in jail is the problem, let's find a way to get him out," Mr.
Sullivan remembers Mr.
Perot saying.


Essay; Bush's Lavoro Scandal
A specter is haunting the Bush Ad ministration the specter of the Lavoro Scandal.
Four billion dollars, one-fourth of it guaranteed by the U.S.
Government, flowed through the corrupt Atlanta branch of an Italian bank in the late 80's to finance Saddam Hussein's war machine.


Bridgeport U. Ponders Its Future
With classes over and commencement two weeks away, students at the University of Bridgeport and the few remaining businesses that look to the school for income now have time to think about its bailout by an affiliate of the Unification Church.
As a chill wind cut across the campus this afternoon, some students voiced relief that the university's long struggle with bankruptcy appeared to be over.
Others said they were disgusted that the school had accepted the offer of $50 million, much of it in cash, from the Professors World Peace Academy, a wing of the Rev.
Sun Myung Moon's church whose followers are commonly referred to as "the Moonies." And others gave mixed reviews, saying they understood the university's predicament but were not happy with the decision.


Sports of The Times; Knicks Still Trying to Turn the Corner
FOR all of the preoccupation with talent in professional basketball, talent is rarely enough: There are a lot of talented players from talented teams who are watching the National Basketball Association playoffs at home.
There is an equally persistent infatuation with meticulous game preparation; yet a number of meticulously prepared teams will soon be eliminated from the playoffs.


PBS Station Sends 'Nova' to Shopping Mall
WGBH, the Boston public television station that brings "Nova," "Masterpiece Theater" and "Evening at Pops" to America's living rooms, has opened a store in an effort to raise more money for its innovative television projects.
The store, WGBH Learningsmith, has already become a popular stop in the affluent Chestnut Hill Mall in Newton, Mass., since it opened in October.
It has been so successful that another store will open in Harvard Square in June, with a third store planned later this year.


Mr. Perot's Ballot Blues
Ross Perot said he'd enter the Presidential race only if supporters succeeded in getting his name on the ballot in all 50 states.
But even Mr.
Perot, with all his money and volunteers, concedes he may not be able to qualify in New York.
He says he'll "probably go ahead and run" anyway.
The chances are Mr.
Perot can avoid the sort of petition problems that nearly knocked Paul Tsongas off the Democratic primary ballot in New York.
But the fact that he even has to worry about qualifying speaks volumes about the state's insane ballot access rules.
Under present state law, he'll need 20,000 valid petition signatures, including a minimum of 100 signatures from at least half of the state's 34 Congressional districts.


Nassau Clerk Trading Pen For Database
The Nassau County Clerk, whose office has become a kind of Dickensian bureaucracy with mounting stacks of court records, deeds and titles languishing like orphans while clerks laboriously inscribe the public's business by hand in tomes, suggested yesterday that a ray of 20th-century hope may soon penetrate the musty gloom.
"We're trying to computerize some functions of the office to streamline it," the County Clerk, Harold W. McConnell, said in an interview on the paperwork backlog that has grown dramatically in recent months with budget cuts and staff layoffs.
"The court-related functions may be in place before the end of May. It's a step in the right direction."


Topics of The Times; Fairness for Refugees
Imagine you're a foreigner seeking political asylum in the United States.
You arrive without valid papers and are immediately detained without a hearing in a Federal jail -- often in isolated, harsh conditions.
Many foreigners don't have to imagine this sequence.
They've lived it.
Before 1980, aliens were usually released on their own recognizance until their cases could be adjudicated.
But when Cubans and Haitians began arriving in large numbers, detention became routine, especially for foreigners fleeing political persecution.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on the Law page on Friday about the nomination of Michael Boudin to the United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit misidentified a radical union of the early 20th century in some copies.
It is the Industrial Workers of the World, not the International Workers of the World.


Three Youths Killed In Single-Car Wreck
Three Long Island teen-agers were killed early this morning when their speeding car flipped over and hit a brick wall at the entrance to Eisenhower Park, the Nassau County police said.
The youths, who were on their way home from their jobs as busboys in a restaurant in Freeport, were pronounced dead at the scene, each still held by his seat belt in the wreckage of the 1985 Toyota, said Officer Bruce Benson, a spokesman for the Nassau County police department.


Re-election Campaign Opens Against Backdrop of Concern
As fund-raising events go, Mayor David N. Dinkins's Spring Gala at the Sheraton Hotel in Manhattan tonight will not seem very different from the routine rubber-chicken political dinner.
Indeed, chicken morel under sun-dried tomatoes is the main course.
But the dinner is the first major event in Mr.
Dinkins's bid for re-election, and it comes at a time when the Mayor is seemingly at a crossroads.


Robin Bernstein Weds S. R. Silberg
Robin Hally Bernstein, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edmund Bernstein of Manhasset Hills, L.I., was married yesterday to Stuart Roy Silberg, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Irving Silberg of Bayside, Queens.
Rabbi Myron Fenster performed the ceremony at the Shelter Rock Jewish Center in Roslyn, L.I.


Ceremony Is Held to Remember Holocaust Victims


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Finances; Being Governor Helps Clinton Raise Money at Home
Gov.
Bill Clinton has received a remarkable $2.2 million in donations for his Presidential quest from Arkansas, nearly a dollar for every person in the state.
His supporters celebrate the outpouring as a sign of confidence from those who know him best.
But there may be a reason other than state chauvinism: Many of the donors are people who do business with the state government and depend on the good will of Mr.
Clinton and his political associates.


Accounts
*
Longines-Wittnauer Watch Co., New Rochelle, N.Y., to Campbell-Mithun-Esty, New York, as agency of record for the company's account, previously handled in-house.
Billings were not disclosed.


Italians Challenge the Kiwis and Win Twice
Michael Fay and his New Zealand yachting team have again fallen into the lap of an America's Cup controversy.
The Italian team, led by industrialist Raul Gardini, has charged that the New Zealanders are violating rules governing the use of a bowsprit, a bow extension on the Kiwi team's 75-foot yacht.


Austria's Vote for President Forces Runoff in May
Austrians voted today on a successor to President Kurt Waldheim but failed to give any candidate a majority, meaning the top two finishers, a Social Democrat and the candidate of the conservative People's Party, will face each other in a runoff next month.
Austrians looked to the election to end their country's isolation over Mr.
Waldheim's role with the German Army in World War II.
But the issue of Mr.
Waldheim was largely muted during the campaign.
Plege on Personal Attacks
Major candidates formally pledged to refrain from personal attacks and subtly cast themselves as leaders well qualified to represent Austria on the world and European stage, especially as the country moves toward negotiations early next year on joining the European Community.


Cost-of-Living Cut
To the Editor:
The Federal Reserve's policy of lowering interest rates (front page, April 10) discriminates against a vast group of people who are suffering financially from the reduction.
At the age of 80, I'm not in the market for a car or a house.
I am dependent on interest from savings to supplement my Social Security.
With the steady reduction in this income, all money is earmarked for day-to-day living.
The empty box of cereal I am replacing cost $2.99 a month ago.
The price today is $3.29.


TRANSACTIONS
WEEKEND Baseball  American League  OAKLAND ATHLETICS -- Activated Terry Steinbach, catcher, from the 15-day disabled list.
Optioned Henry Mercedes, catcher, to Tacoma of the Pacific Coast League.
National League  CHICAGO CUBS -- Placed Jose Vizcaino, infielder, on the 15-day disabled list retroactive to April 20.
Recalled Ray Sanchez, shortstop, from Iowa of the American Association.
HOUSTON ASTROS -- Recalled Benny Distefano, infielder, from Tucson of the Pacific Coast League.
Optioned Karl Rhodes, outfielder, to Tuscon.
LOS ANGELES DODGERS -- Named Jon Debus manager of the Great Falls Dodgers of the Pioneer League.
NEW YORK METS -- Placed Dave Gallagher, outfielder, on the 15-day disabled list.
Purchased the contract of Jeff McKnight, infielder-outfielder, from Tidewater of the International League.
PHILADELPHIA PHILLIES -- Placed Andy Ashby, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list.
Recalled Darrin Chapin, pitcher, from Scranton-Wilkes-Barre of the International League.
SAN DIEGO PADRES -- Activated Mike Maddux, pitcher, from 15-day disabled list.
Optioned Jeremy Hernandez, pitcher, to Las Vegas.


Fashion Misstatement
Outside, in a hallway, the World League is here in search of business.
BRENT PEASE and CRAIG SCHLICTING of the New York/New Jersey Knights are talking to fans.
TANYA McCLURE and JEAN GARCIA, members of the Knightlife Dance Squad, are here in their black and silver uniforms.
They are giving away posters, programs and tickets to an upcoming game when suddenly their eyes follow Stephanie Hogette as she passes their table.


William Gardner, 57, Producer and Director
William T. Gardner, the producing director of the Pittsburgh Public Theater for the last eight years, died on Friday at his home in Pittsburgh.
He was 57 years old.
Mr. Gardner died of a heart attack, said Rob Zellers, a spokesman for the theater.


Love's Untouchable 62 Wins at Greenboro
With a performance that could be fairly called "Couplesian," Davis Love 3d shot an explosive 10-under-par 62 today to run away with the K Mart Greater Greensboro Open by six shots.
The low round of the year on the PGA Tour broke the record at the Forest Oaks Country Club, where the heavy rough that lined the fairways and greens made scoring difficult for the rest of the field.
With none of the other contenders able to break 68, the long-hitting Love zoomed past 15 players in the final round to post a 72-hole total of 16-under-par 272.


Market Place; Picking Winners Among H.M.O's
HEALTH maintenance organizations are thriving, riding a wave of national concern over medical costs.
To hold costs down, these prepaid health plans generally limit their services to an approved list of doctors working on salary or under contract.
For employers, H.M.O.'s cost about $3,000 per enrollee last year, on average, which is 15 percent less than traditional fee-for-service medical coverage, according to a survey of 2,409 employers by the A. Foster Higgins consulting firm.
Election-year concerns about new Government regulation may slow the surge in price increases for all health insurers.
But the strongest H.M.O.'s expect to continue growing.


Beginning of the Ends -- Jets and Giants Pick a Matching Pair
Entering today's National Football League draft, the Giants' major needs appeared to be on defense -- a pass-rushing end, a cornerback and an outside linebacker.
So what did they do?
On two of their first three picks, they took tight ends.
On the first round, with the 14th choice over all, they selected Derek Brown of Notre Dame.
On the third round, they took Aaron Pierce of Washington.
This was the first time in the 57-year history of the draft that the Giants had taken a tight end with their first pick.


Sticking Their Noses In
As a Cowboy fan leaves to derisive cheering, he waves and says, "See you next year."
But what if he doesn't?
What if a court decision causes the draft, as the draftniks have embraced it, to go the way of the leather helmet?
Where would all these people go?


Old Guys Renewed For Game 2
It's funny, although perhaps not to the Knicks, what can happen in 48 hours.
On Friday, Isiah Thomas, the Detroit Pistons' perennial All-Pro guard, was a virtual nonentity.
Thomas was 1 for 9 from the field and finished with 3 points as the Knicks rolled to a 109-75 victory.


Mideast Exercises; Talks Resume Today, but Are Parties Ready to Do More Than Limber Up?
When Arab and Israeli negotiators were last seen in Washington, in February, their spokesmen were spitting tacks at one another.
The Arabs were threatening not to meet again until after the Israeli elections on June 23, and the Americans were wondering if Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d should make a quick visit to the Middle East to keep the talks going.
Somewhat to everyone's surprise, the parties will quietly resume their talks Monday at the State Department, and have agreed in principle that another round will be held in Rome, possibly before the Israeli elections.


Abortion Foes Hit Resistance And Regroup
In the days and weeks before they arrived here to stage mass demonstrations, leaders of Operation Rescue, the national anti-abortion group, pledged to shut down clinics to "rescue" women and their unborn babies.
The two-week protest was then expected to work its way toward a grand showdown on Saturday between the anti-abortion advocates and abortion-rights forces who vowed to defend Buffalo's clinics.


A Portuguese Wins Pritzker Award
Alvaro Siza, a Portuguese architect whose work is relatively unknown in the United States, has been awarded this year's Pritzker Prize for architecture, the profession's highest honor.
Jay A. Pritzker, the president of the Hyatt Foundation, which established the award in 1979, is to present Mr.
Siza with the prize, which includes a $100,000 grant, on May 14 at the Harold Washington Library Center in Chicago.
Mr.
Siza, who is 57 years old, has been practicing architecture in Porto, Portugal, for 38 years.
One of his first projects to gain public attention was a complex in Leca da Palmeira, completed in 1966, consisting of two swimming pools (one for children, the other for adults) and a building with changing rooms and a cafe.
Both the pools and building are set into the natural rock formation on the site with unobstructed views of the sea.


As the Mall Thrives, Main Street Struggles to Survive
From the mall here, it is difficult for a visitor to find the old Main Street.
But it is here, over a rise and past a few lights.
And five years after the Danbury Fair Mall came to town with what some promised were new opportunities for this old city, one of every seven stores on Main Street is empty.


Father of Airfone Is Now Its Rival
Since its inception nearly a decade ago, passenger telephone service on airplanes has been sold exclusively by Airfone Inc., a subsidiary of the GTE Corporation.
But that is about to change, possibly as early as next week.
And the competition will come from no other than Airfone's founder, John D. Goeken.
Mr.
Goeken, who also started the MCI Communications Corporation in the 1960's, conceived of air-telephone service and obtained a huge headstart for Airfone by obtaining the first radio license for airplane phone service from the Federal Communications Commission in 1980.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
The U.S.
Government has had evidence for more than two years that Iraq, in the months before it invaded Kuwait in August 1990, diverted food purchased under a $5 billion American aid program and exchanged it for money and arms in the Soviet bloc and in other countries.
Iraq may have used some of the money, one high-level American official wrote in an Oct. 13, 1989, confidential document, to acquire "sensitive nuclear technologies."  [ Page A1. ]
The seven largest industrial nations are trying to work out the final details of a multibillion-dollar Russian aid package, as Russia's top economic official joined the finance ministers from those countries for the first time.  [ A9. ]


Wrapping Up Big Russian Aid Package
As Russia's top economic official met with them for the first time, finance ministers from the seven largest industrial nations today called on the Russian Government to continue moving boldly ahead with economic reforms.
A day before the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank are expected to announce that they have voted to welcome Russia and the other former Soviet republics as members, the ministers pressed the Russian Deputy Prime Minister, Yegor T. Gaidar, for assurances that Moscow would not backtrack on economic reforms under a hostile Parliament's pressure.


CHRONICLE
There's no doubt that the compliments will be flowing in the direction of B. GERALD and IRIS CANTOR tomorrow evening at the 46th anniversary awards dinner for the Skowhegan School of Painting and Sculpture at the Plaza Hotel.
The couple, who have donated more than 400 works from their collection of about 700 Rodin sculptures to 70 institutions around the world, will receive the school's Gertrude Vanderbilt Whitney Award for patronage of the arts.


Stocks Lower in Tokyo
Stock prices were lower here today.
The Nikkei index of 225 issues was down 91.93 points, or 0.52 percent, to 17450.52.
At midday, the index was down 75.87 points, or less than 1 percent, to 17,466.58.
On Friday, the Nikkei rose 140.40 points.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Assessment; For Pennsylvania Voters, Abortion May Not Be a Decisive Issue
In Washington last week, supporters and foes of abortion rights did battle in the Supreme Court.
In a case based on Pennsylvania's restrictive new abortion law, lawyers debated whether the basic Court doctrine establishing abortion as a fundamental right, enunciated in Roe v.
Wade, should be affirmed, modified or thrown out.
In Harrisburg, Gov.
Robert P. Casey, a conservative Democrat who backed the Pennsylvania law, to the ill-concealed discomfiture of most of his party's national leaders, launched a diatribe against them.
By advocating "abortion on demand," he said, they had put the party on the wrong side of what he termed "the issue that will decide whether or not we can get the Reagan Democrats, who have so much trouble with our social values, to vote for a Democrat for President."


William Seamon, 74, Leading Bridge Player
William Seamon, one of America's leading bridge players, died Saturday at Mount Sinai Hospital in Miami Beach, Fla.
He was 74 years old and lived in Miami Beach.
He was suffering from the effects of a stroke, said his sister, Edith Kemp Freilich.


Jennifer Baum Marries on L.I.
Jennifer Beth Baum, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Leonard Baum of Merrick, L.I., was married yesterday in Glen Cove, L.I., to Dr.
David Richard Gruen, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
John Gruen of Chappaqua, N.Y.
Rabbi Stanley Dreyfus performed the ceremony at the Harrison House.


Quayle Honors Victims of Holocaust
Appearing before 5,000 men, women and children gathered yesterday to mourn the Jews killed by the Nazis, Vice President Dan Quayle pledged the commitment of the Bush Administration to the memory of those who perished in the Holocaust and to Israel, which he said "was built upon the ashes of the Holocaust."
" 'Never again' is more than the vow of Jewish survivors," he said.
"It's the deep, unshakable resolution of the world's sole superpower."


Topics of The Times; Fairness for Refugees
Imagine you're a foreigner seeking political asylum in the United States.
You arrive without valid papers and are immediately detained without a hearing in a Federal jail -- often in isolated, harsh conditions.
Many foreigners don't have to imagine this sequence.
They've lived it.
Before 1980, aliens were usually released on their own recognizance until their cases could be adjudicated.
But when Cubans and Haitians began arriving in large numbers, detention became routine, especially for foreigners fleeing political persecution.


Historical Tack In Beer Spots
Two regional brewers are turning back the hands of time in new advertising campaigns.
In a television commercial by Frankfurt Gips Balkind in New York, the New Amsterdam Brewing Company's New Amsterdam Amber Beer asserts that New York was New York, even before it was called New York.
The spot, which begins running today, features Dutch settlers in a New Amsterdam bar; guarding the entrance is a bouncer in a flowing cape, who behaves with a contemporary New York club-scene attitude.


When This Fever Hits, Time to Run for the Roses
From every point of the compass, they will come next Saturday to see the great Arazi, more than 150,000 of them cramming the brick walks and grass infield of old Churchill Downs in Louisville for the 118th Kentucky Derby.
And from all points of the compass, 19 other horses will cram the two starting gates to race the great Arazi.
Why would they do it? (Not the spectators, but the people who own and handle the other horses.)


Much to Magazines' Relief, Travel Advertising Takes Off
Yearning to put the recession behind them, Americans are once again making plans to hit the road -- and the seas and the rails and the skies.
And to the relief of the magazine industry, travel advertising is finally beginning to take off, too.
"People are traveling; I'm hearing it everywhere," said Linda C. Cherry, advertising director for Traveler, a National Geographic bimonthly magazine.
She said she expected ad pages to be up 29 percent over last year through the July-August issue, which closes next week.


The Forgotten Talent Pool
Faced with millions of returning G.I.'s, U.S. employers began shoehorning the nation's elderly out of the work force at the end of World War II.
In time, temporary push became permanent shove.
Early retirement was widely encouraged and Social Security penalized workers over 65 who kept their jobs.
In 1950, 42 percent of the nation's men and women over 65 were in the work force.
Now the figure is only 12 percent.
Flushing the elderly out of the work force makes less and less sense as Americans live longer, healthier lives.
Dr.
Robert Butler, a gerontologist, finds the practice unfathomable.
"Why is it," he asks, "that those qualities which are especially associated with middle and later life -- experience, accumulated skills, knowledge, wisdom and perspective -- are discarded just when they are coming to fruition in human beings?"


Mideast Talks: Vital Signs
With oxygen and blood transfusions, the Middle East peace talks seem certain to survive a fifth round in Washington that begins today.
Nobody expects major breakthroughs before Israel's June 23 national elections.
But the vital signs look better for two reasons.
A wrangle over the location of the next round of talks has been resolved.
And Israel now seems ready to put on the table its plans for holding elections in the disputed West Bank and Gaza.
Grandstanding and sniping have slowed the talks' momentum since last October's breakthrough Arab-Israeli meeting in Madrid.
Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir's Government has made the most of what it claims is a pro-Arab tilt by President Bush and Secretary of State Baker.
Exasperation has been mutual, clouding the separate but related argument over Mr.
Shamir's request for $10 billion in U.S. loan guarantees for resettling Jews from the former Soviet Union.


Pharmacists to Stage Medicaid Boycott to Protest Cuts in Payment
Many pharmacies across New York State will close their stores tomorrow or refuse to fill prescriptions to protest the state's plan to sharply cut Medicaid payments for prescription drugs, says a trade organization representing the pharmacists.
Jerome Sager, general counsel and executive director of the Empire State Pharmaceutical Society, which represents 1,100 pharmacies in the state, said more than 1,000 pharmacists would gather in Albany tomorrow to protest a proposal to cut the amount they are paid for filling 25 million Medicaid prescriptions for 2.5 million poor New Yorkers.


Shifting by Dinkins On Budget Is Posing Risks With Rewards
For months, Mayor David N. Dinkins has struggled to satisfy fiscal watchdogs without losing the support of the liberal-labor coalition that elected him, seeking permission to borrow hundreds of millions of dollars to ease the pain of keeping New York City's budget balanced in exchange for a grand scheme to shrink government.
But last week the Mayor basically declared that such help was no longer worth such trouble.
He said the city had eked out enough savings to avoid the borrowing, that the $29 billion budget he is to present today would manage to reallocate money to restore a few programs he had previously cut and that the city would find its own ways to keep the budget balanced in the coming years.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Television; Big Shifts in Network-Studio Relationships
AS Howard Stringer, the president of the CBS Broadcast Group, sees it, the increasingly complicated negotiations over which television series will be renewed by the broadcast networks, for how many episodes and at what price, are "a game of financial chicken."
As a result of shrinking profit margins, for the networks that broadcast the programs and the studios that make them, both sides are doing a lot of flinching these days.


INSIDE
Aid to Russia Discussed
Finance ministers met to work out final details of a multibillion-dollar aid package for Russia and other former Soviet republics.
Page A9.
Mixed Results in Buffalo
Operation Rescue, the anti-abortion protest group, arrived in Buffalo with great expectations.
But things have not gone quite as planned.
Page B1.
Giants and Jets: Similar Ends
Drafting one after the other, the Giants and the Jets both picked tight ends on the first round of the N.F.L. draft.
SportsMonday, page C1.


Coup in Peru a Blow to Its Copper
Democracy may not be the only victim of the upheaval in Peru.
About six months ago, Charles G. Preble, the president of Peru's largest private company, announced a $300 million investment in new projects -- by far the largest foreign investment in years in Peru -- and said he was considering spending an additional $150 million.


A Goldman Stake for Hawaiians
A Hawaiian educational trust is investing $250 million into the Goldman Sachs Group, the parent company of Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company, the companies announced yesterday.
The trust will get a stake in Goldman of more than 5 percent, Goldman officials said.
The investment was made by the Kamehameha Schools/Bishop Estate, whose revenues are used to finance the Kamehameha Schools, which are restricted to children of Hawaiian ancestry, as well as for a variety of other educational programs.


Insider Case Is Rejected
The Supreme Court today declined to review the insider-trading conviction of a former stockbroker, Robert Chestman, preserving an important Government weapon against the misuse of confidential information in takeovers.
Mr.
Chestman had heard about the 1986 takeover of Waldbaum Inc., the owner of the supermarket chain, through Waldbaum family members, and reaped profits of $250,000 in trades based on the information.
His lawyers contended that he could trade on the data because he had no responsibility to the company or to shareholders to protect the secret.


Bush vs. Bush on Abortion
Sometimes the least noticed comment is the most revealing.
Tucked away in the momentous abortion hearing before the Supreme Court last week was a remarkable concession by the Bush Administration.


SYRIA GIVING JEWS FREEDOM TO LEAVE
Syria informed the United States over the weekend that it was lifting a travel ban on its 4,500 Jewish citizens, the State Department announced today.
Most of them are expected to leave.
If they do, there will be no more significant Jewish populations left in the Arab world, outside of Morocco.
The once flourishing Jewish populations of Baghdad, Cairo, Alexandria, Tunis and Algiers have either been evicted or fled since 1948, as a spillover from the Arab-Israeli conflict.


METRO DIGEST
METRO DIGEST  NEW YORK CITY  DINKINS OFFERS BUDGET PLAN
Mayor Dinkins proposed a budget for the next fiscal year that includes substantial cuts in New York City's services and work force, but not as deep as had originally been projected.
The $29.5 billion budget provides millions of dollars for longer library hours, health clinics for the poor and other welfare programs.
It is based on a projection of the city's economic future that is more optimistic than either of the Mayor's previous budgets, reflecting a slight rise in the city's tax revenues.
It also assumes $115 million in new taxes that the Mayor and the City Council support but that officials acknowledged may face trouble in the State Legislature.
A1.
CUNY ADOPTS TOUGHER STANDARDS
In its sharpest change of direction since adopting open admissions in 1970, the City University of New York yesterday approved a broad plan to tighten educational requirements over the next decade.
Although open admissions will be retained, students will have to have taken college-preparatory courses in high school or take extra courses at the university before getting their degree.
The program will likely lead to major changes in many of the city's public high schools.
University trustees also improves a tuition increase.
A1.
FIFTH DEATH IN PARK CRASH
Bryant Fonseca turned 20 on Saturday.
On Sunday night he became the fifth person to die as a result of a car crash in Washington Square Park on Thursday.
"We can try to find someone to blame because that would give us a resolution, but that is useless," his father, Michael, said.
B3.
BABY FOUND IN TRASH BIN
A newborn boy, barely breathing, was found in the garbage bin of a six-story apartment building in the Bronx after he was apparently dropped down the building's garbage chute.
The child was found by a porter who was about to pull the bin from under the chute and push it a few feet to the garbage compactor.
B3.
JUDGE BACKS DEATH-PENALTY LAW
A judge said she would uphold the constitutionality of a new Federal death-penalty law in the narcotics-murder trial of a reputed Mafia member in Brooklyn.
Judge Reena Raggi said she would reject a defense motion to declare the death-penalty provision unconstitutional.
B3.
In Federal Court, Tarzan v.
Vogue.
B3.
REGION  A PLAN TO SELL CITY HALL
Short of cash?
Why not sell City Hall?
That, in effect, is what the Suffolk County Legislature will be considering today.
As a way to raise a quick $25 million, Suffolk wants to sell its most prominent government building to a newly created public trust, which would then lease it back to the county.
Most Democrats and Republicans, say they can support the concept, which has been used at the state and county level from New York to California.
B5.
HELP FOR MILITARY CONTRACTORS
Saying New York State had lost more than 65,000 jobs since 1987 because of cutbacks in Pentagon spending, Governor Cuomo visited an electronics company here to announce a state program to help military contractors find customers in private industry.
The program is the first of its kind in the nation to win Federal support, the Governor said.
B5.
Our Towns B5  Chronicle B20


Richard E. Gerstein Is Dead at 68; Found a Crucial Watergate Link
Richard E. Gerstein, the longtime prosecutor in Dade County, Fla., who uncovered the first direct links between the Watergate burglary and the White House of President Richard M. Nixon, died early Sunday in Miami.
He was 68 years old.
Mr.
Gerstein suffered a heart attack and was dead on arrival at 12:39 A.M. at the Miami Heart Institute, a nursing supervisor, Angela Adams, said.


The Democrats Should Adopt Perot
While governors complain and Congressional leaders dither, the Democratic Party is wending its way through the primaries to a convention coronation in July and certain defeat in November.
Most rank-and-file Democrats have decided to ignore this bizarre process, which has produced losers four of the five times since it was concocted in 1972.
These Democrats want a winner, and polls show many believe they see one coming.
His name is Ross Perot.
For the record, Mr.
Perot says he's an independent.
By that he only means he has supported candidates of both parties.
But his positions on specific issues -- abortion, gay rights, taxes, the deficit, free trade, America's role in the world -- make it clear that he's a Democrat.
Granted, he's the kind of Democrat we haven't seen in a while, in the mold of Lyndon Johnson and Henry Jackson, but that's precisely the candidate the Democrats need and that their primary process never seems to be able to produce.


Notes Are Priced By Philip Morris
The Philip Morris Companies yesterday priced a $300 million note issue through underwriters led by the First Boston Corporation.


Apple Sees Net Growth
Apple Computer Inc. expects earnings, revenues and shipments to rise in the second half of the fiscal year 1992, the company's chief financial officer, Joseph Graziano, said today.
"We expect even stronger unit, revenue and earnings growth in the second half of the year," Mr.
Graziano told analysts at the Hambrecht &amp; Quist Technology Corporation.


Chhong Khenis Journal; On Cambodia's Great Lake, the New Tide of Fear
This is the most movable of towns.
Now, at the height of the dry season, part of it is on land, on the edge of the Tonle Sap, the Great Lake of Cambodia.
But most of it, even now, is on the lake.
Houseboats are moored to tall stakes.
Other families have built bamboo-and-thatch houses and moor them on poles.


Albany Sues U.S. on Aliens Held in Prison
New York State sued the Federal Government today, demanding that it begin to take custody of thousands of illegal aliens that the state says it is being forced to house in its prisons.
The lawsuit, filed by State Attorney General Robert Abrams in Federal District Court in Albany, contends that the United States Immigration and Naturalization Service is violating a 1990 law by failing to take custody of illegal aliens who have served time in state prisons for aggravated felonies and are eligible for parole or work-release programs.


Rare Bird Illuminates Bitter Dilemma
WHEN Edmund Smith saw a nondescript black and white bird that he couldn't recognize flying over the hood of his car in central Somalia, he had little idea that he had caught a glimpse of the Bulo Burti boubou, an extremely rare species of shrike previously unknown to Western science.
Working with Mr.
Smith, a biologist, researchers in Somalia quickly captured the bird, still the only known example of the new species.
But when they did, they found themselves in an ethical quandary becoming more and more common among biologists: to kill or not to kill.


25 Groups in Dance Festival
In honor of National Dance Week, a festival of dance by 25 youth ensembles will take place through Sunday in after-school and weekend performances at Albee Square Mall in the Fulton Mall area between Willoughby Street and DeKalb Avenue in downtown Brooklyn.
The programs are sponsored by the Brooklyn Dance Consortium, a dance producing and service organization.
Admission is free.
Schedule and information: (718) 797-3116.


Russian, in Western Mode, Makes His Case
Seeking billions of dollars to heal its economic ills, Russia presented a smooth young face to the West today, a 36-year-old Deputy Prime Minister full of enthusiasm for free markets.
In his gray suit, light blue shirt and dark tie, Yegor T. Gaidar could have passed for a bureaucrat of any Western European government.
With his unwrinkled cheeks and detailed descriptions of how to sell state-owned industries, he offered a clear-cut contrast to his boss, President Boris N. Yeltsin, a rough and bluff politician of an age to be his father.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats; In Pennsylvania, Clinton Is Seeking Solid Victory
Hoping to follow the trail of Democratic success blazed by Harris Wofford in his come-from-behind victory for the Senate last year, Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas ended his final day of campaigning in the Pennsylvania primary by hopscotching across the state in search of blue-collar votes.
The series of rallies began on Sunday in southwestern Pennsylvania, carefully staged for maximum camera appeal and intended to showcase Mr.
Clinton as the Democrat who could best motivate and unite his party.


Conner's Experience Keeping Stars &amp; Stripes in Contention
Barbara Casino, a local lawyer, chartered a boat with friends on Sunday and went out to watch the America's Cup defender trials for the first time.
Unexpectedly, she got caught up in the drama of competition between Dennis Conner and Bill Koch.
"Is it like that all the time?" she asked later.
"I was so excited. I've never seen anything like it in my life. Everyone cheered and clapped for Dennis Conner after he won. Does that ever happen to the other boat?"


Pianist's Postponement
The pianist Santiago Rodriguez has postponed the final two performances in his all-Rachmaninoff series, tomorrow and on May 20 at 8 P.M. at the 92d Street Y. He cited health problems.
Tickets should be kept until new dates and refund options are announced.
Information: (212) 415-5440.


Counsel Finds Possible Evidence of Criminal Fraud in House Bank
The Justice Department's special counsel investigating the House bank scandal disclosed today that he had uncovered possible evidence of a criminal "check-kiting scheme" involving the lawmakers' checking accounts.
The special counsel, Malcolm R. Wilkey, cited the potential of criminal fraud in a letter to House leaders in which he defended the department's subpoenas issued last week demanding all the bank's records during a 39-month period..
The House ethics committee scrutinized the same period from 1988 to 1991 in its review of the bank's operations.


Review/Television; Within Child Welfare, A Tragedy of Neglect
Tonight "Frontline" goes after Gov.
Bill Clinton.
"Who Cares About Children?," at 9 on Channels 13 and 49, relays charges that the Arkansas Governor and professed champion of children avoided doing much about the state's "inadequate and dangerous child welfare system" until he was forced to move by the threat of a class-action lawsuit.
The program leaves the impression that political motives were behind both his years of inaction and his sudden support, after the New Hampshire primary, for increased financing.
"Who Cares About Children?" borrows its point of view from Mr.
Clinton's critics, particularly William Grimm, a child-welfare attorney from San Francisco who was brought to Arkansas in 1990 to put pressure on the state.
He is the hero of this hour.
Set against the pictures of Mr.
Grimm delivering impassioned pleas ("How many more children have to die in Arkansas before somebody does something?"), Mr.
Clinton's statements seem unfeeling and glib.


By Design; At Home on the Street
Nobody dresses like this at home anymore, but among the styles making an impact this spring are "house dresses." These unassuming dresses, with their elbow-length sleeves, plain-Jane necklines and long, languid skirts, are now more at home in slick urban settings like city streets, offices, and restaurants.
Many women consider them a summer uniform for muggy days.
Made of fabrics like rayon or silk, they are cool to wear, and their small prints of dots or flowers give them a fragile, feminine air.
Who remembers the way such dresses were worn in the late 1930's and 40's?
Who cares, anyway, because what makes them work today are such accessories as minimal jewelry, big sunglasses, and thick-heeled platform-sole sandals, even better, if they are backless mules.


Corrections
A report in the Diner's Journal column of Weekend on Friday about the opening of the Flatiron Grill misstated the location.
The restaurant is not in the Flatiron Building but next to it, at 937 Broadway, at 22d Street.


Review/Theater; From Alan Ayckbourn, a Family of Thieves
When Americans think about the greed of the 1980's, they think of that distant den of thieves on Wall Street.
For the British, grand larceny begins at home.
"A Small Family Business," the Alan Ayckbourn comedy that arrived at the Music Box Theater last night, is set entirely in the ordinary households of England's cozy middle-class provinces, where shopping tends to be the major social activity and shoplifting the major misdemeanor.
Yet by the time Mr.
Ayckbourn brings down the curtain on his nattering suburbanites, they seem as culpable as any Ivan Boesky or Robert Maxwell for the criminal amorality of a decade.
Illicit cash, drugs and blood all leave a trail across their immaculately carpeted floors.
Originally produced at the National Theater in London in 1987, just months before the stock market crash, "A Small Family Business" is Mr.
Ayckbourn's own equivalent to Caryl Churchill's "Top Girls," David Hare's "Secret Rapture" and Mike Leigh's film "High Hopes": it's a bitter indictment of the Thatcher years as seen at the grass-roots level, at home and the office.
But Mr.
Ayckbourn, who is no political ideologue, goes after his prey in his own way.
He opens with a hilarious gag involving a misbegotten family surprise party and continues to foment laughter well after members of that extended family have been exposed as thieves, adulterers, morons and thugs who are looting their shared ancestral business, a furniture manufacturer.
Mr.
Ayckbourn is no optimist, but he is a consummate man of the theater who would rather entertain than lecture while lowering the boom.


Corrections
An article on March 20 about the ammunition industry referred incorrectly to an employee of the Alpine Arms Corporation, a gun shop in Brooklyn.
A recent letter from the president of the company pointed out that the employee, Pat Lozito, is a gunsmith at the shop; he is not the owner.


2d-Highest Official Quits DDB Needham
Rein Luik, the No. 2 executive at DDB Needham New York, has resigned, a spokesman for the agency said yesterday, confirming an item in this week's issue of the Delaney Report, a newsletter.


Part City, Part Country and Perhaps One Day All-Pro
After being plucked from his parents' home on the rough-and-tumble South Side of Chicago by his grandparents when he was 8 months old, Johnny Mitchell, the Jets' 1992 first-round draft pick, spent 15 years on a farm in Tchula, Miss., population 1,100.
"That's in the town," the 21-year-old tight end from Nebraska explained today.
"We lived out about 4 miles from the town."


Our Economy Needs Japan's Investments; Paper Losses?
To the Editor:
"False Fears About Japan's Crash," your otherwise perceptive, accurate and well-reasoned April 10 editorial, is flawed by one crucial omission.
It is true that Japanese banks, producers and manufacturers may well survive a greater than 50 percent loss in the value of their market shares.
However, Japanese investors, including millions of average citizens, as well as bankers and producers, are less than half as rich or well off as they were when the market peaked -- in all probability, trillions of dollars poorer.
Not peanuts in anybody's language or economy.


Just Being in Playoffs Is Not Enough for Nets
Being down two games to none against the Cavaliers may not seem so terrible for the Nets, because they have to be grateful to even be in the playoffs.
But Sam Bowie says they are hardly ready to concede the opening round to Cleveland.
"They did what they were supposed to do," the Nets' center said today as the club prepared for Game 3 and, it hopes, Game 4 at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
"Now we got to do what we're supposed to do and that's win tomorrow and win Thursday, and then it'll be square. But we've got our work cut out for us. They're a very good ball club."


Ocean Liner Saved From Scrap Heap
The luxury liner United States, which began its maiden voyage with 500 pounds of caviar and returned to a Broadway ticker tape parade, was saved from the scrap heap today by a businessman who immigrated on the ship 28 years ago.
The liner's new owner, Frederick A. Mayer of Manhattan, who was seasick in his six-person cabin during much of his crossing from Southampton, England, to Manhattan, bid $2.6 million for the rusting, leaking ship at an auction on the steps of the main Newport News Post Office.


Harlem Dance Troupe Knocks on Doors To Enlarge Audience
There will be more than one doctor in the house when Dance Theater of Harlem opens tonight in a two-week engagement at the Brooklyn Academy of Music.
The theater in fact will be full of doctors, and their friends and patients, in an event that marks a new development in the life of the Provident Clinical Society, a 92-year-old, Brooklyn-based professional organization for black physicians and dentists.
In a departure from its usual fund-raising projects, the organization has bought out the theater for opening night.
Dance Theater of Harlem's audience development task force, an innovative new marketing program, has struck again.


Plan to Aid Defense Concerns In Search for New Customers
Saying New York State had lost more than 65,000 jobs since 1987 because of cutbacks in Pentagon spending, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo visited an electronics company here today to announce a state program to help military contractors find customers in the private sector.
The program, begun with limited financing from the state and the Department of Defense, is the nation's first "defense diversification" project to to receive Federal financial support, the Governor said.


Confirming Split, Last 2 Republics Proclaim a Small New Yugoslavia
Serbia and Montenegro today proclaimed the establishment of a new, truncated Yugoslav nation shorn of the four republics that have seceded over the last 10 months.
The move amounted to a confirmation of the breakup of the old Communist Yugoslavia and an implicit acceptance of the independence of Bosnia and Herzegovina within its existing borders.
The decision to proclaim a new Yugoslavia was rushed through in a subdued, almost regretful, ceremony of less than 10 minutes, reflecting the discomfort of people acting to accommodate demands from Europe and the United States.


Bridge
Last week was a remarkable one for Laurie Vogel of Manhattan.
In the Greater New York Bridge Association's Sectional-in-Clubs, in which a double is rare, she scored a triple, winning citywide three times, once with Leni May and twice with Gail Greenberg.
Other winners (from Manhattan unless otherwise indicated) were: Roberto Verthelyi and George Berger; Marcel Friedmann amd Judy Lemle; Malle Andrade and Glenn Eisenstein; Peter Rossi and Laurence Leibowitz; Dorothy Helphand and Micki Lassiter; Jared Lilienstein of Flushing, Queens, and Kikuyo Susaki; and Richard Farber and Eric Mock.


Life's Turns Lead to Abortion Barricades in Buffalo; Four Women and Two Men Talk of How the Issue Has Moved Them Into the Streets
Last fall, when residents here first heard that Operation Rescue's anti-abortion protests were headed for their streets, many complained that they would bring an invasion of lawless outsiders -- be they anti-abortion or abortion-rights supporters.
To some extent, they were right.


Chess
The two early leaders in the semifinal candidates matches, in Linares, Spain, later fell behind: After 9 of the regulation 10 games, the English grandmaster Nigel Short led former world champion Anatoly Karpov of Russia by 5 to 4; the Dutch grandmaster Jan Timman led the German (formerly Russian) grandmaster Artur Yusupov by the same score.
Short won Game 6, Karpov Game 7, Short won Game 8 and Game 9 was a draw.
If the Englishman eliminates Karpov, it will be the first time since 1985 that Gary Kasparov, the titleholder, will face someone other than Karpov in the championship match in the fall of 1993.


At Dinkins Fund-Raising Soiree, Turnout and Spirits Are High
Mayor David N. Dinkins held a major fund-raising dinner last night that many Democrats were watching carefully as a barometer of his political support and campaign credibility.
The Spring Gala event at the Sheraton Hotel and Towers came on the same day that Mr.
Dinkins released the budget voters will likely judge him on in the 1993 election.
The soiree was three months after City Council President Andrew J. Stein, the Mayor's main Democratic rival, raised nearly $2 million at a glitzy event at the Waldorf-Astoria, luring several of the Mayor's 1989 supporters to a $5,000-a-plate affair.


Four Are Fined
ALTON LISTER of the Golden State Warriors has been fined $7,500 and three Seattle SuperSonics a total of $6,500 as a result of rough play in the first round of the playoffs, ROD THORN, vice president of the N.B.A. announced yesterday.


P.&amp; G. Profits Increase 11.8%
The Procter &amp; Gamble Company said today that its third-quarter earnings increased 11.8 percent, to $474 million, or $1.33 a share, spurred by improved sales, especially in overseas markets.
P.&amp; G. earned $424 million, or $1.16 a share, during the comparable period a year ago.
Revenues rose 10 percent, to $7.48 billion from $6.8 billion.


Japan Stocks Rebound
Stock prices rebounded here today after falling on Monday in quiet trading.
The Nikkei index of 225 issues was up 76.88 points, or less than 1 percent, to 17,527.40 at the end of the afternoon trading session.
The index had gained 139 points in the morning.
On Monday, the Nikkei fell 91.93 points on futures-related selling.
The closely watched index rose 140.40 points on Friday.


CHRONICLE
At least one domestic problem has been solved for President Bush.
His future son-in-law, ROBERT P. KOCH, will leave his job as administrative assistant to the House majority leader, RICHARD A. GEPHARDT, Democrat of Missouri.
Good thing: Mr.
Gephardt is one of the President's most outspoken critics.
Mr.
Koch, 32 years old, who will marry the president's daughter, DOROTHY BUSH LeBLOND, on June 27, will become head of the Washington office of the Wine Institute, a trade association for California wineries and growers.


Washington Square Crash Claims Its Fifth Fatality
It was the first time they had ever lived together, and for three precious months, Michael Fonseca and his son shared quiet occasions -- movies, strolls along the East River, easy talks over late-night snacks.
When the police came by early yesterday morning to tell him that his son, Bryant, had died, the fifth fatality from the car crash Thursday in Washington Square Park, he chose to remember those small moments.
"We can try to find someone to blame because that would give us a resolution, but that is useless," Michael Fonseca said yesterday.
"I want to think about these last days. He needed caring and motivation. Who better to help you see things than your father?"


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.25-6.5
6.25-6.5
9.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
6.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.87
3.63
5.93
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.71
3.64
5.60
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.85
3.80
5.68
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.24
7.16
7.92
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.10
8.03
8.22
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.04
8.97
9.29
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.75
6.73
7.28
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Chemists' New Tools: Molecular See-Saws
IN 1951, the pioneering Russian chemist B. P. Belousov accidentally discovered a new class of chemical reactions that spontaneously reverse themselves in rhythmically oscillating cycles.
He submitted his astounding finding to a Soviet scientific journal, but editors rejected it on the ground that such a phenomenon would violate the laws of physics and was therefore impossible.
But scientists have since come to regard Dr.
Belousov's discovery as a landmark, and similar oscillating reactions are now believed to underlie at least 150 types of biological activity.
Chemical oscillators may facilitate the beating of hearts and maybe even human thought.
Moreover, new research, described at a national conference of chemists this month, suggests that oscillating chemical reactions known to operate in living organisms could mimic the functions of conventional transistors as the on-or-off switches on which all digital computers are based.


'Dancing at Lughnasa' Wins Outer Critics Circle Award
"Dancing at Lughnasa," Brian Friel's play about five unmarried sisters in the Ireland of 1936, won the Outer Critics Circle award yesterday for best Broadway play of the 1991-92 season.
"Crazy for You," with music and lyrics by George and Ira Gershwin and book by Ken Ludwig, was named outstanding Broadway musical.
Scott McPherson, the author of "Marvin's Room," was given the John Gassner Award for an American playwright; his play also won the award for best Off Broadway play.
"Song of Singapore" was chosen best Off Broadway musical and also won awards for its book, music and lyrics.


I.M.F. and World Bank: Lenders to the Nations
The International Monetary Fund and the World Bank are products of the Bretton Woods monetary conference, held in New Hampshire in 1944.
The meeting was called to supervise a fixed exchange rate system and help industrialized countries emerging from World War II cope with trade and capital imbalances.
The monetary fund started with 39 countries -- excluding the Soviet Union, which declined repeated invitations to join.
Dominated by industrialized nations, the fund helps developing countries draw up and carry out large-scale economic reforms aimed at growth without inflation.
It often provides loans along the way to help them in this painful process, which often involves cutting government food and energy subsidies that help the poor.


LENDING AGENCIES ADMIT EX-SOVIETS AS FULL MEMBERS
The International Monetary Fund and the World Bank formally offered membership today to Russia, Ukraine and most of the other former Soviet republics.
It was a major step to tie the republics into the rest of the world's economy.
Western and Russian officials said offering membership would also help make billions of dollars of Monetary Fund and World Bank aid available to the republics as they emerge from seven decades of Communism and make the painful transition to market economies.


Brown's Standard Campaign Speech: A New Vision of America
In his campaign addresses around the country, Edmund G. Brown Jr. rarely reads from a text or notes and his speeches vary considerbly from place to place, but he always focuses on the same themes: the corruption of American politics and his crusade to return control of the nation to "the people."
The former California Governor almost always invokes Thomas Jefferson, and he never forgets to plug his toll-free number for campaign donations, usually drawing good-natured laughter and some of his biggest cheers.
Though he tailors his pitches slightly for labor audiences or other groups, he is unlike most politicians in that he rarely studies up on the details of where he is visiting, and does not often include references to local supporters.


With Candidates' Medical History, Openness May Be Good Politics
In the wake of new revelations about Paul E. Tsongas's recurrence of cancer after an experimental bone marrow transplant, the former Senator from Massachusetts made a pledge last week.
Even if there is no need for Mr.
Tsongas to execute the pledge, it could profoundly affect how other candidates release information about their health.
If he runs for President or Vice-President in the future, Mr.
Tsongas wrote in a letter to his doctor, he will open his records at the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute in Boston to independent experts for evaluation.
If there are any remaining questions, Mr.
Tsongas wrote, he will be willing to get tested at another cancer center not affiliated with Dana-Farber, the Harvard teaching hospital where he underwent the experimental transplant.


'Metro' Closes at Minskoff
"Metro," a musical with an all-Polish cast, closed after the matinee on Sunday at the Minskoff Theater, 200 West 45th Street.
The play, directed by Janusz Jozefowicz, with English book by Mary Bracken Phillips and Mr.
Jozefowicz, music by Janusz Stoklosa and English lyrics by Ms.
Phillips, ran for 13 regular performances and 24 previews.


A Hot Spot In the Pacific Gets Hotter


Classical Music in Review
New York Choral Society  Carnegie Hall
"Tito's Say," with music by James DeMars and words by Alberto (Tito) Rios, was the new piece in the New York Choral Society's concert at Carnegie Hall on Friday evening.
Four poems of skewed love are set to pleasant and chatty music.
The style negotiates a path between Broadway ensemble singing and the chanting repetitions of Philip Glass.
John Daly Goodwin's singers seemed better prepared for Mr.
DeMars's off-center antics than the accompanying pick-up orchestra.
The latter, sounding barely rehearsed at all, muddled its way uneasily along.


'Fight With Us' Against Military, Ousted Haitian Urges Americans
Raising a fist in salute to more than 2,500 cheering Haitian students at Brooklyn College, the deposed President of Haiti, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, extolled his faith in the youth of his country yesterday and said he was certain that they would "rally the resistance so that Haiti will become a democratic country once again."
Then, addressing Americans, Father Aristide, whose Government was toppled by the Haitian military last September, said, "We need you to fight with us in the same way we saw Americans fight in Nicaragua."


Editorial Notebook; The Unseen Candidates
Plastic.
That's what I couldn't help thinking last week as I watched Jerry Brown and Bill Clinton campaign for votes in the Pennsylvania primary being held today.
Speeches, interviews, smiles, even policies: as glossy, polished and thin as plastic.
No wonder millions say they prefer None of the Above to the Presidential candidates available this year.
But to talk to Bill Clinton and Jerry Brown is to recognize there is grit behind the gloss, weight behind the plastic.
Governor Clinton is engaging and very smart indeed.
He talks interestingly about shaping reform policies in a ferociously conservative state like Arkansas.
Mr.
Brown, grandiloquent and glib in public, is honestly, even relentlessly inquisitive in private.


BUSINESS DIGEST
End of an Era at Macy's
Edward S. Finkelstein resigned abruptly as Macy's chairman, closing a sad chapter in the saga of the 134-year-old retail company.
He was the last of the merchants who presided over the golden age of department stores.  [ Page A1. ]
In earlier times, Edward Finkelstein had used imagination and flair to rejuvenate stores, but there were doubts that he was the best man to guide Macy's out of bankruptcy.  [ D9. ]


Perot Backers Make Gains on Election Barriers
The Presidential campaign mounted on behalf of Ross Perot is targeting New York State for a particularly intense petition drive aimed at surmounting the obstacles in its election law.
Thomas D. Barr, a prominent Manhattan lawyer and adviser to Mr.
Perot, said yesterday that the Perot Petition Committee, the group that is trying to get Mr.
Perot on the ballot, would open an office in Manhattan to deal with the intricacies of the law -- long considered the most arcane and difficult in the nation for insurgents to overcome -- and also to coordinate the efforts of numerous Perot for President efforts that have cropped up around the state.


BRIEFS
*
Columbia Hospital Corp. agreed to acquire Basic American Medical Inc., Indianapolis, a health-care concern, through a merger transaction.
The deal, valued at about $185 million, is subject to shareholder approval. *
Ecolab Inc., St.
Paul, a maker of detergents and sanitizing products, and Servicemaster L. P., Downers Grove, Ill., entered into a letter of intent whereby a subsidiary of Servicemaster proposes to acquire Ecolab's Chemlawn landscape care business.
No terms were disclosed.


Genscher, Bonn's Foreign Minister 18 Years, Resigns
Foreign Minister Hans-Dietrich Genscher, who helped guide Germany to unification and waged a long campaign for closer ties among European nations, stunned Germany today by announcing his resignation.
Chancellor Helmut Kohl named Irmgard Schwaetzer, the Housing Minister and a former aide to Mr.
Genscher, to be the new Foreign Minister.
Mrs.
Schwaetzer, 50 years old, will be the first woman to hold a senior Cabinet post in Bonn.


Court Avoids Decision On Time Limits of Laws
Granting a Bush Administration request in a housing fraud case, the Supreme Court today set aside a damage award to the Federal Government that could have undercut the Administration's ability to argue that the new civil rights law is not retroactive.
The Administration has placed a high priority on persuading the Federal courts not to apply the Civil Rights Act of 1991, which expanded remedies for job discrimination, to discrimination that occurred before President Bush reluctantly signed the measure into law on Nov. 21.


Observer; Clinton's Beau Geste
Last August I predicted that George Bush would not run for re-election.
I was wrong.
I do not expect Governor Clinton to prove me wrong again, however, as I now predict that for the good of his party he will not accept the Democratic nomination.
The reasons for this are already overwhelming, and the Governor is a man of reason, as George Bush, I regret to say, is not.
Above I confessed error in predicting that Mr.
Bush would not run, but the truly serious error was made by Mr.
Bush.


Two G.M. Units Show Strong Profits
Two of General Motors' three non-automotive subsidiaries -- the Electronic Data Systems and Hughes Electronics -- posted solid quarterly profit gains today.
The third, the General Motors Acceptance Corporation, said profits were actually stronger although it recorded an 80 percent drop from last year's first-quarter profit, which was restated because of an accounting change.
G.M. is scheduled to announce overall first-quarter financial results on Tuesday.


On My Mind; One Thing Missing
Somebody is giving Ross Perot the wrong advice, most likely Ross Perot.
It's running out of value for himself and for the country.
Mr.
Perot wants to be President.
Never mind the laid-back attitude.
He wants it a lot, and sensibly he is using the two strongest tools he has.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Finances; President's Dinner Draws Donations, and Criticism
The company owned by Carl Lindner, a Cincinnati financier, is spending $250,000 for the privilege of dining Tuesday night with President Bush, Vice President Dan Quayle and other Republican powers.
Lobbyists for the Xerox Corporation are paying $20,000.
And Sam Bamieh, a California businessmen who was once an avid supporter of the Nicaraguan contras, is giving $15,000.
These people and 4,000 others are participants in the President's Dinner, a Republican Party gathering that after seven years has mushroomed into an event its organizers say will be the largest political fund-raising event in history.


John DeVries, 76, Lyricist and Artist; Versatile Designer
John DeVries, the lyricist, designer and illustrator, died on April 17 at Methodist Hospital in Houston.
He was 76 years old and lived in New York City.
He died of complications after exploratory surgery, said a friend, Hank O'Neal.


Boeing's Net Rose 42.7% In Quarter
The Boeing Company reported increased quarterly sales and earnings today, attributing the gains to improved commercial aircraft sales and a profit from its military and aerospace business, which reported a loss in the 1991 period.
Still, Boeing shares slipped 37.5 cents each on the New York Stock Exchange, to close at $45, reflecting analysts' concerns that the second half of the year will not exceed last year's results.


Home Resales Up 12.5%; Gains Are Expected to Continue
Sales of existing homes jumped 12.5 percent in March from a year earlier, and gains are expected to continue through the rest of the year, the nation's largest real estate association said today.
The group, the National Association of Realtors, said some 298,000 existing single-family homes were sold last month, compared with 265,000 in March 1991.
It was the third month in a row that sales increased over the previous year.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Cherokee Group, Sunland, Calif., filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for a public offering of $115 million of senior subordinated notes due in 1999 through Kidder, Peabody &amp; Co.
The company designs, manufactures and markets casual apparel and footwear.
Common


Solti to Conduct at Benefit
Sir Georg Solti will make his only New York appearance this season when he conducts the New York Philharmonic in a pension fund benefit for the orchestra at 8 P.M. on Saturday at Avery Fisher Hall.
Works to be performed are the Prelude and "Liebestod" from Wagner's "Tristan und Isolde," "Les Preludes" by Liszt and Berlioz's "Symphonie Fantastique." Tickets are $15 to $90.
Information: (212) 721-6500.


Borland International Has Loss in Quarter
Borland International Inc. reported lower quarterly revenues and a net loss today, reflecting problems digesting the acquisition of the Ashton-Tate Corporation and poor sales because of late products.
"Ashton-Tate was a very expensive acquisition for Borland," said David Readerman, an analyst with Lehman Brothers in San Francisco.
He noted that the results include a restructuring charge of $30 million related to the Ashton-Tate acquisition last year.
That charge, he noted, brings total restructuring costs associated with the merger to about $146 million above and beyond the $450 million purchase price.


CHRONICLE
"Mel . . . oh Mel, this is for you," PATTI LUPONE crooned as she sashayed into the spotlight Saturday evening at the National Building Museum in Washington, where the Shakespeare Theater was honoring MEL GIBSON with its Will Award.
More formally, that is the William Shakespeare Award for Classical Theater, and it was presented at the theater's black-tie fund-raising dinner.
Fixing her dark eyes on the actor, Ms.
Lupone serenaded him with decidedly non-Shakespearean songs, including "I Get a Kick Out of You," and "As Long as He Needs Me."'


Maytag's President To Add Chief's Title
The Maytag Corporation said yesterday that it would name Leonard A. Hadley chief executive at today's annual meeting, adding to his current responsibilities of president and chief operating officer.
He will replace Daniel J. Krumm, 65 years old, who is retiring as chief executive but will remain chairman.
Mr.
Hadley, 57, has spent 33 years with Maytag.
He has shepherded the corporation through some tumultuous acquisitions, after heading a task force in the late 1970's to plan the company's long-term strategy.
That panel recommended a series of acquisitions to overcome the slow growth Maytag was facing in a mature home appliance industry.


Two Methods To Redistrict Sent to Court
Having failed to agree on a Congressional redistricting plan, the Democratic-led Assembly and the Republican-led Senate today submitted separate and distinctly partisan proposals to a Federal court in Brooklyn.
The submission of the separate maps signified a hardening legislative impasse and made it increasingly likely that the courts will have to make redistricting decisions that belong in the Legislature.


Strickland Injured
ROD STRICKLAND, the San Antonio Spurs' point guard, fractured the third finger on his left hand late in a playoff game against Phoenix Sunday night and is not expected to play again in the series.
He injured the finger when his hand jammed into the chest of a Suns player with 2 minutes 17 seconds to play.
The Suns lead the series by 2-0. (AP)


Teachers Get Fliers With Hitler's Picture
More than 20 teachers at Stuyvesant High School in Manhattan returned from spring break yesterday to find fliers in their mailboxes with a picture of Adolf Hitler and the caption "When I come back, no more Mr. Nice Guy," the police said.
The police classified the mailing as a bias incident.
The fliers were postmarked April 20, Hitler's birthday, said a police spokesman, Officer Andrew McInnis.
The envelopes carried a return address from a Jewish nursery school in Queens that was not involved in the mailing, officials said.


Magadan Is Cooking At Hot Corner
There were two outs in the inning and Dave Magadan settled into his position, at the ready, or so the Mets' third baseman believed.
But when the Phillies' Wes Chamberlain flicked a grounder Magadan's way, the ball ticked off his glove for an infield hit before Magadan could react the way he surely wanted to.
Magadan, grateful for the praise he has earned in his return to baseball's hottest corner, had been reminded once more that the work is never done.


Sheraton Hotels Offer Lower, Simpler Rates
The Sheraton hotel chain has joined the chorus of airlines and rental car companies pitching lower -- and simpler -- prices to consumers.
Until now, the listed room rates for the ITT Sheraton Corporation's 300 hotels and inns in North America, like those of other chains, were similar to the sticker prices on new cars.
Only the unwitting or desperate -- about 20 percent in the case of Sheraton customers -- paid the full price, which usually masked a constantly changing array of discounts and qualifications.


EXECUTIVES
*
Chase Manhattan Bank, N.A., New York, a unit of the the Chase Manhattan Corp., named Kathy A. MaGaw, currently product and production risk-management executive, to the additional position of senior vice president. *
Gerber Products Co., Fremont, Mich., a baby food, clothing and accessories company, named Craig Wassenaar corporate controller.


Our Economy Needs Japan's Investments
To the Editor:
"When the Japanese stock market plummeted 10 percent," you write in "False Fears About Japan's Crash" (editorial, April 10), "fear struck Wall Street. The Dow Jones industrial average plunged nearly 100 points in two days and Americans wondered whether Main Street would be next." You then go a long way toward dispelling the Chicken Little dialogue heard in international financial circles.
"Stock market crashes can be traumatic," you conclude, but "they don't need to be economically crippling."
Unfortunately, you miss the mark on the fundamental impact that the deflating of the bubble economy has on global prosperity.


Colts' Tentative Deal Used as Leverage Tool
One of the first major twists in the opening round of the National Football League draft on Sunday occurred well before the Washington Redskins made a daring trade up from No. 6 to No. 4 to nab receiver Desmond Howard, the Heisman Trophy winner.
Sean Gilbert, the Pittsburgh defensive end who wound up as the Rams' selection at No. 3, went to bed Saturday night relatively certain he would be the Indianapolis Colts' choice with the No. 2 pick.
The player and his agent, Gus Sunseri of Pittsburgh, say that late on Saturday night, they had reached an agreement in principle with the Colts.
"It was a tentative agreement, but we were 95 percent sure," Sunseri said.


Forest Service May Alter Rule Blocking Logging
As part of an election-year assault on regulations that it says are choking economic recovery, the Bush Administration has proposed limiting a rule that environmentalists have used to block logging on millions of acres of national forests.
Under the 85-year-old rule, members of the public have been able to delay or stop timber sales simply by mailing written critiques about the probable environmental harm of the logging to the United States Forest Service within 45 days after the service has put the timber on the market.
The rule requires the Forest Service to respond to the challenges within 115 days by rejecting the challenge, changing the terms of the sale or withdrawing the timber from the market.


Review/Rock; Van Morrison's Mix of the Solid and the Spiritual
On record, the song "Sweet Thing," from Van Morrison's 1968 album, "Astral Weeks," is nothing less than a slice of mystery: rhythms like the angular slant of rain, violins arching like branches, the strange flight of a flute and a voice hushed with sadness.
But when Mr.
Morrison performed "Sweet Thing" at the Paramount on Sunday night, the song was pure flesh and blood.
It had a strong, supple beat, animated by vibes and electric guitar; Mr.
Morrison's gruff voice phrased the words casually, as if they described just another love affair.
The recorded version of "Sweet Thing" is transparent, as incorporeal as time or light; onstage it seemed solid, graspable, even common.


Judge Allows Death Penalty In New York
A judge said yesterday that she would uphold the constitutionality of a new Federal death-penalty law in the drug and murder trial of a reputed Mafia member in Brooklyn.
Judge Reena Raggi, who is presiding over the trial in Federal District Court, told the lawyers for both sides in the trial of the defendant, Thomas Pitera, that she would reject a defense motion to declare the death-penalty provision unconstitutional.


Partners &amp; Shevack Creative Director
Jackie End, a creative executive at several leading agencies, has been named to the new position of executive vice president and creative director at Partners &amp; Shevack in New York.
The agency announced her appointment yesterday, confirming a report in Adweek.


Still the G.M. After All Those Rumors
They met.
They talked.
They may have even shouted.
But no pink slip was delivered when the Yankees' managing partner, Joseph Molloy, and General Manager Gene Michael met yesterday before the Yankees played the Texas Rangers at Yankee Stadium.
It does not mean Michael should feel much safer.
Michael's status has been the subject for speculation several times recently and a column Sunday in The Daily News suggested that he would be replaced by Brian Sabean, the club's Tampa-based vice president of scouting and player development.


Borrowing Money to Balance State Budget Declared Illegal
A state judge declared today that one of New York State's pet budget-balancing techniques was illegal, ruling that the state's attempts to justify the practice were "the constitutional equivalent of Hans Christian Andersen's tale of the Emperor's New Clothes."
In his ruling, Justice Lawrence E. Kahn of the State Supreme Court said that the state's habit of borrowing money at the end of one fiscal year to balance that year's budget, and then paying it back the next fiscal year, was unconstitutional.
The state has done this since 1988 to close its deficits, and it did it again at the end of last month, issuing $531 million in short-term debt to close an expected budget shortfall for the 1992-1993 fiscal year.
Citizen Lawsuit Forced Issue
"What occurred here was an unconstitutional rollover of state debt without voter approval," Justice Kahn wrote.
"This is, purely and simply, an attempt to sweep a yearlong deficit under the constitutional rug by incurring debt without voter approval."
But the judge did not offer any alternative.
State officials, vowing to appeal the decision immediately, said that the ruling would not make a difference and predicted that it would be overturned by a higher court.
The state Budget Director Patrick J. Bulgaro, speaking of the state's practice of borrowing to close its deficits, said in a statement: "We believe that the state's authority to issue deficit notes when faced with an unanticipated deficiency is well-founded in the state constitution, in statute and in case law.
"Accordingly, we will request the Attorney General to appeal this decison, and we are confident of the eventual outcome."
Justice Kahn issued the decision in response to a lawsuit brought by Robert L. Schulz, a resident of Glens Falls, and other citizens who are waging a campaign against state's fiscal practices that they find irresponsible.
Focusing on the $531 million the state borrowed at the end of March, Justice Kahn said that what made the borrowing unconstitutional was the fact that the notes were issued before the 1992-1993 budget was in place.
"The state had no budget upon which to reasonably anticipate the existence of sufficient tax or revenues," he said.
But state officials disputed his reasoning, saying that even in the absence of a budget, the state Comptroller is allowed to impound revenues to pay back the state's debt.
Cindy Green, a senior research associate for the Citizens Budget Commission, a watchdog group financed by corporations, pointed out that the state has borrowed a total of $2.8 billion since 1988 to close its deficits and praised justice's decision as a blow for fiscal responsibility.
"In the past four years, the state has had the capacity to 'balance' its budget through borrowing," she said.
"I don't know what this ruling means for this year, but it is very helpful for future years and might foreclose the state's ability to paper over its imbalances."


Milton Rosenstock, Music Director, 74, For Stage and Ballet
Milton Rosenstock, a music director who worked in theater and ballet, died on April 24 at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 74 years old in Manhattan.
He died of heart disease, said a spokesman for Dance Theater of Harlem, where Mr.
Rosenstock had been principal conductor since 1981.


Rangers Bar Door After Leaving Window Open
Consider last night an experiment in the lunatic laboratory of Stanley Cup hockey: Could the Rangers, known for playoff burlesque of the most unscientific sort, really blow a five-goal lead at Madison Square Garden?
They did not, in the end.
But the Devils came remarkably close to achieving such a comeback before falling, 8-5, in Game 5 of their Patrick Division semifinal series.
Their defeat, macabre as it was, sent the Devils home to suburbia trailing by a very conventional 3 games to 2, their backs to the aluminum siding.


Yankees Manage to Survive, Sending Rangers on the Run
Jesse Barfield hit a 400-foot home run that should have won the game for the Yankees last night, but their vaunted relievers failed, the Rangers surged ahead and it looked like it just might be a wasted night for New York.
But the Yankees rebounded on a ball that was not hit half as hard and half as far as Barfield's three-run blast.
And the Rangers probably could have had half their team chase it and still not catch it because of the way their defense was positioned.
Half their team almost pursued it anyway.


Sharing Charlie's Gifts in Small World He Crafted
HERE are some things Charlie O'Connor doesn't do: He doesn't pay bills by home computer.
He doesn't use bank machines.
He doesn't choose the exact-change lanes at tollbooths.
He doesn't have a telephone answering machine.
And he doesn't wear earphones outdoors to inoculate himself against conversations with strangers.
Here are some things Charlie O'Connor always does: He always crushes your hand with a hearty shake.
He always has a smile, even when the leg is hurting pretty badly, which is more often nowadays.
He always has a greeting for every youngster (and he sees plenty every day).
He always watches the neighborhood like a hawk.


Fugitive Task Force Of F.B.I. and Police
In an effort to reduce violent street crime, the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the New York City police have established a unit to track down fugitive suspects, F.B.I. officials said yesterday.
James M. Fox, the head of the F.B.I. bureau in the city, said the new unit will pursue "the most violent and vicious fugitives who are loose in the city and who are wreaking the most havoc."


The Downfall of a Merchant of the Old School
After R. H. Macy &amp; Company filed for bankruptcy protection in January, Edward S. Finkelstein vowed repeatedly that he would remain at the helm of the big retailer during its climb out of bankruptcy.
The way back promised to be a difficult couple of years, but only last week the 67-year-old Macy chairman sounded like his old ebullient, optimistic self.
In an interview with his favorite trade publication, Women's Wear Daily, Mr.
Finkelstein delivered a relentlessly upbeat assessment.
Macy's inventory levels, he explained, were about normal -- "right on plan" -- and the merchandise offerings were "much more current and fresh." No Surprise to Analysts


A Risky Fiscal Plan; Dinkins's Budget Relies on Tactics That Were Abandoned as Unrealistic
Mayor David N. Dinkins's proposed New York City budget counts on a modest economic recovery and rebounding tax revenue to help balance the city's books in the coming years -- a forecast so far buttressed by only the first glimmers of fact.
That forecast is just one of the optimistic assumptions on which Mr.
Dinkins's spending plans are built, and it will have to be measured over time.
A more immediate uncertainty is his request to the Legislature for $115 million in new taxes on commuter incomes, fuels, tobacco and liquor, a package that politicians say is already dead.


CREDIT MARKETS;
A $58.3 million tax-exempt bond issue by Arlington, Tex., was initially priced yesterday to yield a maximum of 6.6 percent for a bond with a maturity of 2011 through underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.


A Tough Penalty Call
BRIAN O'NEILL, executive vice president of the National Hockey League, yesterday suspended Minnesota North Stars defenseman DERIAN HATCHER for three playoff games, without pay, as a result of a high-sticking incident with Detroit Red Wings right wing KEVIN MILLER on April 24.
No penalty was assessed on the play.


Clowning and Criticism At American Express
One shareholder approached the microphone wearing a clown's nose.
Another kissed the chairman.
Twice.
And with James D. Robinson 3d, the chairman of the American Express Company, displaying a remarkable tolerance for the shenanigans, it seemed almost an afterthought that the company's problems had any time on the agenda at yesterday's annual meeting.
Mr.
Robinson, who has led American Express for 15 years, got the meeting off to an unusual start with a 15-minute denunciation of an article published yesterday in The Wall Street Journal.


Price Cut In Offer For MIPS
Silicon Graphics Inc. reduced the price of its planned acquisition of MIPS Computer Systems Inc. today to reflect MIPS's poor first-quarter results.
Analysts said the reduced terms of acquisition also acknowledged the unraveling of the Advanced Computing Environment, or ACE, consortium, which sought to establish a new desktop computer standard using a microprocessor designed by MIPS.


Co-Chairmen Attuned to Macy's Needs
In choosing two men to replace Edward S. Finkelstein, the R. H. Macy board took an unusual step intended to address the competing pressures facing the company.
The board gave the titles of co-chairman and co-chief executive to a financier, Myron E. Ullman 3d, and a merchant, Mark S. Handler.
While the two men get along well, some management experts question whether such an arrangement can last.


Market Place; A Strange Limbo For Fibreboard
JOHN D. C. ROACH is a chairman with an unusual problem.
Because of circumstances totally beyond his control, Fibreboard Inc. may wind up filing for bankruptcy within a year.
On the other hand, if circumstances break the right way, the company may look attractive as a takeover target.
That situation, which reflects legal questions related to historic production of asbestos at Fibreboard, may explain its unusually aggressive wooing of Wall Street and of institutional investors.
In a world where promises for the future are usually made quietly, or at least out of earshot of the Securities and Exchange Commission, Fibreboard is putting forecasts in its annual report.
The company "believes that within three years Fibreboard has the potential to achieve annual pretax income of $15 million to $20 million," the report said.


No Benefit Seen in Use Of Interferon In AIDS
A drug that African scientists said provided striking results as an AIDS treatment is not effective and is not recommended for people infected with H.I.V, the virus that causes the disease, United States health officials said here today.
The drug, a chewable wafer, is interferon alpha, also known as Kemron.


Ashe Does It His Way
ARTHUR ASHE said yesterday that he plans to speak out publicly on the issue of AIDS, but that "no AIDS activist group is going to force me to do anything I don't want to do."
Ashe, without being specific, said he had been pressured by such organizations since his reluctant disclosure on April 8 that he has AIDS.
He said he is still considering what role he should play, and, that meanwhile, "high-pressure tactics absolutely will not work on me."


U.S. REORGANIZES NUTRITION ADVICE
After a year and almost $1 million spent on debating how best to teach the public about nutrition, the Agriculture Department on Tuesday will adopt as its primary educational device a pyramid that divides foods into five groups.
The Food Guide Pyramid will replace the venerable four food groups, which have been used to teach nutrition in schools since the 1950's.
Its publication will affect the way children learn about nutrition for years to come.


Welfare Reform Alone Won't Reduce Poverty
To the Editor:
"Welfare Reform Proves Sluggish" (editorial, April 4) pinpoints the weak commitment to welfare reform that has been shown by the states in response to the 1988 Family Support Act, which "promised to transform welfare into a program that provides education, training and jobs to the needy, rather than cash alone."
Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan's latest proposal, the work for welfare bill (S. 2303), would move the 1988 legislation in the right direction, but it would not markedly redefine how welfare operates or cure the problems of poverty any more successfully than the original act four years ago was able to do.


What Is 'Classroom Drill' In French?
AMERICANS are notoriously inept at foreign languages.
Well-designed computer programs can relieve some of the tedium of study and allow a learner to proceed at his own pace.
French Reading Lab I: 3 by Maupassant, from the Hyperglot Software Company of Knoxville, Tenn., is intended for beginning to intermediate students of French who also own, or have access to, a Macintosh computer.
The three stories are "La Parure" ("The Necklace"), "Garcon, un Bock!" ("Waiter, a Beer!") and "Le Papa de Simon" ("Simon's Dad").


How Medicare Scaled Fees by Geography; Doctorless Future
To the Editor:
Your April 12 front-page article about doctors' dropping Medicare patients shows the tip of an iceberg waiting to sink health care if Government policies are followed to their logical conclusion.
Indiscriminate slashing at health care costs and physician autonomy is driving physicians out of the profession, and will deter bright, caring people from entering it.
Becoming a physician requires more sacrifice than perhaps any other career.
To call myself a vascular surgeon, I had to do well in college, then spend the next 12 years working grueling hours, depriving myself of most of the joys of young adulthood and immersing myself in other people's worst misery.


Fratello Calls the Shots, With Few Surprises
To NBC's Mike Fratello, the first weekend of National Basketball Association playoff games produced no surprises.
"I expected Indiana-Boston to be close, and even though it's 2-0 Boston, Indiana could have won either game," he said.
"I thought Cleveland-Jersey would be 3-1 and Detroit-New York could go down to the last second."


Petrolia Journal; Town Amid Redwoods Gamely Fights Off Quake
The Post Office in this remote North Coast village burned to the ground and virtually every house was damaged in the earthquake Saturday and two powerful aftershocks Sunday.
But the mail was distributed today nevertheless, thanks to Jerry Carrasco, the enterprising postmaster.
Mr.
Carrasco set up shop this morning in an abandoned laundromat, brought a table from home as a sorting surface, nailed a rusty old "Post Office" sign to the door and began making tidy alphabetical piles.
By noon, many of the 350 townspeople had figured out where he was and came to claim mail and magazines, to commiserate and compare notes on how they withstood the trio of temblors of 6.3 to 6.9 on the Richter scale of ground motion.


Classical Music in Review
'Countess Maritza'  Fashion Institute of Technology 227 West 27th Street Through Sunday
The Village Light Opera Group's principal mission is to keep the Gilbert and Sullivan canon alive, but every now and then it turns its gaze to other parts of the operetta literature.
Its current production is a frothy work of Central European vintage, Imre Kalman's "Countess Maritza."


Sports of The Times; The Pistons Focus an Eye On Winning
IF the eyes are truly the windows of the soul, or at least the mind, then Gerald Wilkins of the Knicks should play basketball with his eyes shut.
"I saw in Wilkins's face that he was driving for the basket no matter," said Joe Dumars, the Piston guard, who had looked not at Wilkins's nose or forehead, but in his eyes, "so I tried to slide in front and make him take a difficult shot. That's about what happened."


Raymond Reisler, 84, Ex-Lawyer and Judge
Raymond Reisler, a former New York State Supeme Court judge and a past president of the Brooklyn Bar Association, died on Friday at New York Hospital.
He was 84 years old and lived in Neponsit, N.Y.
He died of a stroke, said his son, Raymond Jr.


Raymond Reisler, 84, Ex-Lawyer and Judge
Raymond Reisler, a former New York State Supeme Court judge and a past president of the Brooklyn Bar Association, died on Friday at New York Hospital.
He was 84 years old and lived in Neponsit, N.Y.
He died of a stroke, said his son, Raymond Jr.


Review/Ballet; New Aurora and Fairies In 'The Sleeping Beauty
Margaret Tracey was Princess Aurora on Sunday afternoon when the New York City Ballet offered "The Sleeping Beauty" at the New York State Theater.
Her performance epitomized some of the virtues and the problems of Peter Martins's version of this 19th-century classic.
Just as the action in his production speeds along, so Ms.
Tracey always moved brightly and sharply.
Her balances were secure in the Rose Adagio of the first act, yet she never created the impression that she was performing technical tricks.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-10  JOINING THE FISCAL MAJOR LEAGUE
Russia and other former Soviet republics were offered membership in the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank, a step that will aid the new market economies.
A1
Yegor T. Gaidar, the new face of Russia's free market.  A6  BIRTH OF A (SMALLER) NATION
Serbia and Montenegro created a truncated Yugoslavia that acknowledged the end of the Communist era and the secession of the remaining republics.
A1  SYRIA EASES TRAVEL BAN ON JEWS
Syria is dropping restrictions on travel for its 4,500 Jewish citizens in a policy shift that is expected to encourage most Syrian Jews to leave the country.
A1  GERMAN FOREIGN MINISTER QUITS
Without giving a reason, Germany's Foreign Minister, Hans-Dietrich Genscher, resigned but will remain active in Government.
A3  CEASE-FIRE IGNORED IN KABUL
Despite a cease-fire, an Afghan rebel coalition and a guerrilla group that opposes plans for an interim government continued their fight.
A10  ARISTIDE SEEKING SUPPORT
On a visit to New York, the deposed President of Haiti, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, rallied support for his country.
A10  BRITAIN ELECTS A SPEAKER
Britain's House of Commons elected a 62-year-old Yorkshire woman, Betty Boothroyd, as its 155th Speaker, making her the first woman ever to hold the office.
A6  PAN AM COURT CASE OPENS
Jurors heard opening arguments in a lawsuit seeking to hold Pan Am liable for failing to prevent the attack on Flight 103, which exploded over Lockerbie, Scotland.A5  STRIKE AT THE HEART OF GERMANY
Germany was immobilized by a sweeping strike that affected transportation, postal delivery and trash collection.
And the unrest was expected to grow.
A3  Chhong Khenis Journal: The annual miracle of Tonle Sap.
A4  National A12-20  ALL DESSERT FOR THE G.O.P.
The celebrities will fill four platforms.
The guests will number 4,000.
And when The President's Dinner ends, the Republican Party will have raised between $7 million and $8 million in a single dinner, probably the largest political fund-raising event in history.
A1  WHAT VOTERS SAY ABOUT MRS.
C.
Hillary Clinton has been all over the Pennsylvania news media promoting her husband's campaign, and many people of Beaver Falls see her as tough as nails, a good-to-have-her-there power behind a somewhat weak throne: not beloved, but respected.
A19
The text of a typical campaign speech by Edmund Brown.  A18
Jackson lobbied hard, briefly, for the No. 2 spot.  A20  MACY'S CHAIRMAN RESIGNS
The chairman and chief executive of Macy's, Edward S. Finkelstein, abruptly resigned.
He had presided over the 134-year-old retailing chain during the golden age of department stores, only to see the company wind up in bankruptcy court earlier this year.
A1  FRAUD ALLEGED AT HOUSE BANK
A special counsel investigating the House bank scandal said he may have evidence of a criminal "check kiting scheme" involving the lawmakers' checking accounts.
A15  CLEARING WAY FOR TIMBER SALES
The Bush Administration proposed limiting a rule that environmentalists have used to block logging on millions of acres of national forests.
A12  JUSTICES BACK ADMINISTRATION
At the request of the Bush Administration, The Supreme Court set aside a damage award to the Federal Government that could have undercut the Administration's ability to argue that the new civil rights law is not retroactive.
A17  GOOD-BYE, FOUR FOOD GROUPS
After a costly debate, Federal nutrition experts are replacing the symbol of four basic food groups with a five-group pyramid that emphasizes that Americans need to eat less fat.
A14  Petrolia Journal: Earthquakes damaged every house here.
A12  Metropolitan Digest, B1 MODEST BUDGET GROWTH OFFERED
Mayor Dinkins proposed a modest increase in the New York City budget that would be achieved through a gentle upturn in the economy, some new taxes and a series of cutbacks in some of the services that the city provides.
A1  CHANGING OPEN ADMISSIONS
After years of growing concern over faltering academic standards, the City University of New York signaled its sharpest change of direction since its open admissions policy in 1970 by approving a broad plan to tighten educational standards.
A1  Business Digest, D1  Science Times C1-11  Chemists' new tools: molecular see-saws found 40 years ago.
C1  Travel can be sickening; now scientists know why.
C1  Rare bird illuminates a bitter biological dilemma.
C1  The Doctor's World C3  Tropical forests: more valuable for medicine than other uses.
C4  Arts/Entertainment C13-18  Theater: "A Small Family Business." C13  Music: Van Morrison.
C13  20th-century works for piano and cello.
C13  Dance: Harlem troupe campaigns for black audiences.
C13  Fashion Page B7  The evolution of leather's gentler image.
Obituaries D24  Richard E. Gerstein; found a crucial Watergate link.
Milton Rosenstock, music director for theater and ballet.
John DeVries, lyricist, designer and illustrator.
Sports B8-14  COLLEGE GAMBLING GROWING
Law-enforcement officials suspect, and college administrators fear that the gambling uncovered at the University of Rhode Island is being duplicated on college campuses across the country.
A1  Baseball: Yanks top Rangers.
B9  Column: Berkow on the Knicks B9  Football: Jets' top pick multitalented.
B9  Hockey: Rangers go up, 3-2.
B9  Editorials/Op-Ed A22-23  Editorials A22  Fighting for choice.
Stop the Subcontinent bomb.
Uncle Pygmy pleads poverty.
Michael Weinstein: Plastic.
Letters A22  Russell Baker: Clinton's beau geste.
A23  A. M. Rosenthal: One thing missing.
A23  Wick Allison: The Democrats should adopt Perot.
A23  Ruth Clark: Put a lid on the exit poll.
A23  David A. Kaplan: Bush v.
Bush on abortion.
A23


TRANSACTIONS
Basketball
USA BASKETBALL -- Named Maryland coach Chris Weller coach of the USA Women's Select Team that will compete for the R. William Jones Cup in Taipei, Taiwan.
National Basketball Association
NBA -- Fined Golden State center Alton Lister $7,500; Seattle center Shawn Kemp $2,000; and Seattle guard Dana Barros $500 for an altercation involving a flagrant foul by Lister on Kemp in Saturday's game and fined Seattle guard Nate McMillan $4,000 for a flagrant foul against Sarunas Marciulionis in the same game.
United States Basketball League
MIAMI TROPICS -- Named John Lucas coach, Jim Price assistant coach and Jordan Bressler director of media relations.
NEW HAVEN SKYHAWKS -- Signed Jay Edwards, guard.


Review/Recital; Piano and Cello Babel to Confuse a New Century
The story of music in the 20th century is many stories, and at Sunday's afternoon and evening recitals for cello and piano at the Kathryn Bache Miller Theater, Joel Krosnick and Gilbert Kalish showed little interest in their various chronologies or in interconnecting coherence.
Indeed, these hugely challenging programs went out of their way to be incongruous.
History was not explained; eagerly pointed up was a Babel of languages and philosophies that will continue to confuse people long past the year 2000.


St. John's Close to Selection
The promotion of Brian Mahoney to head basketball coach at St.
John's could take place as early as tomorrow.
"I think we're getting down toward the end," Jack Kaiser, a university vice president and director of athletics, and a member of the search committee, said last night.


Fighting Is Heavy in Kabul, Which Awaits New Leaders
Heavy fighting continued around Kabul today as members of a provisional national government proclaimed in Pakistan struggled to reach the Afghan capital by an overland route.
Rockets landed across the city, and artillery and tanks fired from ridges in and around the city as a broad alliance of Muslim guerrillas and former Afghan Army soldiers battled a rebel faction loyal to Gulbuddin Hekmatyar, the hard-line fundamentalist leader of the Hezb-i-Islami, or Islamic Party.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Challenger; As the Primary Outlook Darkens, Brown Looks Beyond the Election
In a turning point in his six-month quest for the Presidency, Edmund G. Brown Jr. signaled today that he would emphasize building a people's movement that could last well beyond the November election rather than winning the Democratic nomination.
On a plaza outside Independence Hall, where he opened his third campaign for President in October, Mr.
Brown strongly suggested that he no longer expected to be the nominee.


Devils Find That Even Terreri Can Have a Bad Night
Changing goaltenders in the middle of a game usually brings inspiration and lights a spark for a team, even if it is behind by five goals.
It happened to the Devils last night at Madison Square Garden.
They scored four straight goals after replacing Chris Terreri with Martin Brodeur, the 19-year-old rookie, while trailing by 5-0.
But they came up short in an 8-5 loss.


Classical Music in Review
Kronos Quartet  Alice Tully Hall
The Kronos Quartet makes its living from the new, although in past years the new has not always been the substantial.
Striking about Saturday night's program was a consistent inspiration to go along with the novelty.
Throwaway flights of fancy were mostly absent.


DINKINS PROPOSES A MODEST GROWTH IN HIS BUDGET PLAN
Mayor David N. Dinkins yesterday proposed a modest growth in the New York City budget that would be achieved through a gentle upturn in the economy, some new taxes and substantial cuts in some city services.
The plan drew a positive response from fiscal monitors.
It was based on a projection of the city's economic future that is a bit more optimistic than in either of the Mayor's previous budgets.  [ Page B4. ]


Virgin Atlantic Sets New Fares
Virgin Atlantic Airways announced a new fare program today, hoping to attract business passengers who are trading down to economy class but want more room.


Civil Trial of Lockerbie Bombing Case Under Way
With relatives of those who died in the bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 crowding a Brooklyn courtroom, jurors heard opening arguments yesterday in the relatives' lawsuit to hold Pan Am liable for failing to prevent the attack.
Forty months after the explosion over Lockerbie, Scotland, that killed 259 people on a Boeing 747 bound to New York, and 11 people on the ground, there are still many questions about the terrorist attack that could be answered in the United States District Court over the coming weeks.


Motor Vehicle Inspectors and Hospital Workers Rally at State House in Trenton


Housing Bonds For Puerto Rico
The Puerto Rico Housing Bank and Finance Agency is offering $92.8 million in tax-exempt special-obligation refunding bonds through a group of underwriters led by Paine Webber Inc.


Uncle Pygmy Pleads Poverty
With shameful penury, the Bush Administration balks at humanitarian intervention in Somalia because it might cost the United States $7.5 million.
This would have been the U.S. share of an innovative proposal to send a battalion of 500 United Nations soldiers to protect relief workers trying to feed starving Somalis.
As it stands, the burden of monitoring a shaky truce falls on a far smaller blue-helmeted presence: 50 military observers, costing $1 million, of which the American share will be $303,800.
That's all the Security Council, bowing to U.S. pressure, saw fit to authorize last week.


Barely Alive, Newborn Boy Is Found in a Garbage Bin
A newborn boy, barely breathing, was found yesterday in a trash bin at the bottom of a garbage chute in a six-story apartment building in the Bronx, the police said.
The baby was apparently dropped down the chute in the impeccably maintained building in the Pelham section, where the trees along Pelham Parkway are budding and luminous with late spring and the police and residents say this sort of thing never happens.


Suffolk Legislators to Vote On County Building Deal
Strapped for cash, Suffolk County is hoping to get a quick infusion of funds by selling its most prominent government building to a newly created public trust, which would then lease it back to the county.
While such a deal may sound like a one-shot gimmick, most Democrats and Republicans, as well as municipal-bond rating experts, say they can support the concept, which has been used at the state and county level from New York to California.


Opinions on Hillary Clinton Vary, but Almost Everybody Has One


Treasury Issues Tumble in Price
Prices of Treasury securities fell sharply yesterday, and long-term bond yields moved to their highest levels of the year.
Trading volume was extremely light, which magnified the extent of the slide in prices.


Raymond Reisler, 84, Ex-Lawyer and Judge
Raymond Reisler, a former New York State Supeme Court judge and a past president of the Brooklyn Bar Association, died on Friday at New York Hospital.
He was 84 years old and lived in Neponsit, N.Y.
He died of a stroke, said his son, Raymond Jr.


Stowe Hausner, 69, Social-Work Expert
Stowe Whitman Hausner, a prominent authority on social work, died on Saturday at her home in Mount Kisco, N.Y.
She was 69 years old.
She died of cancer, her family said.


People
*
Jean M. Sharp was named president and principal at Hudson Healthcare Communications, New York, formerly Vargas &amp; Levy.
Ms.
Sharp succeeds Tom Vargas, who left to become executive vice president and group director at Sudler &amp; Hennessey, New York.
She was previously senior vice president and group account supervisor at Harrison, Star, Wiener &amp; Beitler, New York.


CUNY Adopts Broad Changes In Its Standards
After years of mounting concern over faltering academic standards, the City University of New York yesterday signaled its sharpest change of direction since its open admissions policy in 1970 by approving a broad plan to tighten educational requirements over the next decade.
The trustees of the nation's largest urban university, while reaffirming its commitment to accepting all New York City high school graduates without regard to their academic standing, voted unanimously to demand tough new curriculum standards that would place a heavy onus on the city's public high schools and their students, who make up the bulk of the student body.


Plastic From a Plant
Scientists say they have grown a high-quality plastic from a genetically modified plant, a step that may lead to crops of biodegradable plastic from potatoes or sugar beets.
Researchers at Michigan State University and James Madison University in Harrisonburg, Va., said they had altered the genes of a small weed of the mustard family, known as Arabidopsis, in the laboratory to produce the plastic PHB, polyhydroxybutyrate.
This plastic is similar to the petroleum-based polypropylene.


How Medicare Scaled Fees by Geography; Meanwhile, in Canada
To the Editor:
Our health system in Canada has been the subject of adverse criticism from politicians and those with vested interests, particularly in the United States.
Perhaps the view of a patient may clarify the situation.
Two weeks ago I was taken to a local hospital because of internal bleeding.
Within minutes I was being treated in the emergency department, and was admitted to the intensive-care ward within the hour.
I received seven bags of blood over the next three days and then moved to the regular ward.
There my stomach was endoscoped, I had a C.A.T. scan, X-rays and ultrasound scans confirming that I had cancer.


Giants Satisfied Progress Was Made
When the National Football League draft ended today, Tom Boisture, the Giants' year-round draftmaster, said he liked the 12 players the Giants had chosen.
Most team officials say that every year about their drafts.
But Boisture then said something few officials ever say.
He criticized the Giants' 1991 draft class, saying: "They haven't done anything yet. None of them helped us win last year."


The Evolution Of Leather's Gentler Image
Yves Saint Laurent showed a short, skinny smooth leather skirt in Paris a decade ago, and it became a mainstay of women's wardrobes throughout the world all during the 1980's.
Last year Karl Lagerfeld jazzed up his Chanel collection with zippered leather jackets based on the ones motorcyclists wear.
He showed them with day and evening clothes, and many women picked up his cue.


How Medicare Scaled Fees by Geography
To the Editor:
You report that many physicians are planning to cut back on services to elderly patients because of fee reductions in the Medicare fee schedule adopted this year (front page, April 12).
While there is no doubt that fees in areas like Manhattan and Miami will be cut, your implication that this is due to flaws in the geographic adjustment for differences in the costs of practice is not accurate.
I can say this as a co-author of the studies that derived the geographic adjusters for practice costs.
Any attempts to move Medicare away from a payment system based on the usual fees of physicians toward one based on reasonable variations in costs, across services and geographic areas, would necessarily lower unjustifiably high fees.
Justifiability here is defined by measured practice costs and policy maker objectives.
Before the fee schedule, Medicare fees in Manhattan were more than 50 percent above the national average -- the highest in the country.
From this base line, any approach to a national fee schedule would lead to a major price cut in Manhattan.


Knicks Need to Adjust To Pressure Situations
After losing their playoff opener to the Knicks, the Pistons responded.
Will the Knicks do the same?
That question will be answered tonight, when the Knicks and the Pistons play Game 3 of their three-of-five-game playoff series at the Palace of Auburn Hills.
With Sunday's dramatic 89-88 victory, Detroit evened the series and took the home-court advantage from the Knicks.
Now the Knicks must win either tonight or Friday in Michigan to get the series back to New York.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Week; Lack of Party Discipline Makes Contest Untidy
Back in the Pleistocene era of American politics, which ended about the same time the Vietnam War heated up, there was something called party discipline.
It gave a phrase to the language: either "toe the party line," they said, or get in trouble with its elders.
With the popular rebellion against the fighting in Vietnam and the attendant changes in social values, insurgency became a more or less permanent political condition, especially in the Democratic Party.
Big-city bosses and ward heelers passed from the scene.
Congressional and legislative leaders lost their clout.
Smoke-filled rooms were replaced by primary elections.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Voters; A Spouse Who Grabs The Stage
Pick up the newspapers in western Pennsylvania, turn on the TV news, and there big as life is Hillary Clinton, come to sell her husband and herself to the voters in Tuesday's primary.
She is by turns candidate and candidate's wife, one minute railing against President Bush in a speech at a Democratic rally, the next donning an apron to do some silk-screening at a children's museum in Pittsburgh.
Small wonder, then, that here in the Beaver Valley, northwest of Pittsburgh, the talk on the eve of Election Day is at times as much about the Clinton named Hillary as the one named Bill.


Rent Regulations Block Water-Saving Schemes
To the Editor:
Stiffer water taxes, Thomas O'Brien contends (letter, April 2), are guaranteed to help conserve water.
True, but not in New York City, where two-thirds of all households live in multiple dwellings, not directly responsible for the cost of their water.
Because New York's rent regulations do not permit a pass-through of water costs to the end user, there is no incentive to conserve.
To make matters worse, the city's Water Board has endorsed Mr.
O'Brien's contention and mandated installation of a single water meter in each multifamily building.


Fantasy Baseball's Dream Teams
WARNING: This column is about obsession.
It is also about using the personal computer to pursue a late-night hobby so addictive (and so stupid, some would say) that thousands of otherwise normal people are willing to risk friendships, jobs and even marriages to pursue it.
The hobby is fantasy baseball on the Prodigy national computer network.


Myron S. Falk Jr., 85, An Investment Banker
Myron S. (Johnny) Falk Jr., an investment banker, philanthropist and prominent collector of Asian art, died on Sunday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 85 years old.
He died of cancer, his family said.


Chairman of Macy In Its Boom and Bust Is Quitting His Posts
Edward S. Finkelstein, the last of the merchants who presided over the golden age of department stores only to see his chain wind up in bankruptcy court, resigned abruptly yesterday as chairman and chief executive of R. H. Macy &amp; Company.
The end of his 43-year tenure at the company closed a sad and calamitous chapter in the story of the 134-year-old retailer.


Patterns
Fashionable Molecules
Close your eyes and breathe deeply.
Think pretty thoughts.
And have your credit card ready.
Origins, a new freestanding cosmetics store of Estee Lauder, officially opened for business yesterday at 402 West Broadway, at the corner of Spring Street.
The shop features cosmetics for both "inner and outer beauty," in a setting with lots of marble, no tropical hardwoods.
It represents a move by a major cosmetics company outside the traditional channels of retail sales, namely department stores, whose main-floor selling areas have become vaporized battlegrounds for consumer dollars.


Jockey Suspended
Jockey RICHARD MIGLIORE was suspended for seven days by Aqueduct stewards for "careless riding" aboard A.M.
Swinger in the first race Sunday.
The suspension, announced yesterday, runs from May 1-7. (AP)


Creighton Settles Suit
Creighton University said yesterday it has settled a lawsuit filed by a former basketball player who claims the school exploited his athletic talents but failed to educate him.
The Creighton general counsel, GREGORY JAHN, said the university admits no liability in the $35,000 settlement with KEVIN ROSS.


More Bleak Reports From Oil Companies
Two big oil companies, ARCO and Unocal, reported steep profit declines today, and Phillips Petroleum said it had lost $114 million.
The reports provided further evidence of a uniformly bleak first quarter for the oil industry.
ARCO's net income declined by 48.7 percent, while the Unocal Corporation's plunged by 78.6 percent.


Open Positions on Short Sales Up 5.5% on Nasdaq
The number of shares sold short and not yet covered rose 5.5 percent on the Nasdaq, to 374.3 million, for the monthlong period ended in mid-April.
This is the highest level since the National Association of Securities Dealers began tracking the data in 1986, exceeding the previous record of 369.3 million shares in November.
The statistic, closely watched because it reflects the activities of those traders who bet against stocks they believe are overvalued, includes trades conducted in the month up to April 15 and settled as of April 22.


Papers Losing Readers Since Strike at The News
A year after the strike at The Daily News, readership of the New York daily newspapers is 325,000 less on weekdays and 275,000 less on Sundays than it was before the strike, circulation figures released yesterday show.
Those figures suggest that many former Daily News readers, rather than buying another newspaper or resuming purchase of The News, have stopped reading daily newspapers.
According to the Audit Bureau of Circulations, which monitors newspaper circulation, the four dailies -- The News, The New York Post, Newsday and The New York Times -- reported combined daily circulation of 3,220,456 for the six months ending March 31.
The News, Newsday and The Times reported 3,604,607 Sunday circulation.
The Post has no Sunday editions.


Patent Ruling Won by Barr
A Federal judge in Manhattan yesterday upheld a challenge by Barr Laboratories Inc. to the patent held by ICI Pharmaceuticals Group on an important anti-cancer drug, Nolvadex.
Barr, in Pomona, N.Y., said it planned to start making a low-priced version of Nolvadex this year.
The drug, which is prescribed for breast-cancer patients, had $420 million in 1991 sales, including $210 million in the United States.


Russian-Language Edition Of The Times Begins Today
The New York Times today introduces its first foreign-language edition, a biweekly paper in Russian called The New York Times News in Review.
Arthur Sulzberger Jr., publisher of The Times, announced arrangements for the publication yesterday at a news conference at The Times.
It is a joint venture with The Moscow News, a weekly paper that emerged in the mid-1980's as one of Russia's first independent journalistic voices.


Business and Health; When Treatment And Costs Collide
INSURERS, employers and medical treatment review companies are finding that taking on greater responsibility for medical-care decisions has exposed them to a growing number of lawsuits.
At the heart of such "managed-care" efforts are decisions, once the sole province of doctors, to deny or shorten hospital stays.
The goal is to hold down costs without compromising a patient's health.
But when a patient is harmed or dies, insurers may be required to prove that they acted properly, many health-care lawyers say.


CHRONICLE
It has been a banner year for LORNE MICHAELS, the executive producer of "Saturday Night Live." His wife, ALICE MICHAELS, gave birth on April 3 to a 10-pound-3-ounce son; "Wayne's World," the film he produced, has grossed $100 million; "Saturday Night Live" got the highest ratings in its history this season, and now BRUCE SPRINGSTEEN will make his network television debut on the show.
The Boss, as Mr.
Springsteen is known, will do three numbers on May 9.
"We are thrilled," Mr.
Michaels said yesterday.
"We have been after him ever since I saw him at the Bottom Line in 1974. He has always had a policy of no TV."


Texas Moves To Eliminate Gluts in Gas
In a significant policy shift, Texas regulators today gave natural-gas drillers more flexibility to determine the amount of gas they sell each month, ending a decades-old system that fixed production at levels requested by pipeline companies.
The 3-to-0 vote was praised by independent producers.
Many hoped the revisions would prevent recurring gas gluts like those that have depressed prices and raised producers' debt burdens in recent winters.
Fear Price Fixing


Merrill Official Joins Shearson
Richard B. Stewart Jr. jumped from Merrill Lynch to Shearson Lehman Brothers yesterday, becoming the firm's new chief financial officer and vice chairman.
Mr.
Stewart, 49 years old, replaces Ronald Yoo, who was the interim chief financial officer.
Mr.
Yoo will continue as a vice chairman and chief administrative officer of Shearson, which is American Express's Wall Street subsidiary and the country's second-largest retail brokerage house.


Newest Concern for Colleges: Increase in Sports Gambling
At first glance, the University of Rhode Island seems like any other campus, winding down another school year.
But an unmarked squad car and whispers about investigators on campus are indications that a certain order here has been disrupted.
Beginning with a series of arrests last month, Rhode Island State Police exposed what they describe as a loosely organized but efficient on-campus gambling ring that operated between the University of Rhode Island and Bryant College, a private business school in nearby Smithfield.
The case is currently being heard by a grand jury, and indictments could be handed up before the end of May, when the school year ends.


Coup in Peru a Blow to Its Copper
Democracy may not be the only victim of the upheaval in Peru.
About six months ago, Charles G. Preble, the president of Peru's largest private company, announced a $300 million investment in new projects -- by far the largest foreign investment in years in Peru -- and said he was considering spending an additional $150 million.


Immunomedics President Is Hired by U.S. Bioscience
Looking ahead with confidence, even after four months of disfavor on Wall Street, U.S.
Bioscience Inc. yesterday announced the appointment of Russell C. McLauchlan, a seasoned pharmaceutical executive, as president and chief operating officer.
Dr.
Philip S. Schein, chief executive of the drug development company, said Mr.
McLauchlan would direct sales, marketing, business alliances and manufacturing "as we move closer to becoming an integrated pharmaceutical company."


Albany Leaders Close to Deal On Revamping Election Laws
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and legislative leaders neared agreement today on measures to make it easier for candidates to get on the ballot and for people to vote, changes long sought by critics who say New York's complex election laws unfairly protect incumbents and punish challengers.
But the leader of the Republican-controlled State Senate, Ralph J. Marino, declined to confirm the contents of a detailed memorandum that the Cuomo administration today characterized as an accord on the election-law changes.
Some Democratic lawmakers said he appeared to be holding out for assurances from Mr.
Cuomo that the Governor would not veto the Legislature's once-a-decade plan for redrawing legislative districts.


Charles H. Kline, 73, Chemical Consultant
Dr.
Charles Howard Kline, an international consultant to manufacturers of chemicals and related products, died on Thursday at his home in Kinnelon, N.J.
He was 73 years old.
He died of prostate cancer, his family said.


Stop the Subcontinent's Bomb
Russia has now agreed to a welcome "pause" in its lucrative sales of missile technology to India.
But a pause is only a temporary solution, and missiles are only part of a deeper problem: India's headlong rush to acquire nuclear arms.
Both India and Pakistan have well-advanced nuclear programs.
A standstill agreement between them, policed by mutual inspections, could halt this perilous race.
Pakistan says it's amenable if India accepts.
India has shown little interest.
An unrelenting international embargo on investment, aid and trade, especially in arms and technology, could force agreement.


Raymond Reisler, 84, Ex-Lawyer and Judge
Raymond Reisler, a former New York State Supeme Court judge and a past president of the Brooklyn Bar Association, died on Friday at New York Hospital.
He was 84 years old and lived in Neponsit, N.Y.
He died of a stroke, said his son, Raymond Jr.


A Resignation Prompts A Shake-Up at Merrill
Merrill Lynch &amp; Company juggled its senior management yesterday in response to the resignation of Roger M. Vasey as executive vice president for the debt markets group.
Mr.
Vasey, 56, regarded on Wall Street as one of Merrill's most able and powerful managers, said yesterday that he would step down from his trading and management responsibilities by the end of this year.
He will continue at Merrill as a senior advisor, maintaining ties with selected clients and advising Merrill's president and chief operating officer, Daniel P. Tully, who on Friday will also add the title chief executive.


Lowe Unit Concentrates On Cable
LOWE &amp; PARTNERS has established a separate agency within the agency devoted to the advertising and marketing of cable television networks.
The move underscores the growing importance of such networks as advertisers themselves, not just as carriers for others' ads.
The new unit, the Lowe Cable Group, specializes in creating both consumer and trade campaigns -- aimed at viewers, advertisers and the operators of cable systems -- for those networks.
Marcia Norcia, who is 37 years old and was formerly a vice president and account supervisor at Ahern &amp; Heussner in New York, has been appointed executive vice president and managing director.


Coup in Peru a Blow to Its Copper
Democracy may not be the only victim of the upheaval in Peru.
About six months ago, Charles G. Preble, the president of Peru's largest private company, announced a $300 million investment in new projects -- by far the largest foreign investment in years in Peru -- and said he was considering spending an additional $150 million.


Tarzan Meets Vogue (in Court)
It's a jungle out there.
Tarzan knew it. Now Vogue magazine does.


Fighting, Peaceably, for Choice
One wet morning last week, a crowd yelling "Baby killers!" and brandishing brutal photographs stood in the road outside a Buffalo abortion clinic.
Directly in front of the clinic stood row upon row of pro-choice advocates carrying signs that read "Keep Abortion Legal" and chanting "Hey hey! Ho ho! We stopped O.R. in Buff-a-lo!" Between the two lines stood raincoated policemen.
For a month last summer, Operation Rescue -- the "O.R." of the chant -- hobbled Wichita, Kan., as a way of furthering its goal, preventing women from exercising their constitutionally protected right to abortion.
They clogged sidewalks, blocked clinic doorways, threw themselves under cars and police horses.


British Commons Elects Woman as Its Speaker
Britain's venerable House of Commons elected a 62-year-old Yorkshire woman, Betty Boothroyd, as its 155th Speaker today, making her the first woman ever to hold the office.
Miss Boothroyd, a member of the opposition Labor Party, is one of 60 women in the 651-member House of Commons that was elected on April 9.
By 372 votes to 238, she defeated a Conservative, the former Northern Ireland Minister, Peter Brooke, the only other candidate.


Books of The Times; How 5 Strangers Reconfigure a Narrator's Life
The Blindfold  By Siri Hustvedt  221 pages. Poseidon Press. $20.
The New York City depicted in Siri Hustvedt's disturbing first novel is a sinister, predatory place where identities can easily be misplaced, where chance encounters with strangers can permanently alter the shape of one's life.
Midtown, with its dour office buildings and its emphasis on commerce, does not exist for Ms.
Hustvedt's characters; nor do the family neighborhoods of the Upper East and West Sides.
Rather, Ms.
Hustvedt's people commute exclusively between the hectic, grungy streets near Columbia University and the swank bars, galleries and lofts of SoHo.


Classical Music in Review
Bach-Schutz Festival  St. Paul's Chapel Columbia University
A joint meeting of the American Bach and the American Schutz Societies at Columbia University over the weekend afforded the occasion for a Bach-Schutz Festival.
The centerpiece was itself a joint affair: a concert on Saturday evening by the chorus Pomerium Musices and the period-instrument ensemble Artek.


Quotation of the Day
"I don't blame her for anything. An accident is an accident. I'm not looking to blame, but I'm looking for something to help me answer the question why? Maybe someone 74 years old shouldn't be driving, but if I were 74, I would certainly want my right to drive." -- MICHAEL FONSECA, whose son, Bryant, died of injuries suffered when a woman drove her car into Washington Square Park.  [ B3:6. ]


Best of Bench Bunch? It's Still Schrempf
DETLEF SCHREMPF, the versatile Indiana Pacers forward, was named yesterday as the winner of the National Basketball Association's Sixth Man Award for the second season in a row.
Schrempf averaged 17.3 points, 9.6 rebounds and 3.9 assists per game during the regular season and was a key factor in the late-season drive that got the Pacers into the playoffs for a third straight year.
However, he was unable to keep the Pacers from being swept in the first round of the playoffs by the Boston Celtics.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: On the Sidelines; Jackson Rushes to Play Down His Demand for Ticket Spot
The Rev.
Jesse Jackson reinserted himself into the Democratic Presidential campaign today, opening what seemed to be an aggressive lobbying campaign for the Vice Presidential slot.
By day's end, however, Mr.
Jackson backed off, saying he did not intend to threaten the party or its presumed nominee, Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas, but would, of course, be honored to serve as running mate.


Q&amp;A
Mighty Mice
Q.
How much mouse power equals one horsepower?
A.
The formal definition of horsepower is the unit for measuring the power of motors or engines, equal to a rate of 33,000 footpounds per minute.
A footpound, in turn, is the force required to raise one pound at the rate of one foot per minute.


Marsupials May Have Faced Australian Rivals With Teeth
THANKS to a single tooth found in Queensland, Australia, there may be an end to kicking sand in the faces of kangaroos, koala bears or any of the other pouch-bearing animals that might appear to be the wimps of the mammal world.
Marsupials have long been considered by biologists to be quaint but hapless creatures that rule the isolated land mass down under only because they found themselves alone there without their more competitive brethren, the placental mammals.


Review/Theater; Hypocrisy and Dissent In an Unenlightened Age
In "Ambrosio," Romulus Linney probes deeply into the nature of heresy and the power of love, both spiritual and temporal.
Always a rapt student of history, he uses a seismic event in the past, the Spanish Inquisition, as a sounding board for his provocative thoughts on what drives people to irrational acts and crimes of passion.
At the same time, the playwright never ignores his role as storyteller.
"Ambrosio," the final production in the first season of the Signature Theater Company, validates the premise behind the formation of the troupe.
In the course of a single year, this enterprising company has devoted itself entirely to plays by Mr.
Linney: revivals, revisions, the New York premiere of "A Woman Without a Name" and now a new play that ranks with the author's most challenging dramatic works.


INSIDE
Perot Target: New York
The Perot Presidential campaign targeted New York for an intense ballot drive, and Albany came closer to election-law changes that could make his bid easier.
Pages B1 and B2.
Fraud at House Bank Alleged
A special counsel said he might have proof of a "check-kiting scheme" at the House bank.
Page A15.
Afghan Cease-Fire Fails
A cease-fire did not bring an end to the violence among rebel factions in Afghanistan's capital.
Page A10.
Bonn Foreign Minister Quits
After 18 years in office, Hans-Dietrich Genscher is stepping down, but not out of politics.
Page A3.


Perseverance Triumphs and a Couple Bring a Child Home
On Wednesday the rabbi sent roses.
The bishop offered a Mass of thanksgiving.
And almost everyone who comes to the brown brick house on Grand Street a block from the windswept Hudson River brings a toy.
Finally, a child has come to Theresa and Kenneth Orzechowski.
After almost 24 years of trying to have children, five miscarriages, and then arranging to adopt a disabled 4-year-old girl last year, only to be told that they were the wrong religion, the couple have realized their dream.


Chevron's Profits Tumbled By 45.4% in First Quarter
The Chevron Corporation said today that its earnings fell 45.4 percent in the first quarter, with each of its operations posting lower results.
Like virtually all oil giants, Chevron's earnings suffered in the quarter because of lower prices for crude oil and natural gas, and weak demand for chemicals and refined products.
Net income was $304 million, or 88 cents a share, compared with $557 million, or $1.59 a share, in the period a year ago.
Revenues declined 10.2 percent, to $9.7 billion from $10.8 billion.


Rebels' Leader Arrives in Kabul And Forms an Islamic Republic
The leader of a broad coalition of Afghan Islamic groups arrived in Kabul today and assumed power from the former Government.
He was greeted by restrained public jubilation, celebratory gunfire from the guerrillas controlling the capital and shouts of "God is great!"
Sibgatullah Mojadedi, who was elected last week to head a 50-member ruling council of Islamic guerrillas, religious leaders and intellectuals, announced the creation of an Islamic republic and declared a general amnesty for all Afghans, excluding the former President, Najibullah, who has taken sanctuary in a United Nations building here.


Treasury Notes and Bonds Rise Positive Reaction
Credit market participants reacted positively to a batch of statistics that painted a mixed picture about the economy yesterday, and prices of Treasury notes and bonds moved higher, pushing rates down.
The 2 percent rise in first-quarter gross domestic product, the biggest three-month increase in three years, was greeted with relief by the bond market.
The Federal Reserve Board chairman, Alan Greenspan, projected that sort of growth earlier this month, but many market participants feared the number would in fact be higher and might prompt a resurgence of inflation.


Shift Made, Macy Now Needs a Plan
With the resignation on Monday of Edward S. Finkelstein as chairman and chief executive of R. H. Macy &amp; Company, the company can settle down to the technical, somewhat dull task of getting itself out of the red and into the black.
The most immediate chore is the formulation of a five-year business plan outlining how the company intends to operate while under bankruptcy protection.


Perseverance Triumphs and a Couple Bring a Child Home
On Wednesday the rabbi sent roses.
The bishop offered a Mass of thanksgiving.
And almost everyone who comes to the brown brick house on Grand Street a block from the windswept Hudson River brings a toy.
Finally, a child has come to Theresa and Kenneth Orzechowski.
After almost 24 years of trying to have children, five miscarriages, and then arranging to adopt a disabled 4-year-old girl last year, only to be told that they were the wrong religion, the couple have realized their dream.


Wages Post 0.9% Gain, Same as in Prior Period
Pay and benefits for American workers rose nine-tenths of 1 percent in the first quarter, the same gain as in the previous quarter, the Labor Department said today, indicating employers face little pressure to raise wages.
The department also reported that union contracts settled in the first quarter gave workers a 3 percent average annual raise over the life of the contract.
That was down from previous raises.


Liberian Guerrilla's Role Is Exaggerated
To the Editor:
"In Liberia's Illusory Peace, Rebel Leader Rules Empire of His Own Design," your April 14 news article on Charles Taylor, might have been valid six months ago, but recent events, and my own observations in a February trip to Monrovia, indicate that the reality is different.
Monrovia, rather than a city on the verge of collapse, appears poised for reconstruction.
Pharmacies, food, auto supply and home furnishing stores offer a range of goods, while many restaurants offer full menus and excellent food at reasonable prices.
Yes, Monrovia's infrastructure is inadequate.
But the water shortage is a function of the dry season, and power outages occurred even in pre-civil war days.
I flew in and out of Monrovia's Spriggs-Payne Airport, the only functioning international field in Liberia, controlled by the interim government, not Mr.
Taylor.
The Port of Monrovia is open for business and thriving.


Found Near Death, Infant Is Now Healthier
A day after being discarded down the chute of a Bronx apartment house and discovered near death in a garbage bin, a newborn infant was given a good prognosis yesterday by doctors, who said he had improved significantly.
The baby, named Jake by a resident at Jacobi Hospital, where he was taken Monday morning, lay comfortably yesterday afternoon, wearing a disposable diaper fastened with tapes decorated with Mickey Mouse figures, warmed by an overhead heating lamp and sucking a pacifier as doctors, nurses and well-wishers stopped by the neonatal intensive care unit to see how he was doing.


Corrections
A picture caption in Business Day on Monday with an article about a resurgence in travel advertising in magazines misidentified the founder of European Travel &amp; Life.
He is Mark Inabnit.


Corrections
A brief article in Business Day yesterday about a bond issue by Arlington, Tex., misidentified the lead underwriter of the offering.
It is Dean Witter Reynolds.


Ex-49er Is Cleared on Rape Charges
GREG COX, a defensive back released by the San Francisco 49ers the day after rape charges were filed against him last fall, has been acquitted by a Monterey (Calif.) County Superior Court jury.
"I'm glad it's over," a tearful Cox said after hearing the verdict Monday.
"I'm glad justice was done."
The jury deliberated over parts of two days before acquitting Cox of two rape counts and one of forcible oral copulation.
Several jurors talking to reporters afterward said they voted to acquit Cox because of contradictory and inconsistent trial evidence.
The alleged victim said she was assaulted in a Carmel Valley, Calif., home last Sept. 10 after a night of partying with Cox and three of his friends.


S.E.C. Backs More Records on Bond Sales
Breaking ranks with both the Bush Administration and the Federal Reserve Board, the Securities and Exchange Commission endorsed legislation today that would make it easier for regulators to monitor the $2 trillion government securities market by requiring securities dealers to keep more thorough records.
Richard C. Breeden, the commission's chairman, told a House panel that any new legislation on the government securities market should require better record-keeping by dealers.
He said such a measure would deter market abuses and make it much easier to prosecute them.


Only Nature Makes Truffles Better Than A Chocolatier's
TO figure out when holidays and special occasions are coming up, don't bother with a calendar.
Just look at chocolate sales.
Chocolates make up about 70 percent of the candy sold on holidays.
The big three are Easter, Valentine's Day and Mother's Day (May 10 this year).
The Chocolate Manufacturers Association of America estimates that candy sales for Mother's Day this year will total $323 million, a 4 percent increase over 1991.
Candy sales for the other two holidays rose about 2 percent.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  'NO-SHOW' JOBS AT LINCOLN HOSPITAL
An assistant mental health commissioner has resigned amid allegations that he hired three acquaintances, including the pastor of his Long Island church, for "no-show" jobs at Lincoln Hospital in the Bronx.
The assistant commissioner, Ivan Cortes, had been an official at the hospital in 1989, when he hired the men to renovate offices for a drug rehabilitation program.
The men were paid $123,000, but the work was never done, authorities said.
B3.
SEEKING HELP FOR THE HOMELESS
After missing a self-imposed deadline to respond to proposals to overhaul the city's troubled shelter system, the Dinkins administration held a forum where many speakers called on the city to stop studying the problem and act.
B3.
BROOKLYN BATTLES CITY HALL


New Positions At Okidata
Okidata, a division of Oki America Inc., promoted two executives yesterday to run the rapidly growing company, best known for its computer printers.
Bernard Herman was named to the new post of chairman and will continue as chief executive.
Dennis P. Flanagan replaced him as president and also gained the new title of chief operating officer.
Mr.
Flanagan was executive vice president for sales, marketing and customer service.


What's Next? Why, Pea Shoots, Of Course
PEA shoots are the latest toy for some New York chefs.
"Chefs are always looking for something new to play around with, and pea shoots have intrigued a number of them," said Stefan Kopf, a partner in Four Winds, a specialty-food wholesaler in Manhattan.
Like first graders who all want Ninja Turtle lunch boxes, chefs all over town are suddenly using pea shoots to dress up their dinner plates.
The pretty little leaves, curling tendrils, fresh green color and delicate yet distinctly pealike flavor make them the perfect accessory for that new spring menu.


For Every Post-Quake Shudder, a Laid-Back Shrug
The recent series of strong earthquakes at both the north and south ends of the state has stirred a bad case of jitters in some Californians and inspired in others the sort of insouciance that keeps millions of people living atop an unstable fault line that periodically shifts and shudders.
The two groups are as distinct as right-handers and left-handers, as Type A personalities and their Type B opposites.
In the past week, the worriers have checked the batteries in their transistor radios, restocked their refrigerators with bottled water and laid out evacuation clothes next to their beds.
Their more lackadaisical counterparts instead shrug and say that they cannot understand why earthquakes inspire such fear and trembling when hurricanes and tornadoes cut just as deadly a path.


U.P.I. Bankruptcy Judge Sets Auction for May 12
United Press International, the bankrupt news service that has survived years of financial turmoil, is to be sold at auction on May 12, a Federal bankruptcy judge ordered yesterday.
But both U.P.I.'s management and the company's creditors said that the forced sale would probably mean new life rather than death for the news agency, though it may not endure in its present form.


House Republicans Urging Surrender of Bank Records
Congressional Republicans said today that they wanted the House to turn over all bank records subpoenaed by the Justice Department as the lawmakers, fearing the political repercussions of resistance, rebelled against their leader.
The Republicans' demand puts them in direct conflict with the Democratic leadership, which has indicated that it may resist the subpoenas.
It also represents a reversal by Representative Robert H. Michel, the House Republican leader, who said Monday that he favored narrowing the scope of the subpoenas.


Review/Film; Ukrainian Creates Chernobyl Metaphor
"Raspad," the Russian-language film opening today at the Eighth Street Playhouse, is a big, sprawling, awkward but nearly always riveting attempt to re-create the 1986 nuclear disaster at Chernobyl and to see it as a metaphor for the collapse of moral values in the social-political system that produced it.
Raspad is Russian for collapse or deterioration.
Mikhail Belikov, the film's Ukrainian director, got more metaphor for his rubles than he originally intended.
The film was made with Government approval in 1989-90, before the actual breakup of the Soviet Union.
Because "Raspad" is both about big events and a result of them, it has an interest that goes well beyond its sometimes impressive cinematic dimensions.


Yearning for Fresh Faces Shows in Tiny Turnout and Newcomer's Victory
Pennsylvania voters plowed no new political ground today, but they emphatically confirmed two of the salient trends of American politics this year: the tepid reaction of the electorate to the Presidential candidates of both major parties and the surge of women toward broader political influence.
The Presidential news was the more predictable.
Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas, who has had no effective opposition since he swept to victory in the tumultuous New York primary three weeks ago, took more than half the votes in this delegate-rich state.
His nomination seems more likely than ever.


Xoma Fills Dual Post Of President and Chief
The Xoma Corporation, a biotechnology company based in Berkeley, Calif., named John L. Castello president and chief executive yesterday.
Mr.
Castello is the former president and chief operating officer of the Ares Serono Group, a Swiss pharmaceutical company with twin headquarters, in Geneva and Boston.
Mr.
Castello, 56 years sold, succeeds Steven C. Mendell, 50, who will continue as chairman.
Mr.
Mendell said that he had asked the company's board last year to find a seasoned pharmaceutical executive to manage Xoma as its first products near the market.


University's Degree Comes With a Heavy Dose of Meditation (and Skepticism)
The plains are misty with chill as first light slips over the Patanjali Golden Dome of Pure Knowledge.
A man in a hooded sweatshirt shakes a bell to call in meditators before the doors close.
A new day in the search for Heaven on Earth has begun here on the campus of Maharishi International University, 45 miles west of the Mississippi River.
At a time when the real world, with all its messy disputes, increasingly intrudes on the isolation of college campuses, here is an accredited university with grant-winning faculty members and competitive students who mix daily transcendental meditation in the dome with serious academic studies, striving to create their own new world.


Ethicists Debate New Definition of Death
DR.
JOHN FLETCHER, an ethicist at the University of Virginia, has a highly unusual clause in his living will.
If he lapses into a persistent vegetative state and permanently loses his ability to use his mind, he wants his organs donated to help others.
Dr.
Fletcher said he did not expect doctors to act on this directive -- yet.
He acknowledges that society is not yet ready to declare people in persistent vegetative states dead.
But he and other ethicists believe that the idea should be considered.
They suggest that it should allow these patients to be organ donors if they request it in writing ahead of time.


National Gallery Appoints Director To Succeed Brown
Earl A. Powell 3d, the director of the Los Angeles County Museum of Art, has been named to succeed J. Carter Brown as the director of the National Gallery of Art in Washington.
Mr.
Powell, who is 48 years old, will become the fourth director in the gallery's 51-year history.
Mr.
Brown will be the gallery's director emeritus.
"I'm looking forward to building on the excellence the gallery has achieved," Mr.
Powell said in a telephone interview yesterday.


Browning Is Absent To Savor His Victory
Reds 3, Pirates 2
CINCINNATI, April 28 (AP) -- Tom Browning was ejected and then got the victory tonight as the Cincinnati Reds rallied for two sixth-inning runs off Doug Drabek and beat the Pittsburgh Pirates, 3-2.
Browning (3-1) gave up just three hits in six innings, but his temper knocked him out of the game in the middle of the inning with the Reds trailing by 2-1.
He went nose to nose with Tom Hallion, the home-plate umpire, in an argument over ball-and-strike calls, bumped the umpire's cap and was ejected.
Browning, who celebrated his 32d birthday today, capped the evening by flinging two boxes onto the field before heading for the clubhouse.


Arazi Emerges Into View and Tests the Track
On the race track where Princess Margaret once walked in stately steps across a red carpet and where Gen.
H.
Norman Schwarzkopf strode to rising ovations, heads turned and cameras rolled and clockers gaped at 8:30 this morning.
From Barn 45 on the backstretch, the mythical and almost mystical chestnut colt, the 2-year-old champion of Europe last year, the great Arazi came out of quarantine and took his first steps on the dirt course at old Churchill Downs.
At least, they were his first steps there since he dazzled the thoroughbred world last fall by sweeping past 13 other colts and winning the Breeders' Cup Juvenile with so much command that he became the instant favorite for the 118th Kentucky Derby.


Likud Is Set Back by a Report of Waste and Graft
In what has proved thus far to be the spring of its discontent, the dominant Likud Party suffered a new setback today after an official report accused the Government of mismanagement, waste, unethical behavior and corruption.
It seemed almost inevitable that the scathing portrait of wrongdoing and ineptitude would be used against Likud by the opposition Labor Party in national elections scheduled for June 23.


Lawmakers Say Drug Labels Are Dangerously Inadequate
Inadequate or hard-to-read warning labels on common nonprescription drugs mask potential adverse effects and can endanger consumers, particularly the elderly, members of Congress charged today.
At a joint hearing of two Congressional subcommittees concerned with health matters, lawmakers said the Food and Drug Administration relied too much on industry to monitor the safety of over-the-counter drugs and charged that the agency had been slow in completing safety and effectiveness studies of many common drugs.


BASKETBALL: Knicks Get Series Edge While Nets Stay Alive; A Late Rally Does the Trick
The Nets are alive and well and still in the playoffs after coming from behind to erase a 10-point fourth-quarter deficit in Byrne Meadowlands Arena tonight to beat the Cleveland Cavaliers, 109-104.
Chris Morris and Derrick Coleman, the two players who had led mutinies against Nets Coach Bill Fitch in the last week of the regular season by refusing to go back into games, led the New Jersey charge tonight.


Berbick Sentencing Delayed Again
The sentencing of the former heavyweight champion, TREVOR BERBICK, on a rape conviction was delayed for a second time yesterday in Miami because the fighter is undergoing another psychiatric evaluation.
Circuit Judge THOMAS WILSON postponed sentencing earlier this month after Berbick made a rambling, 45-minute courtroom speech proclaiming his innocence.


Lifetime Telephone Numbers That Ring Anywhere You Go
Tired of telephone tag?
People who want to be reached anywhere they go -- at home, the office, a friend's residence or at a vacation house -- can sign up for a single telephone number under a service to begin in June that A.T.&amp; T. announced yesterday.
The service, the first of its kind, is part of the emerging technology for personal communications networks that could someday revolutionize how people use telephones.


Crafty Conner Gets His Breeze and Rides It to Victory
A lucky spate of weather and a skipper who refuses to cave in under pressure today resulted in another unexpected victory in the America's Cup defense finals.
Dennis Conner and his Stars &amp; Stripes team defeated Bill Koch's America [ 3 ]  by 1 minute 47 seconds in a 5-to-9-knot westerly breeze.
The winds were relatively light for cup racing, a bonus for the Conner team.
As the older of the two opponents, Stars &amp; Stripes has rallied from a 1-4 deficit riding that kind of breeze.
The victory today moved Conner into a 4-4 tie with Koch in the 7-of-13-race defense finals.


Dispute Over Council Member Turns Meeting Into Shouting Match


9 Hurt in Midtown Crash; Driver Had No License
Nine people were injured when a car jumped a curb in midtown Manhattan yesterday, knocking two people into a glass door, then reversed direction and barreled through the front window of a nearby music store, the police said.
The driver, Jose Rodriguez, 69 years old, of Fountain Avenue in Brooklyn, was charged with reckless driving and driving without a license, said Officer Andrew McGinnis, a police department spokesman.


BRIEFS
*
Allergan Inc., Irvine, Calif., a pharmaceuticals and ophthalmic products concern, and Ocular Sciences signed a definitive agreement for Ocular Sciences to purchase all the assets of Allergan's contact lens business in North and South America, subject to financing and other conditions. *
Andersen Worldwide Organization, New York, announced the formation of an accounting joint venture with a Chinese firm.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN Woman in the News: Lynn Hardy Yeakel; Skillful Political Novice
Last Thanksgiving Porter Hardy Jr., a retired Congressman from Portsmouth, Va., bluntly told his daughter, Lynn H. Yeakel: "This ain't no time to be in Washington."
But Ms.
Yeakel, a 50-year-old fund-raiser for women's charities, also listened to other advisers.
Like her, they were outraged by the Senate Judiciary Committee's hearings on Judge Clarence Thomas's nomination for the Supreme Court, and they were also confident that it was the right year to shake up that most exclusive of men's clubs, the United States Senate.


Francis Bacon, 82, Artist of the Macabre, Dies
Francis Bacon, the Irish-born painter whose abstract images of psychological and physical brutality made him one of the most exalted, and most disliked, artists of the postwar era, died yesterday at a hospital in Madrid.
He was 82 years old and lived in London.
He died of a heart attack while vacationing in Spain, according to a statement from his London dealer, Marlborough Fine Art.


Under Attack, Doctor Still Defends Abortions
Since he began performing abortions in the mid-1970's, Dr.
Shalom Press has seen his share of opposition.
Anti-abortion protesters have picketed his offices and his home.
Unidentified callers ask for "Dr. Abortionist." Three times, abortion foes have burst into his office, once chaining themselves together with bicycle locks.


Sports of The Times; Joey Kocur Hands Bonus To Rangers
JOEY KOCUR'S right hand resembles a map of his native Saskatchewan.
That bump is his boyhood town of Kelvington.
That knob is nearby Nut Mountain.
That long gash could very well be the Qu'Appelle River meandering its way into Mountain Lake.
Those scars might be the Quill Lakes, and those over there could be Old Wives Lake.
And that large bruise could certainly be the urban sprawl of Saskatoon.
Fortune-tellers say they can predict the future from the lines in the palm of a hand, but any novice can divine Kocur's past from the lines on the back of his right hand.
Yet Kocur insists, "The hand has never been broken; just a couple of scrapes here and there. "


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Finance; BUSH MAY GET TAB FOR G.O.P. DINNER
President Bush donned a tuxedo, waxed effusive about "a miracle called America," and deftly separated some 4,300 Republican loyalists from about $8 million of their money tonight.
It nevertheless seemed likely by the end of the day that Mr.
Bush would pay a hefty political price for his performance at a vast fund raising event for Republican Congressional candidates called the "President's Dinner."


3 Plead Guilty in Teaneck Clash
Three men have pleaded guilty to charges stemming from disturbances that followed the 1990 shooting of a black teen-ager by a white police officer.
The three Teaneck residents entered the guilty pleas on Monday as the long-delayed case was about to go to trial.


Morris I. Leibman, 81, A Senior Law Partner
Morris I. Leibman, a senior partner in the Chicago law firm of Sidley &amp; Austin, died of cancer on April 21 at Northwestern Memorial Hospital in Chicago.
He was 81 years old.
Mr.
Leibman was the driving force behind the 1972 merger of his former firm, Leibman, Williams, Bennett, Baird &amp; Minow, and Sidley &amp; Austin.
He played a central role in directing the combined firm to national prominence.


CHRONICLE
About five years ago, RUDOLF NUREYEV and JANE HERMANN were having dinner at Leonard Bernstein's apartment.
Suddenly Mr.
Nureyev sat down to play the piano, recalls Ms.
Hermann, now a director of the American Ballet Theater: "Lenny said to him, 'How much do you know about music?' " Mr.
Nureyev answered, "I really should be a conductor." Mr.
Bernstein: "Then you should go to Juilliard." Mr.
Nureyev: "But not till I stop dancing."


U.S. Study of Mental Care Finds Widespread Abuses
A Federal Government review of private psychiatric hospital cases -- most of them teen-agers and young children of military families -- has found that in 64 percent of the cases patients never should have been admitted, were kept longer than necessary or had medical records for which their hospitals could not justify treatment.
The abuses may have cost American taxpayers hundreds of millions of dollars.


10 Escape After Men Set Fire to Restaurant
Three masked men set fire to a Washington Heights restaurant after a drug dispute early yesterday, forcing about 10 people trapped inside to break through a window to escape the smoky blaze, the police said.
No one was injured in the fire at the 20 de Mayo Restaurant, at 1263 St.
Nicholas Avenue, at 173d Street.
The police said the blaze had apparently been set after a drug dispute involving a restaurant patron.


Prisoner Is Convicted In Threats On Judges
A disgruntled inmate was convicted on Monday of threatening the lives of three Federal appeals judges.
The inmate, Abdel-Jabbor Malik, who has filed some 60 lawsuits protesting the conditions of his imprisonment since 1979, acknowledged writing letters to Federal court officials in Manhattan after the three judges dismissed a lawsuit he had filed against correction officials.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, the Political Week column yesterday, about disarray in the Democratic Party, misstated the date for choosing delegates to the Democratic National Convention from California, Ohio and New Jersey.
Primary elections in those states will be held on June 2.


Bush Claiming Contest Is Won
President Bush's claim tonight to have locked up the Republican nomination was more symbolism than mathematics, since the delegates that Mr.
Bush counted to put him "over the top" have not been selected yet.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Apr. 24
Apr. 17
Apr. 26
1992
1992
1991
Gasoline production, daily
7.2
6.7
6.7
Distillate production, daily
3.0
2.8
2.8
Gasoline stocks
218.4
217.5
204.2
Distillate stocks
94.6
92.5
99.8
Crude imports, daily
6.0
5.7
5.4
Product imports, daily
1.9
1.8
2.2
Crude stocks
350.7
349.4
341.7
Crude production, daily
7.3
7.3
7.4
Refinery utilization (%)
87.2
86.0
84.3
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Pocket Books Publisher To Bantam
Irwyn Applebaum, who has spent the last seven years building Pocket Books into the foremost publisher of paperback best sellers in the United States, has been appointed president and publisher of its rival, Bantam Books, it was announced yesterday by Jack Hoeft, president and chief executive of the Bantam Doubleday Dell Publishing Group.
Mr.
Applebaum, who is scheduled to begin his new job on June 1, succeeds Linda Grey, who is starting her own imprint within Bantam specifically geared to producing best sellers.


Insurance Company Pays $157 Million To Settle Bias Case
In what is the largest damage recovery in any case brought under the Civil Rights Act of 1964, the State Farm Insurance Company has paid $157 million in a settlement with 814 women who were refused jobs as insurance sales agents in California over a 13-year period.
At a news conference here today, lawyers for the women said the total payment, including awards won by individual women in separate trials, was expected to exceed $200 million.


Tenneco Posts Profit Of $33 Million
Tenneco Inc. said today that it had earned $33 million, or 20 cents a share, in the first quarter, compared with a scant $1 million in the comparable quarter a year earlier.
Revenues were flat, at $3.3 billion.
The diversified industrial giant reported higher earnings in five operating units and narrowed its loss at the J. I. Case subsidiary to $77 million, from $147 million.


Personal Health
RAPE is not a subject women like to think about.
But upon hearing or reading about rape incidents, many worry about becoming victims and wonder how they might react if faced with the threat.
Opinions vary widely from "Grit your teeth and bear it, or risk being hurt or killed" to "Try to sweet-talk or scare him out of it" to "Scream, fight back and flee."
Depending on the circumstances and the women involved, each of these responses could be appropriate.
Unpleasant though it may be, the wise woman will think them through beforehand because sooner or later, national statistics indicate, one in four American women will become a victim of rape or attempted rape.


Police Charge Man Who Said Blacks Stabbed Wife
From the start, a brutal attack on a suburban couple in a deserted Milwaukee parking lot last Tuesday night had a sad and familiar ring to it, one that immediately recalled the 1989 shooting death of Carol Stuart in Boston.
This time, a white couple, Jesse and Barbara Anderson were leaving a trendy restaurant when, Mr.
Anderson says, two black men jumped them and repeatedly stabbed his wife in the face and neck.
He said that when he rose to defend his wife, the men stabbed him in the chest and ran away.
The men did not take anything and made no demands, he said.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the President's Dinner, a Republican Party fund raiser for Congressional candidates, misstated its history.
The party's first Congressional fund-raising dinner was held in 1974; the event, later named the President's Dinner, began earning substantial sums of money in the mid-1980's.


States' Officials Endorse Smog Rules for Utilities
Broadening the fight against smog, state and local air pollution officials on Monday unanimously approved recommendations for strict controls on emissions of nitrogen oxides from electricity generating stations.
While the officials must still convince the governors of their states to go along, their resounding endorsement is a significant step because they are the states' experts in the matter and the ones who would enforce the rules.
The approval is comparable, say, to having state insurance commissioners unanimously agree on a new way to handle car insurance.


Cone Gives a Fine Try, but Mets Are Still Without a No-Hitter
The baseball, its speed achingly slow, its path stubbornly, almost supernaturally straight, wouldn't bend.
And so for another night at Shea Stadium, history wouldn't be altered.
David Cone, five outs from a certain immortality in Queens, stood to the left of the mound with one out in the eighth inning last night and watched his bid for the first no-hitter in the history of the Mets end as an infield single collapsed insultingly, but forever fair inside third base.


Murray and Lions Depart Ways
An empty locker signified the end of the 12-year run of EDDIE MURRAY with the Detroit Lions.
As veterans prepared for yesterday's practice and the start of a six-day minicamp at the Silverdome in Pontiac, Mich., Murray instead cleaned out his corner stall and shook hands with teammates.


Forum Gets Call for Action On Shelters for Homeless
After missing a self-imposed deadline for responding to proposals to overhaul New York City's troubled shelter system, the Dinkins administration held a public forum on the issue yesterday at which many of the speakers called on the city to stop studying the problem and take action.
Top city officials, meanwhile, disagreed on how much attention the proposals, put forward by the Cuomo Commission, were getting within the administration.
And critics suggested that the Dinkins administration has been too distracted by the process of preparing next year's budget and had neglected the plan.


Rexene Creditors Grant Concessions
The Rexene Corporation, the troubled petrochemical company operating under Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection, said that its unsecured creditors had agreed to changes in its proposed reorganization plan.
Their concessions include allowing Rexene to forgo paying more than $25 million in new notes that were to have been issued in lieu of interest.
Debt holders will instead be issued additional common stock, giving the debt holders 92.5 percent of the common stock when the reorganization plan becomes effective.


Remembering a Father Of Social Security
To the Editor:
This month marks the 100th anniversary of the birth of Abraham Epstein, a founder of the American Social Security system.
It is because of his conviction and courage that millions of Social Security beneficiaries -- retired and disabled workers, their families and survivors -- receive dignified Social Security, rather than suffer the misery of the poorhouse or the humiliation of the dole.
Born in Russia, Epstein came to the United States at age 12, graduated from the University of Pittsburgh, worked for the Pennsylvania commission to draft the first old-age pension bill, taught at New York University and Brooklyn College, and devoted his life to the principles of economic security for workers and their families.
In the 1920's, he castigated "blind greed, selfish materialism and rampant individualism," championed the needs of the elderly and unemployed, and preached mutual protection and public responsibility.


Aide Quits After Inquiry Into Hirings
An assistant commissioner of the New York City Department of Mental Health has resigned after a Department of Investigation report that said he had hired three acquaintances, including the pastor of his Long Island church, for no-show jobs at Lincoln Hospital in the Bronx.
The assistant commissioner, Ivan Cortes, 40 years old, of Central Islip, L.I., was associate executive director at the city-owned hospital in 1989 when he hired the men to renovate offices for a drug-rehabilitation program.
The men, hired by the day, were paid a total of $123,000 over 18 months, but the work was never done.


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday about the first-quarter earnings of the non-automotive subsidiaries of the General Motors Corporation misstated the percentage decline in profit at the General Motors Acceptance Corporation.
It was 44 percent, not 80 percent.


Brochure on AIDS Is the Latest Departure From Benetton
THE North American subsidiary of Benetton, the Italian clothing company that specializes in stirring controversy, will take the unusual step of sponsoring the distribution of a brochure about AIDS prevention, which will appear as an advertising supplement in a national magazine.
The Benetton Services Corporation's decision to sponsor the brochure follows a furor instigated by a print advertisement that Benetton has run for the last two months in magazines worldwide.


Public &amp; Private; Believing the Children
She had a good deal more dignity than I remembered from the days when we worked together.
Perhaps it was the passage of time, the segue from clerk to editor, single woman to mother.
Or perhaps dignity is the armor you don when you've spent years listening to your daughter describe sexual abuse.
Describing how her teacher penetrated her with eating utensils.
Describing how her teacher engaged in sex acts with the kids placed in her care.
Describing it at home and in the courtroom.
It has been seven years.
Her daughter was 5.
Now the girl is on the verge of adolescence.
Nothing she says or does, no reticence or mood, no odd comment or bit of sexual curiosity, comes to her mother except through the scrim of this thing.


Arazi Emerges Into View and Tests the Track
On the race track where Princess Margaret once walked in stately steps across a red carpet and where Gen.
H.
Norman Schwarzkopf strode to rising ovations, heads turned and cameras rolled and clockers gaped at 8:30 this morning.
From Barn 45 on the backstretch, the mythical and almost mystical chestnut colt, the 2-year-old champion of Europe last year, the great Arazi came out of quarantine and took his first steps on the dirt course at old Churchill Downs.
At least, they were his first steps there since he dazzled the thoroughbred world last fall by sweeping past 13 other colts and winning the Breeders' Cup Juvenile with so much command that he became the instant favorite for the 118th Kentucky Derby.


J. L. Macfadden, 88, An Expert on Fitness
Johnnie Lee Macfadden, an author and physical-fitness advocate, died April 6 at her home in Manhattan.
She was 88 years old.
She died after a lengthy illness, her family said.


Beaten Charger May Get Compensation
JOE PHILLIPS, the Charger nose tackle who missed most of the 1990 season with head injuries after he was beaten by three men outside a San Diego restaurant, may be getting some money from the restaurant.
A jury ruled that the restaurant was partly responsible for the beating since it had failed to provide security in its parking lot in a known high-crime area.


Rodin Moves Outdoors


CHRONICLE
Hollywood met Seventh Avenue yesterday at a NoHo loft where BARRY SONNENFELD, the director of "The Addams Family," was shooting scenes for a new movie, not yet named, starring MICHAEL J. FOX.
The film features ISAAC MIZRAHI in a cameo role as -- what else? -- a fashion designer.
While Mr.
Mizrahi and a long-legged cadre of models milled around backstage, simulating the frenzy of a fashion opening, Mr.
Fox spoke a few lines.


Many Pharmacists Reject Medicaid Prescriptions
Throughout New York State yesterday, pharmacists locked their doors and traveled to Albany to protest changes in Medicaid reimbursement that they said could force them to close their doors permanently.
Many other pharmacists who remained open refused to fill Medicaid prescriptions.
At a time when curbing Medicaid costs has become a priority across the country, yesterday's protests were meant to remind legislators that numbers on a ledger sheet represent income to independent pharmacists, who dispense medication to poor patients.


G.M. Posts First Profit Since 1990
The General Motors Corporation today announced its first quarterly profit since the second quarter of 1990.
The company, which has been scrambling to reorganize its management and operations to help erase its string of losses, said it made $179 million in the first quarter, compared with a loss of $1.1 billion, excluding nonrecurring gains, a year earlier.


Merck Chairman Says He Will Retire in 1994
Dr.
P.
Roy Vagelos, who has built Merck &amp; Company into one of the world's most profitable corporations, announced yesterday at the company's annual stockholders meeting that he would retire as chairman and chief executive soon after his 65th birthday in October 1994.
"It's going to be tough leaving this place," he said in a recent interview in his office at Merck headquarters in Rahway, N.J.
"But I've told everybody here that I'm going to do it." The company has a longstanding rule that executives step down at 65.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Poll; Perot Makes Strong Showing In Survey of California Voters
Although only about half of California voters know enough about him to express an opinion, Ross Perot would run neck-and-neck with President Bush here and slightly ahead of Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas if the election were held now, according to a Los Angeles Times poll published today.
The latest in a series of recent public-opinion polls showing strong support for the Texas billionaire, the survey linked his popularity to widespread dissatisfaction with both major-party front-runners.
Mr.
Perot is considering an independent bid for the Presidency but has not declared a candidacy.


Divided Suffolk Legislators Pass Executive's Bill to Resolve Financial Crisis
After a bitter partisan debate, the Suffolk County Executive scored the first major success of his four-month-old administration today by winning legislative approval of an omnibus bill that would resolve the county's financial crisis.
The measure was approved 11 to 7, with the passing votes provided by Republicans and Conservatives.
The opposition came from the Democratic minority, which accused the executive, Robert Gaffney, a Republican, of putting together the measure behind closed doors.


Former Detroit Police Chief's Trial Nears End
In their closing arguments at the embezzlement trial of Detroit's former police chief, Federal prosecutors said that the former official, William L. Hart, looted $1.3 million from a police fund, lavished it on girlfriends and then lied repeatedly to cover it up.
They also said that Mr.
Hart, 68 years old, helped a former deputy chief, Kenneth Weiner, steal an additional $1.3 million from the fund in exchange for the promise of a lucrative job offer.
The fund was intended for undercover drug operations.


Helicopters Order For Sikorsky
Sikorsky Aircraft announced that it had received a $1.54 billion contract to build 300 Black Hawk helicopters over the next five years.
Sikorsky will build 60 UH-60 Black Hawks a year for the Army through 1996.
The contract also gives the Army an option to order up to 180 additional Black Hawks, which are designed to carry troops and weapons in an airborne assault.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Front-Runner; Front-Runner Clinton Takes up the Outsider's Message
Declaring that the Pennsylvania primary returns signaled a new beginning in his campaign for the Democratic Presidential nomination, Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas tonight stepped up his attacks on President Bush by appropriating Edmund G. Brown Jr.'s outsider's message.
Mr.
Clinton said his margin of victory and the views expressed by voters in surveys demonstrated that some of the questions about his integrity and character had diminished and that Americans were interested in more profound issues.


Andrettis Will Be in Full Force at Indy 500
For a while it appeared there would be only three Andrettis in this year's Indy 500 and that the absent Andretti would be last year's rookie of the race, 28-year-old JEFF ANDRETTI, the youngest son of MARIO ANDRETTI.
Now, thanks to A. J. FOYT, Jeff has a ride, which means that he, Papa Mario, brother Michael and cousin John, should make it another four-Andretti race.


BRIEFS
Debt  *
Fieldcrest Cannon Inc., Greensboro, N.C., a maker of home textile products, has filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for a public offering of $85 million in senior subordinated debentures due 2004 and for an equity offering of 1.5 million common shares through Kidder, Peabody.
*
Marine Midland Bank N.A., Buffalo, part of the Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corporation, has filed for a shelf offering for up to $1 billion in mortgage-backed pass-through certificates.


Mahoney Will Become Coach at St. John's
There were no telltale sightings of smoke coming from Perboyre Hall, the administration building on the St.
John's campus.
Once the Rev.
Donald J. Harrington, the university president, chose his basketball coach, he laughed and said that would not be necessary.
A relatively simple search had ended without smoke or surprise.
Just the swift recommendation of a search committee and the telephone call of Brian Mahoney's professional life.


Food Notes
Cookbooks as History
An exhibition of historic cookbooks, "Lessons of Food," opens today at Milbank Memorial Library, Teachers College, Columbia University, 525 West 120th Street.
A collection of more than 30 books, many of them by well-known historical figures, including Harriet Beecher Stowe, will be on display.
The oldest book is a 1622 edition of a work by Bartolomeo Scappi.


One Man's Communist Revolution, Live, Onstage
WHEN Josh Kornbluth was a boy, he thought the Knicks were a Communist organization.
"They passed the ball a lot," he said.
"They were into sharing."
Also significant was the coach's name: Red Holzman.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Senate Race; After Making Specter the Issue, Newcomer Wins Bid to Face Him
Lynn H. Yeakel, a fund-raiser for women's charities, sprang from virtual anonymity a month ago to become the upset winner of Tuesday's Democratic Senate primary in Pennsylvania.
With 97 percent of the votes counted at about 2 A.M., Ms.
Yeakel had 45 percent to 33 percent for Lieut.
Gov.
Mark S. Singel.
The remainder was divided among three other candidates.


Concentrate. Straighten the Matchbooks.
NCE I fancied myself a student of Dr.
Johnson, and echoed his insights about taverns or what ails anyone who is tired of London.
But now doubts arise as to whether the great one -- ennobler of the aphorism, Boswell's lifetime dining-out ticket -- knew what he was talking about.
The quote before the court is one to the effect that nothing concentrates the mind so wonderfully as the prospect of being hanged in a fortnight.
The good doctor never faced execution at any time, of course, but it rings so true, and is such a wonderful show-off quote, that I have always taken it as revealed wisdom.


U.S. and World: New Economic Order
Although there has been much talk about building a new political order in the post-cold-war world, the events here in the last few days make clear that a new economic order is also rapidly emerging.
Consider these developments in the whirlwind of high-level economic meetings in Washington:


In Disputed Region, Belgrade Foes Reject New Yugoslav State
The leaders of newly independent Bosnia and Herzegovina today dismissed the proclamation of a truncated Yugoslav federation and the declaration that the new Serbian-controlled state harbored no designs on its neighbors' territory.
"The Serbs have occupied half of our territory, and now they are pretending to be reasonable," said Ejup Ganic, a member of the Bosnian presidency.
Serbian guerrillas, backed by the Serbian-dominated Yugoslav Army, control much of the territory of Bosnia and Herzegovina.


Louise L. Wright, 95; Headed Voters League
Louise Leonard Wright, who was active for many years in women's and foreign affairs, died on April 17 at Crosslands, a retirement community in Kennett Square, Pa.
She was 95 years old and had previously lived in Charlottesville, Va., and, until 1956, in Chicago.
Her family said she died after a brief illness.


Wine Talk
"VALPOLICELLA, Bardolino, Orvieto and Soave."
If that's the answer, what is the question? It is: "What do you have besides Chianti?"


Sonics Edge the Warriors to Take a 2-1 Lead
SuperSonics 129, Warriors 128
SEATTLE, April 28 (AP) -- Shawn Kemp's two free throws with 6.1 seconds left gave the Seattle SuperSonics a 129-128 victory over the Golden State Warriors tonight, and a 2-1 lead in their first-round National Basketball Association playoff series.
After Billy Owens's spinning layup with 7.5 seconds left gave the Warriors a 128-127 lead, Kemp drove to the basket and was fouled.
He made both free throws to put Seattle ahead.


Arazi Emerges Into View and Tests the Track
On the race track where Princess Margaret once walked in stately steps across a red carpet and where Gen.
H.
Norman Schwarzkopf strode to rising ovations, heads turned and cameras rolled and clockers gaped at 8:30 this morning.
From Barn 45 on the backstretch, the mythical and almost mystical chestnut colt, the 2-year-old champion of Europe last year, the great Arazi came out of quarantine and took his first steps on the dirt course at old Churchill Downs.
At least, they were his first steps there since he dazzled the thoroughbred world last fall by sweeping past 13 other colts and winning the Breeders' Cup Juvenile with so much command that he became the instant favorite for the 118th Kentucky Derby.


FINANCE/NEW ISSUES;
A $400 million financing by the Solectron Corporation, an electronics company based in Milpitas, Calif., was priced yesterday through Merrill Lynch as sole underwriter.
The securities are liquid-yield option notes, or Lyons, a Merrill trademark, with a final maturity in 2002.
The notes are a zero-coupon issue that pays no periodic interest.
If held to maturity they yield 7 percent.


Book Notes
A Talked-About Dedication
Joan Didion is angry with folks at Simon &amp; Schuster.
It doesn't take a great reporter to figure it out.
All you have to do is pick up her latest book, "After Henry," a collection of essays just published by Simon &amp; Schuster, and read the dedication.
"This book," it reads, "is dedicated to Henry Robbins and to Bret Easton Ellis, each of whom did time with its publisher."


Eating Well
AMERICANS are as confounded as ever about a heathful diet.
Years and years of dietary advice, admonitions and warnings have had a serious impact on what we know we should do, but a relatively small impact on what we actually do.
Survey after survey reaches the same conclusion: lots of people have gotten the message about nutrition and its relation to health, but most of them aren't interested in making changes or don't know how.
In 1990 the NPD Group, a Chicago-based market-research firm, reported on a survey it had conducted: "Among consumers who said they were most concerned about dietary cholesterol and fat, consumption of such high-fat foods as regular cheese, hot dogs, gravy, ham, pork, eggs, beef and mayonnaise was not affected. In addition, 84 percent of those most concerned about cholesterol and fat selected regular cheese as their top dairy product."


Beyond the Sewer Line; Seeking Peace and a Good Septic System
Steve Stackhouse turned onto a private road deep in the Ralph Lauren countryside of Fairfield County, then into a driveway marked by an alarm-company sign.
Beyond a large house, five deer grazed in the woods.
He pried a manhole cover from the driveway and peered down.
Then he put a six-inch-diameter hose into the hole and started up his truck with a roar.
A nanny and a little boy in pajamas watched from the front door as he proceeded to pump out the septic tank.


G.O.P. ANNOUNCES A WELFARE POLICY
Deciding they need substance as well as scandal to make major gains in the November elections, House Republicans today unveiled the first of several legislative proposals they plan to introduce to show they are serious about domestic policy.
Today's example demanded work from welfare recipients.


Editorial Notebook; Do-It-Yourself Machine Guns
With assault rifles under increasing public scrutiny and official control, gun owners and manufacturers are fighting back.
Assault rifles, they say, are victims of a bad press, no more a threat than popular sporting rifles.
Publications for America's gun-owning subculture tell a different story.
Their ads suggest that it's possible even for a non-expert to convert an assault rifle into an extremely dangerous machine gun.


Yields Flat On C.D.'s and Bank Funds
Yields on bank money market accounts and certificates of deposit were flat for the week ended today, according to The Bank Rate Monitor.
And as in the previous week, declines were smaller.
Robert K. Heady, publisher of the interest-rate publication, said he expected deposit rates to drift in their present range for a while before setting a definite course.


Mayor Dinkins and the Silver Lining
The Dinkins administration's new budget comes bound with a bit of shiny ribbon and includes the promise of some small but appealing initiatives.
The politicking is forgivable even in these tough times because taken as a whole, the 1993 budget offers a prudent, candid plan that should serve New York City well.
If the Mayor keeps to his plan and does not give city workers a raise, he will manage to balance the budget without gimmicks, borrowing or an enormous tax boost.
His budget makes conservative assumptions and continues to trim fat.


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR Diary:
Someone in the Government, believe it or not, has a sense of humor.
An offbeat one, at that.
The proof: as a would-be writer I have, over the years, become familiar with United States Copyright Form PA, used for registration of published or unpublished works of the performing arts.
As an example of how to enter a composer's name, the forms at one time used the name Alexander Hollenius.
Now as every true film buff -- or Bette Davis fan ---- is aware, Alexander Hollenius is the name of the composer portrayed by Claude Rains in the film "Deception." In the movie Ms.
Davis shoots Mr.
Rains.
Perhaps that's the reason that Hollenius, alas, is eliminated on more recent versions of Copyright Form PA.


Lloyds Bank Considering Midland Bid
The most profitable of Britain's big four nationwide banks, Lloyds Bank P.L.C., said today that it was considering an offer of nearly $6.5 billion for another of the big four, Midland Bank P.L.C., which is already being sought by the Hong Kong-based banking group, HSBC Holdings P.L.C.
Lloyds said it would make the bid if regulators guaranteed that it would be on an equal footing in a takeover fight.
The offer, if made and accepted, is expected to accelerate the consolidation under way in the British banking industry, which, like the American industry, is plagued by high costs and too many branches and employees.
First Offer Backed
Earlier this month, Midland's board agreed to recommend that shareholders accept an offer of shares and bonds from HSBC, parent of the giant Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corporation.
The offer is now worth about $:4 a share, or a total of $:3.27 billion ($5.81 billion).
That is about $682 million below the planned offer by Lloyds of $:3.66 billion ($6.49 billion) in cash and shares, based on Lloyds's closing stock price today in London.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Primary; CLINTON AND BUSH PREVAIL IN PENNSYLVANIA PRIMARIES; FEMINIST IS SENATE NOMINEE
Gov.
Bill Clinton kept rolling toward the Democratic nomination Tuesday with a commanding victory in the Pennsylvania primary, reinforcing his dominance over former Gov.
Edmund G. Brown Jr.
With 96 percent of the precincts reporting, Mr.
Clinton had 57 percent of the vote, Mr.
Brown had 26 percent and former Senator Paul E. Tsongas, who withdrew from the race last month, had 13 percent.


Devils Learn Lesson: Best Defense Is Defense
The best lessons in sports can be learned in losing.
On the morning after they allowed eight goals in a Stanley Cup game, the Devils insisted that they had learned their lesson well.
The Devils are faced with elimination by the Rangers because they attended to their defensive duties rather irresponsibly Monday night in their 8-5 loss at Madison Square Garden.


Belfast Journal; Braving Life Without 'Dad': Shared Grief in Ulster
Karl Hagney was shot dead as he walked home from the pub in South Belfast on an autumn night last year, leaving his wife, Pauline, to tell their 5-year-old daughter, Julianne, that a sick man had shot Daddy and that he was now in heaven with Granny Nancy.
Julianne says her daddy appeared at night smiling, and now she wants to die to be with him.
Mrs.
Hagney, a waitress, is a 28-year-old Roman Catholic who also has three sons.
She and hundreds of widows of the political violence that has killed nearly 3,000 in Northern Ireland since 1969 still live hours and days of grief, depression and tears trying to explain to themselves and their children why it happened to them, and to convince themselves it is necessary to keep on living.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-10  A NEW ORDER IN KABUL
The leader of a coalition of victorious rebel groups swept into the Afghan capital, announcing the creation of an Islamic republic and declaring amnesty for everyone except the former President, Najibullah.
A1  FEAR AND OPTIMISM IN MYANMAR
Everything is shifting in Myanmar's Government, but the Burmese people are not convinced the changes are real, lasting or significant.
A3  ISRAEL IS ADAMANT ON TALKS
Israel says it won't take part in regional talks as long as the U.S. insists that Palestinians from outside the West Bank and the Gaza Strip be allowed to attend.
A6  MUSICAL SEATS IN GERMAN CABINET
Members of Parliament from the German Free Democratic Party overrode the choice by party leaders and selected Justice Minister Klaus Kinkel to replace Hans-Dietrich Genscher as Foreign Minister.
Housing Minister Irmgard Schwaetzerhad been nominated by the party leadership.
A5  PANAMA'S ZIGZAG RECOVERY
Traffic is heavy, construction is thriving, but so are unemployment and crime in the years after the U.S. invasion of Panama.
A6  AMMUNITION FOR LABOR PARTY
As Israel's elections approach, a report that accuses the ruling Likud Party of waste, mismanagement and corruption is likely to become campaign ammunition.
A7  THE ATROPHY OF ECONOMIC MUSCLE
In the new economic order, the U.S. has less to flex than in its days as a financial superhero.
A8  WEAPONS AGREEMENT REACHED
Four former Soviet lands have reached an agreement that will expedite the ratification of the strategic arms reduction treaty.
A9
Bosnians find little to trust in the new Yugoslavia.
A10  STEP IN THE GLOBAL WARMING WAR
The Bush Administration has made an offer to curb the increase in gases that contribute to global warming, but still refuses to join in a treaty to stabilize 1990 levels.
A10  National A14-22, D23-24  CLINTON KEEPS ROLLING
Governor Clinton gained a commanding victory in the Democratic primary in Pennsylvania.A1  WOMAN TO CHALLENGE SPECTER
Lynn Yeakel, a fund-raiser for women's charities and a political newcomer, scored an upset victory in Democratic Senate primary in Pennsylvania.
A1
Woman in the News: Capturing the anger from the Thomas hearings.  A19
News analysis: Pennsylvania's voters confirmed two trends.  A18
A California poll found Perot even with Bush, ahead of Clinton.
A19  STEEP TAB AT G.O.P.
DINNER
A dinner featuring President Bush raised $7 million for the Republican Party, but it could create political problems for the President.
A19  THE WAR ON REGULATIONS
In some cases, the Administration has cut red tape in the last three months with its 90-day moratorium on new Federal regulations and review of existing rules.
In other cases, the red tape has merely been fluttered by political hot air.
Either way, his current posture toward Federal rule-making marks a full-circle turnabout by the President.
A1  A TRULY PERSONAL PHONE NUMBER
People who want to be reached anywhere they go -- at home, the office, a friend's residence or a vacation house -- can sign up with A.T.&amp;T. for a single telephone number.
The service begins in June.
A1  HOUSE SPLIT GROWS OVER CHECKS
Congressional Republicans said they wanted the House to turn over all bank records subpoenaed by the Justice Department.
D23
House Republicans opened a new initiative on domestic policy.
D23  EX-H.U.D.
AIDE INDICTED
Deborah Gore Dean, executive assistant to the Reagan Administration's Housing Secretary, was charged with accepting an illegal gratuity and making a false statement to the Senate.
A14  OF TWO KILLINGS
From the start, a brutal attack on a suburban couple in a deserted Milwaukee parking lot last week had a sad and familiar ring to it, one that immediately recalled the fatal shooting of Carol Stuart in Boston three years ago.
But this time the response of the authorities was decidedly different.
A14  AFTER QUAKES, NOT ALL SHAKE
The recent series of strong earthquakes at both the north end and the south end of California has stirred a bad case of jitters in some residents and inspired in others the sort of insouciance that keeps millions of people living atop an unstable fault line that periodically shifts and shudders.
A14  Lawmakers issued a warning on nonprescription-drug labels.
D24  The test model of a new Stealth fighter crashed in California.
D24  An insurance company paid $157 to settle a sex-bias case.
A22 Education Page B8  Maharish International University mixes meditation and courses.
Metropolitan Digest, B1 Business Digest, D1  Obituaries D24-25  FRANCIS BACON, ARTIST
The London-based painter, whose abstract images of psychological and physical brutality made him one of the most exalted, and most disliked, postwar artists, died in Madrid at the age of 82.
A1  OLIVIER MESSIAEN, COMPOSER
One of the most influential French composers of the 20th century, he drew on such diverse sources as bird song, Indian and Balinese rhythmic modes, and more conventional Western forms, in a career of more than 60 years.
D24  The Living Section C1-12  Only nature makes truffles better than a chocolatier's.
C1  At lunch with Dolly Parton.
C1  There in the crystal ball, forecasters are thriving.
C1  The big stars go out to eat, but it's the caterer who shines.
C3  Wine Talk C8  Health Page C13  Personal Health: Different approaches to warding off rape.
Arts/Entertainment C15-20  Pat on back for Seville's elite.
C15  National Gallery names its new director.
C15  Film: A Ukrainian's metaphor for Chernobyl.
C15  Sports B9-15  Baseball: Cone loses no-hitter in 8th.
B9  Yanks beaten, 1-0.
B11  Basketball:Knicks top Pistons.
B9  Nets stay alive.
B9  Mahoney to coach St.
John's.
B12  Editorials/Op-Ed A24-25  Editorials A24  Crazy on the House Bank.
Dinkins and the silver lining.
Movement in Myanmar.
David C. Anderson: Guns.
Letters A24  Anna Quindlen: Believing the children.
A25  Henry A. Waxman: The environmental pollution President.
A25  David Mura: Bashed in the U.S.A.
A25


Deputy Chairman Is Named To the Top Barclays Post
Andrew R. F. Buxton, deputy chairman and managing director of Barclays P.L.C., was named yesterday to succeed Sir John Quinton, who has been chairman and chief executive of Barclays, Britain's largest bank, since 1987.
Leaks to the British press last week that Sir John would step down caught analysts by surprise and generated speculation that the Barclays board, angry about the bank's poor performance, had suddenly forced out Sir John.


Sprint Discount Plan For Small Businesses
In the latest escalation of the long-distance carriers' pitched battle for small-business customers, the Sprint Corporation announced a new discount program yesterday that would allow several small businesses to be counted together to qualify for the higher discounts available to much larger corporate customers.
As the recession has chilled the growth in telephone usage among residential and large-business customers, the long-distance companies have shown increasing interest in the small-business market.


When Fists, Not Finesse Are a Winning Formula
It had been, the Rangers agreed today, a wild and silly game.
Their 8-5 victory over the Devils in Game 5 of the Patrick Division semifinal series Monday night was the sort of jumbled affair that was best filed away alongside some of the nuttier Stanley Cup moments in history.
"The only other game I can remember like that was when I was an assistant coach for Scotty Bowman at Buffalo in 1980," said Coach Roger Neilson, whose Rangers now lead the Devils, 3-2, as the series shifts to Byrne Meadowlands Arena on Wednesday night.


Olivier Messiaen, Composer, Dies at 83
Olivier Messiaen, one of the most important and influential French composers of the 20th century, died in his sleep on Monday evening at the Beaujon Hospital in Paris.
He was 83 years old and lived in Paris.
A spokesman for the French Culture Ministry said that Mr. Messiaen died after surgery.


4 Former Soviet Republics Agree on Nuclear Arms
The four former Soviet republics that have strategic nuclear weapons have reached an agreement that will expedite the ratification of the strategic arms reduction treaty with the United States, Ukraine's President said today.
Under the agreement, Russia, Ukraine, Belarus and Kazakhstan are to act as equal partners in the signing of a new protocol with the United States reconfirming the treaty, known as Start.


The Big Stars Go Out to Eat, but It's the Caterer Who Shines
What to put on the stove if a great chef is coming to dinner?
And if that's daunting, what about 120 chefs anointed with one, two or three stars by the Michelin guide, the arbiter of European restaurant quality?
That's who came to dinner Sunday evening, and on into the wee hours, in the old cooperage house at the Mumm Champagne works in Rheims, 80 miles east of Paris.


Grand Jury Indicts Ex-Aide To Reagan's Housing Chief
Deborah Gore Dean, executive assistant to the Reagan Administration's Housing Secretary, was indicted today on charges of soliciting and accepting an illegal gratuity and making a false statement to the Senate.
The indictment of Ms.
Dean, a top aide to Housing Secretary Samuel R. Pierce Jr., brought to six the number of people indicted or convicted in the investigation of the scandal-plagued Department of Housing and Urban Development during the Reagan years.


BASKETBALL: Knicks Get Series Edge While Nets Stay Alive; Rugged Victory In Overtime
In a 53-minute test of wills, the Knicks showed unyielding determination tonight and put the Detroit Pistons on the verge of elimination.
Winning their most important game of the season, the Knicks outlasted the Pistons, 90-87, in overtime at the Palace of Auburn Hills in Game 3 of their three-of-five-game playoff series.
The Knicks recaptured the home-court advantage and by going up, two games to one, can win the series by taking Game 4 here Friday night.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The economy grew at a 2% annual pace in the first three months of the year, the fourth straight quarterly gain.
Consumers were inspired to spend by relatively warm weather and Government efforts to pad their wallets.  [ Page D1. ]
New-home sales suffered their steepest loss in more than 10 years last month.  [ D6. ]  Pay and benefits for U.S. workers rose 0.9% in the first quarter.  [ D6. ]  Consumer confidence surged to a seven-month high this month, the Conference Board said.  [ D6. ]


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.25-6.5
6.25-6.5
9.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.61
3.84
5.98
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.70
3.71
5.53
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.81
3.85
5.57
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.19
7.24
7.85
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.04
8.10
8.17
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.00
9.04
9.23
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.74
6.75
7.28
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Perseverance Triumphs and a Couple Bring a Child Home
On Wednesday the rabbi sent roses.
The bishop offered a Mass of thanksgiving.
And almost everyone who comes to the brown brick house on Grand Street a block from the windswept Hudson River brings a toy.
Finally, a child has come to Theresa and Kenneth Orzechowski.
After almost 24 years of trying to have children, five miscarriages, and then arranging to adopt a disabled 4-year-old girl last year, only to be told that they were the wrong religion, the couple have realized their dream.


Robotics Comes Back to Reality
With the death of Isaac Asimov this month, the robotics industry lost its patron saint just as it was recovering from the loss of its commercial delusions.
The 1990's have seen sales rise to record levels for industrial robots that can efficiently paint, weld, seal, assemble and package a wide variety of goods, often with a precision humans cannot duplicate or under conditions they cannot endure.
And new applications are springing up in other sectors: for instance, service robots that can tirelessly perform tasks like polishing supermarket floors or delivering patients' meals in hospitals.


Two Largest Steelmakers Post Losses
The nation's two largest steel producers, hurt by persistent price competition, reported first-quarter losses yesterday.
While the steel division of the USX Corporation, the nation's largest producer, slashed its loss by nearly 96 percent from the first quarter of last year, the Bethlehem Steel Corporation's loss widened by 13.8 percent despite higher shipments.
Following are the details of the companies' results: USX
USX's U.S.
Steel Group reported a first-quarter loss of $13 million, in contrast to a net loss of $308 million in the first quarter of last year, when the company had a restructuring charge of $322 million.
Sales for the quarter were up 4.5 percent, to $1.17 billion, from $1.12 billion in the 1991 period.


CRASH DESTROYS F-22 TEST MODEL
The only flyable test model of the Air Force's most advanced fighter, and most expensive new weapons program, crash-landed and was destroyed by fire Saturday at Edwards Air Force Base, Calif., the Air Force said today.
The Air Force and the team building the plane, led by the Lockheed Corporation, said that the accident happened after the plane, the F-22, more than 90 percent of initial flight-test goals had been completed and that it would not jeopardize the aircraft's development.


School Financing: Arguing Equity Is Not Enough
The battle over financing public schools has taken on a new dimension.
Now the issue is not simply whether rich and poor schools are receiving equal financing, but whether all schools are receiving enough to provide an adequate education.
The issue of adequacy in education has surfaced most recently in Louisiana, where two lawsuits were filed in March in State District Court by the American Civil Liberties Union and a group of 26 school districts.
They contend that the state's school financing formula is unconstitutional because it does not give schools enough money to insure that students will receive an adequate education under state education standards.


Real Estate; Builders Find New Projects In Seattle
CORPORATE expansion in technology, aerospace and manufacturing in the Pacific Northwest is propping up construction employment at a time when the development of new office buildings in Seattle and surrounding communities has virtually collapsed.
John Torrance, a vice president of CB Commercial, predicts that no new office towers will go up in Seattle's overbuilt downtown until the end of the century.
Commercial brokers say the downtown vacancy rate is 13.9 percent, with about 24.8 million square feet available for direct lease.
Tenants have been cutting staff and shrinking their office use.


In Head-to-Head Matchup, Hometown Teams Vie for Hearts of Fans
It's only April, so no Subway Series thoughts, no matter how far-fetched, could possibly be dancing in the heads of New York's baseball fans.
Still, that does not mean the local baseball clubs aren't wending their way into the souls, if not hearts of their respective rooting factions.
That's why last night offered such a delicious double dip, if you will, of New York baseball, as the surprisingly tenacious Yankees played the second of three scheduled games against the Texas Rangers at the Stadium, and the enigmatic Mets opened a home stand against the Houston Astros at Shea.


Bonds From San Antonio Have a Top Yield of 6.7%
A $648 million refunding issue by the City of San Antonio was tentatively priced yesterday to yield a maximum 6.7 percent for water system revenue-refunding bonds due in 2011 and 2016.
The group of underwriters led by Dean Witter Reynolds priced another long-term security, due 2018, at a deep discount to yield 6.65 percent.


Israel Opposes U.S. Plan for Arab Panel at Talks
Israel's Foreign Minister, David Levy, told Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d today that Israel would not take part in the regional peace talks on refugee matters and economic development if the United States continued to insist that Palestinian refugees from outside the West Bank and Gaza Strip be able to attend, Israeli officials said.
The United States and Russia formally issued the invitations on Monday for the five different regional talks, which are intended to accompany and support the core negotiations between Israel and its immediate Arab neighbors, Syria, Jordan, Lebanon and the Palestinians.


Party in Bonn Rebels on Genscher's Successor
In a surprise decision, colleagues of Germany's designated new Foreign Minister, Irmgard Schwaetzer, rejected her nomination today and voted instead to name Justice Minister Klaus Kinkel to head the Foreign Ministry.
The decision surprised many German politicians, most of all Mrs.
Schwaetzer, who broke into tears at the news of her defeat at a party meeting.
She would have been the first woman to hold a senior cabinet post in Bonn.


AT LUNCH WITH: Dolly Parton; For 'Friendly Country Clod,' A Day for Charming the City
DOLLY PARTON lilts into the dining room, her flaxen locks fluttering in a self-propelled breeze, flashing a mile-wide, red-rimmed smile at flabbergasted lunchers.
Eight men huddled in solemn conversation look up, astonished, and break into spontaneous applause.
"I don't even know them," Miss Parton says with girlish incredulity as she slides into a black leather banquette.
"But they sure seem nice."


Carriage-Horse Bill Balances Humane and Business Interests
To the Editor:
"Carriage Horses: In Danger Again" (Topics of The Times, April 14), about horse carriages on New York City streets, is quite misleading.
The bill I introduced, to amend Local Law 89, is an effort to balance humane and safety interests with the small horse-carriage industry.
The amendment does not abolish the safeguards that were put into place -- the temperature restrictions that limit when the horses may work and the restrictions not to allow drivers unlimited territory in which their horses may roam.
Time and place restrictions do exist.
Contrary to your view, I am not looking to "thrust" the horses back into a sea of traffic.


Gerard K. O'Neill, Professor, 69; Led Studies on Physics and Space
Gerard K. O'Neill, a professor emeritus of physics at Princeton University, died on Monday at the Sequoia Medical Center in Redwood, Calif.
He was 69 years old.
He died of complications from leukemia, said Betty Graeber, a spokeswoman for the Space Studies Institute that Dr.
O'Neill co-founded in Princeton.


Review/Music; Edward Aldwell Offers His Perspective on Bach's 'Art of Fugue'
It is always a privilege to hear Bach's "Art of Fugue." This music was almost consciously archaic at the time of its composition, a compilation of techniques that must have seemed quaintly academic to some listeners in 1750 (the way much art music might seem to a wider public today).
It is extraordinarily formal and intricate, a collection of fugues and canons, written in open score for no particular instrument.
The 11th fugue alone contains three themes: each is heard inverted and combined with the others.
Yet this exercise in form and counterpoint seems to touch the heart of music's powers: without being overtly expressive, it becomes thoroughly personal.
These fugues create a world that is constantly surprising yet always familiar.
There are moments when it seems one is being granted direct experience of time's unfolding.


Corrections
An article on Saturday about the Presidential race in Connecticut misstated the number of times Ross Perot's name could appear on the ballot.
He could be listed either as a petition candidate or as the endorsed candidate of Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr.'s independent party (A Connecticut Party), but not both.


When the Irish Came Into the American Club
To the Editor:
As an opponent of Patrick J. Buchanan's racist American nationalism, I enjoyed Prof.
Fred Somkin's knock at President Bush's challenger from the right in "Buchanan's Club" (letter, April 6).
But I am disappointed that, as a teacher of American history, he shows limited knowledge of American assimilation and nativist history.
Irish and German Roman Catholics were admitted to American club privileges the moment they got off the boat, as against African-American Protestants.
By about 1900, they were members of the club itself -- not without recurring discomfort about Irish superpapal Catholicism.
The rules had to change in the face of massive immigration from Southern and Eastern Europe.


Carriage-Horse Bill Balances Humane and Business Interests; Pathetic Animals
To the Editor:
You report April 15 that the New York City Council's Transportation Committee voted 7 to 1 to expand the hours and areas in which carriage horses may operate.
Except for Kathryn Freed, the dissenter, the committee shows ignorance on the subject.
The Manhattan carriage horse trade is in a 19th-century business in a 20th-century atmosphere of greedy and insensitive owners and drivers.
No amount of fancy harness can conceal the fatigue, soreness and look of discomfort of these pathetic animals.


More Clouds Gather for Troubled Olympia &amp; York
The future clouded further yesterday for Olympia &amp; York Developments, the troubled Canadian real estate giant, as the Canadian Government backed away from providing the company with loan guarantees on the sale of a prominent Toronto office building and one of its main plans for raising quick cash fell apart, according to bankers and people within the company.
These latest developments could prompt a move by creditors to seize the building, the Exchange Tower, which serves as Olympia's world headquarters as well as the headquarters of the Toronto Stock Exchange.


Arazi Emerges Into View and Tests the Track
On the race track where Princess Margaret once walked in stately steps across a red carpet and where Gen.
H.
Norman Schwarzkopf strode to rising ovations, heads turned and cameras rolled and clockers gaped at 8:30 this morning.
From Barn 45 on the backstretch, the mythical and almost mystical chestnut colt, the 2-year-old champion of Europe last year, the great Arazi came out of quarantine and took his first steps on the dirt course at old Churchill Downs.
At least, they were his first steps there since he dazzled the thoroughbred world last fall by sweeping past 13 other colts and winning the Breeders' Cup Juvenile with so much command that he became the instant favorite for the 118th Kentucky Derby.


Bridge
It is well-known that Henry VIII executed two of his queens but less well-known that he executed the 67-year-old Countess of Salisbury for the crime of having an unpopular son.
The Countess briskly ran away from the headsman in the Tower of London, a spirited effort that unfortunately failed.
The moral, which applies occasionally at the bridge table, is that one should not stand meekly when waiting for the ax to fall: a small chance of escape is better than none.
On the diagramed deal from a sectional open pairs in Bridgeport, Conn., on Saturday, South made a miraculous escape.
North and South were Sviatoslav Dyomin and Vladimir Fleyshgakker, two Manhattan residents, originally from Moscow, who were en route to victory in the event.


Dow Advances by 3.36, But the Market Is Lower
Blue-chip stocks rose slightly yesterday in a late wave of buying, but the market was broadly lower, hurt by rising bond yields and losses in technology issues.
The Dow Jones industrial average rose 3.36 points to close at 3,307.92, but declining issues outpaced gainers, 961 to 724, in heavy New York Stock Exchange volume of 189.2 million shares.


Review/Television; Date Rape and Other Current Topics
Tonight at 10 on ABC, John Stossel brings a light touch to some matters that are customarily pounded at by television.
"The New Rules of Love," a special edition of "20/20," takes on the popular subject of date rape and recycles previous reports on tensions between working wives and husbands over who should be doing what around the house and why arguments between men and women have a way of getting out of hand.
The opening segment raises the touchy question of whether when a woman says no, she
means
no.
Mr.
Stossel daringly suggests that "there's a new standard of sexual correctness that's out of touch with reality." Does gamesmanship play no part in dating these days? he asks.


The Environmental Pollution President
On Earth Day, President Bush said that the main environmental accomplishment of his Administration was "proposing, negotiating and signing into law a new Clean Air Act that will cut sulfur dioxide emissions in half, reduce toxic air emissions and clean up smog in cities across America."
What he didn't say was that in less than a year and a half, his Administration has broken the law 35 times in failing to issue regulations needed to carry out the act.
He forgot to mention that his Administration refuses to control toxic lead emissions from incinerators or cancer-causing fumes from motor vehicles.


Panama Grows, Reaching Skyward, Yet Down Below Much Pain Remains
In this city stretched out beside the Pacific Ocean, new high-rise office buildings and condominiums are joining the already gleaming white skyline at the dizzy pace of a boomtown, creating vast traffic jams as construction crews maneuver around each other on dozens of sites.
Most major economic indicators are rising with what one business executive likened to the sharp, sure climb of a jetliner.
The Panama Canal has been doing record business.
Politics is flourishing, and so is the mainstream press, both in its news pages and its advertising linage.


EXECUTIVES
*
Dauphin Deposit Corp., Harrisburg, Pa., a bank holding company, named Christopher R. Jennings chief operating officer.
He retains the title of president.
Paul B. Shannon, currently senior executive vice president and chief credit officer of the corporation, will become president of Dauphin Deposit Bank and Trust Company, the lead bank. *
Dun &amp; Bradstreet Corp., New York, named William F. Doescher senior vice president of global communications for the Dun &amp; Bradstreet's Information Services division.
He continues as vice president of public relations and advertising for the Dun &amp; Bradstreet Corp., and as publisher of D&amp;B Reports magazine, the Dun &amp; Bradstreet magazine for small-business management.


Perseverance Triumphs and a Couple Bring a Child Home
On Wednesday the rabbi sent roses.
The bishop offered a Mass of thanksgiving.
And almost everyone who comes to the brown brick house on Grand Street a block from the windswept Hudson River brings a toy.
Finally, a child has come to Theresa and Kenneth Orzechowski.
After almost 24 years of trying to have children, five miscarriages, and then arranging to adopt a disabled 4-year-old girl last year, only to be told that they were the wrong religion, the couple have realized their dream.


Marriott Raising $200 Million
The Marriott Corporation is offering $200 million in 9.5 percent notes due May 1, 2002, at a price of 98.855, to yield 9.682 percent, through underwriters led by Salomon Brothers.
Underwriters said the notes were priced to yield 206 basis points more than Treasury securities with a similar maturity.
A basis point is one-hundredth of a percentage point.


Review/Film; Thelma and Louise Meet Cute. Stay Cute.
In the prologue to "Leaving Normal," a van carrying a family suddenly takes leave of the blacktop and flies off into a starry, special-effects sky.
The surreal, exuberant escape promised by that image is something this film obviously aspires to but never manages to achieve.
In a star-crossed coincidence of the sort "Leaving Normal" might otherwise celebrate, this story of two runaway women has appeared in the shadow of the much better "Thelma and Louise," which robs the new film of even novelty value and necessitates unflattering comparisons.
Credibility is an immediate problem, even for a film whose fondness for the fanciful is apparent at every turn.
Not even the initial meeting between Darly (Christine Lahti), a hard-boiled cocktail waitress with a wardrobe that leans toward leopard spots and leather, and Marianne (Meg Tilly), an abused wife on the run from her husband, has an honest ring.
The two cross paths at a bus stop in the middle of the night in a town called Normal; Marianne cries; Darly tentatively comforts her.
This is all it takes to send two new acquaintances off into the heart of road-movie America, romping and squabbling and making up as if their friendship went back many years.


There in the Crystal Ball, Forecasters Are Thriving
OVERNIGHT, national boundaries have dissolved.
Bitter enemies have suddenly become friends, while former compatriots go to war.
Once-secure bank jobs disappeared without warning, as did the banks that symbolized all that was solid and dependable.
Even the weather isn't what it once was.
When the world seems unpredictable, there is one business that thrives: predicting the future.
Whether they stare at palm lines or trend lines, people who believe that they have some ability to forecast events of the next day, the next year or even the next decade are finding a growing demand for their services.


U.S. Informally Offers to Cut Rise in Climate-Warming Gases
The Bush Administration has for the first time offered to curb the increase in climate-warming gases released into the atmosphere by American factories, trucks and automobiles as part of a proposed agreement being prepared for a top-level international environmental conference to be held in Rio de Janeiro in June.
This American negotiating position was stated in Paris earlier this month during informal talks on the planned treaty between the industrial nations and some developing countries, officials said.


Blackhawks, Led by Roenick, Capture Series Against Blues
Blackhawks 2, Blues 1
ST.
LOUIS, April 28 (AP) -- Jeremy Roenick scored both of his team's goals as the Chicago Blackhawks wrapped up their first-round playoff series against the St.
Louis Blues with a 2-1 victory tonight.
The Blackhawks won three in a row to take the series, four games to two, and advance to the Norris Division finals against either Minnesota or Detroit.


Mayor's Budget Mixes Cuts and Welfare
Spending cuts that Mayor David N. Dinkins has proposed in his budget would leave New York City with bumpier streets, dirtier parks, delayed sewer repairs and more overcrowded jails.
But the Mayor's budget also provides New Yorkers with longer library hours, health clinics for the poor, community-assistance programs at public schools, and expanded efforts to address the city's tuberculosis epidemic.


Astros' Spoiler Savors Spotlight
Benny DiStefano stood in the on-deck circle with one out in the eighth inning, studying David Cone, searching for a loophole, when he heard a fan near the railing.
"We know you're from New York," he remembered the fan saying, "but please don't break up the no-hitter."


State Senate Passes Bill to Allow Queens to Begin Secession Effort
The State Senate approved legislation tonight that would allow the borough of Queens to begin the process of seceding from the City of New York.
But the bill, which is viewed here primarily as a vehicle for election-year grandstanding by Queens politicians, is not expected to pass the Assembly.
A spokesman for Assembly Speaker Saul Weprin, a Queens Democrat, said that Mr.
Weprin believes that the Legislature should study Staten Island's secession efforts before giving the same authority to Queens.


INSIDE
Split Grows in House Over the Bank Inquiry
Rebelling against their leader, Congressional Republicans said they wanted the House to turn over all bank records subpoenaed by the Justice Department.
The move left the Democratic leader, Speaker Foley, increasingly isolated.
Page D23.
Ex-H.U.D.
Aide Indicted
Deborah Gore Dean, aide to the Reagan Administration's Housing Secretary, was charged with accepting an illegal $4,000 payment.
Page A14.
Mental Care Abuses Cited
A Government review of private psychiatric hospital cases, most involving children of military families, has found widespread abuses.
Page D1.
Pharmacies Shut for Protest
Pharmacists throughout New York locked their doors and traveled to Albany to protest smaller Medicaid reimbursements.
Page B1.
New National Gallery Head
Earl A. Powell 3d, director of the Los Angeles County Museum of Art, is to succeed J. Carter Brown at the Washington museum this fall.
Page C15.
Olivier Messiaien Dies
The doyen of French composers, who sought to capture in music the beauty of the natural world and the spirituality of Catholicism, was 83.
Page D24.


Centocor Founder Back As Head of Committee
Centocor Inc. said yesterday that Michael A. Wall, the company's founder, had returned to active duty as chairman of a newly created executive committee and that James E. Wavle Jr. had resigned as Centocor's president and co-chief executive.
Mr.
Wall will work with Hubert J. P. Schoemaker, Centocor's chairman and chief executive, to redefine the company's corporate strategy.
In a telephone interview, Mr.
Wall and Mr.
Schoemaker said they would emphasize collaborative efforts rather than the building of an independent pharmaceuticals company.
David P. Holveck, Centocor's executive vice president and president of the diagnostics division, was named president and chief operating officer.


Movement in Myanmar
A smidgen of good news has trickled out of Myanmar, formerly Burma, in recent days.
The ruling State Law and Order Restoration Council, or Slorc, is plainly responding to international outrage over its abuses of human rights.
That suggests a powerful lesson: No just cause need be considered hopeless once civilized states mobilize in its behalf.


Books of The Times; America's Red Diaper Baby: The Left
The Rise and Fall of the American Left  By John Patrick Diggins  Illustrated. 432 pages.
W.
W.
Norton. $22.95.
As a political idea and force in the United States, what's left of the left?
Of the old reformist-minded left, the Marxist-oriented left, the more moderate democratic left?


Burmese, After Years of Terror, Hope Things May Soon Change for the Better
For many of the people of Yangon, the faded capital of a nation better known to the world as Burma, the best they could muster this week was a muted, wary optimism that maybe something might change.
"We do not know what to believe, whether this junta could ever tell the truth," said a 26-year-old painter, asked about the announcement by the military Government that it would release political prisoners and would allow family members to visit the nation's Nobel-prize winning dissident, Aung San Suu Kyi.
"Optimism is a luxury."


BUSH IS EXTENDING REGULATION FREEZE AS A GREAT SUCCESS
In some cases, for better or worse, the Bush Administration has really cut red tape in the last three months with its 90-day moratorium on new Federal regulations and its review of existing rules.
In other cases, the red tape has merely been fluttered by political hot air.
In any event, President Bush regards the examination of regulations that he announced in his State of the Union Message to have been a rousing success.
On Wednesday, with the fanfare of a speech in the White House Rose Garden, the President is to announce that the moratorium and review will be extended for at least another several months.


CHRONICLE
Members of four major East Coast symphony orchestras will also play unusual roles on Sunday, at the baseball field of Brandywine Springs Park, near Wilmington, Del.
The New York Philharmonic Penguins, the Philadelphia Orchestra Firebirds, the National Symphony Nationals and the Baltimore Symphony's Balto-No Shows will compete in a round-robin softball tournament.
Each team will play three seven-ining games, with professional umpires, "so things will really move," said DON LIUZZI, principal timpanist of the Philadelphia Orchestra.


Democrats Stalk Out of Budget Hearing
All three Democratic members of the Assembly Appropriations Committee angrily stalked out a budget hearing today after the committee's Republican chairman refused to allow them to talk about how cuts in the budget will affect the elderly and others.
The chairman, Rodney Frelinghuysen, also made clear that the Republican majority was not planning to release a detailed budget before the deadline of May 18, when Gov.
Jim Florio has either to accept or veto legislation that would cut the sales tax by a penny, at a cost to the budget of $608 million.


Economy Grew at 2% Rate in First Quarter
The economy grew at a 2 percent annual pace in the first three months of the year, the fourth straight quarterly gain and the best George Bush has witnessed as President, Commerce Department figures showed today.
The growth in gross domestic product -- the total output of goods and services by labor and operations in the United States -- was fueled by consumers, who account for 67 percent of the $4.89 trillion economy and who were inspired to spend by relatively warm weather and Government efforts to pad their wallets.


Armand M. Morgan, 90, Admiral Who Oversaw the Design of Ships
Rear Adm.
Armand Malcolm Morgan, retired, who supervised the design and construction of the nation's submarine fleet in World War II and later had charge of the design of Navy ships, died Saturday at the Falmouth-by-the-Sea convalescent home in Falmouth, Me.
He was 90 years old and had lived in Portland, Me., since moving from Washington two years ago.
He died of heart failure after a brief illness, his family said.


Interpublic's Net Increases by 22%
The Interpublic Group of Companies reported yesterday that net income for the first quarter rose about 22 percent from the similar period a year ago to $9.6 million, or 26 cents a share, from $7.9 million, or 22 cents a share.
Revenues increased about 13 percent, to $400.7 million from $353.8 million.
Net new business of $267 million represented a 33 percent increase from the quarter a year ago.


Review/Music; A Seasoned Pianist's Solo Debut
Akira Eguchi came to his debut recital with an imposing list of competition victories and awards, including the Juilliard School's William Petschek Prize, which sponsored the concert.
Still, although Mr.
Eguchi's performance on Thursday evening at Alice Tully Hall was his introduction as a solo pianist, he is hardly a newcomer.
In recent seasons he has been heard several times in collaborations with violinists and has consistently distinguished himself without stealing the spotlight.
With the spotlight to himself, Mr.
Eguchi was all the more impressive, and in a program of standard works he took several original turns.
His account of Beethoven's Sonata No. 30 (Op. 109), for example, was not so philosophically lofty as some, but Mr.
Eguchi showed the work to be susceptible to impetuousness and temperament.
There were moments when absolute precision was sacrificed to the passion of the moment, yet for all the drama of the reading, there was also a firm sense of structural logic to which Mr.
Eguchi adhered.


Going Crazy on the House Bank
Bad enough for the House Bank to be so mismanaged as to become a scandal that has, beyond all reason, inflamed the public and stirred panic among Members of Congress.
Now the Justice Department, by starting a bizarrely broad criminal investigation, invites suspicion of unworthy partisanship.
Despite their own misgivings about the scope of the inquiry, Republican House members nonetheless rushed to say they wanted to cooperate.
House Democrats can stand against both the panic and partisanship by agreeing to cooperate with a reasonable investigation, and standing firmly against a fishing expedition.


Quotation of the Day
"The judge is looking for criminal acts and we have a duty to cooperate with that search. It's like when the teacher says empty your pockets, you better empty them." -- REPRESENTATIVE HENRY J. HYDE, calling for compliance with subpoenas in the House bank scandal.  [ D23:6. ]


Market Place; Small Stocks Getting Short Shrift
Are small stocks worn out?
From the looks of things in the past week, they are rather ragged.
And analysts who make it their business to track stocks of small companies are heaping more and more scorn on them.
Perhaps the only thing going for stocks of companies with market capitalizations under $500 million is the contrarian view: nobody loves them, thus, there's likely some money to be made.


The Pop Life
Beastie Boys Album
A lot has happened in the rap and pop world since the Beastie Boys released their first album, "Licensed to Ill" (Def Jam), in 1986.
Partly because of that album, rap has become the music of choice for teen-agers, and, more important, has been divided into all sorts of splinter groups that don't have much in common, from Ice Cube to Vanilla Ice, from Brand Nubian to P. M. Dawn.
In the contentious, self-righteous world of hip-hop, where authenticity wrangles daily with the desire to reach elevated chart positions, these divisions mean something.
It's unclear where the Beasties and their new album, "Check Your Head" (Capitol), are going to fit in.


When the Irish Came Into the American Club; Slowly Changing Land
To the Editor:
As Anthony Lewis maintains, "Ireland is a changing country" (column, March 26), but visitors and readers should be cautious in interpreting visible symbols of change (including memorials to Oscar Wilde and Samuel Becket or the election of Mary Robinson as President) as evidence of a substantively different society.
Ireland has been changing since the late 1950's, when a major transformation in government economic policy began to restructure the economy.
By the late 1970's, Ireland had many of the characteristics associated with modernization: the primacy of agricultural production and employment was displaced by manufacturing and services sectors, and the majority of Irish people were living in urban areas.
There were increased participation in education, increased labor force participation by women and declining fertility rates.


A Palmeiro Catches Up With a Palmeiro
When 40-year-old JOSE PALMEIRO showed up at Yankee Stadium on Monday night, he had no complaints about Yankee hospitality.


Gay Protesters Are Ejected From City Council Meeting
Gay protesters who have been clamoring for the resignation of the New York City Council's health committee chairman turned a City Council meeting into a shouting match yesterday, hurling obscenities and condoms at lawmakers before being ejected from City Hall.
The gay-rights groups have attacked the health chairman, Enoch Williams of Brooklyn, because he voted against the city's 1985 gay-rights bill and opposes plans to give addicts clean needles and distribute condoms in schools.
Their criticism was stepped up last week after Mr.
Williams was quoted in The New York Post as saying that condoning homosexuality helped spread AIDS, a statement he has since disavowed.


Movie Generation Gap
To the Editor:
I am 12 years old, and I am writing because I feel that the reviewers are wrong about children's movies.
They usually say the movie is bad or stupid.
I think those critics should only review R-rated movies.
And you should get a kid to review PG or PG-13 movies.
I know I would love to!
Adults don't have the same opinions as kids do, and when they say that a movie isn't good, I always end up loving it.
For instance, this weekend I saw "Newsies" and thought it was excellent though the reviewers didn't.
CARI GELBER New York, April 13, 1992


2 Lawyers Charged With Fraud
Two Manhattan lawyers were charged yesterday in schemes accusing them of bilking clients of at least $500,000, the Manhattan District Attorney said.
One of the lawyers, Elliot J. Stein, was charged with 11 counts involving efforts to defraud at least five clients, said Barbara Thompson, a spokeswoman for the District Attorney, Robert M. Morgenthau.


60-Minute Gourmet
SQUAB is the centerpiece of some fine dining memories for me.
I have always been fond of the Moroccan squab-and-phyllo pie called pastilla.
And as a boy in the Chablis region, I came to love the regional specialty known as Burgundy squab pie, made with a rich red-wine sauce.
So I am pleased to see that squab is gaining in popularity in this country.
For many years it was considered an exotic game bird here, seen only in fancy restaurants.
But now squabs can be seen neatly lined up in supermarket butcher cases, along with guinea hens, pheasants and rabbits.


Man Found Guilty Of Killing Drug Foe
A 31-year-old Brooklyn man yesterday was convicted of murder charges for running down a neighborhood drug opponent with a speeding van in the Sunset Park section last year.
After deliberating three hours, the jury found the defendant, Alfredo Cartagena, guilty of second-degree murder and related charges in a one-week trial in State Supreme Court in Brooklyn.
Justice Francis X. Egitto set May 14 for sentencing Mr.
Cartagena, who could face a maximum sentence of 25 years to life in prison.


The Elite of Seville Celebrate Their Cultural Efforts for Expo
The performance of Bizet's opera "Carmen" last Friday night at the new Teatro de la Maestranza here was no ordinary occasion.
Quite apart from the performance, this was an occasion for well-deserved self-congratulation by Seville's elite.
Expo '92, the truly spectacular panoply of the achievements of 111 participating nations, opened on April 20.
Despite a few loose ends, it opened smoothly, with all the pavilions up and running and all the gadgetry working.
Given the effort involved and the feverish rush to get things finished in time, Seville's leaders had every reason to feel proud.
Which they did, with great bravado and bonhomie, before, during and after "Carmen."


Futile Night for Yanks As Sinkers Bring a Tale Of Too Many Grounders
Three groundouts in the first inning, three more in the second and, surprise, three more in the third.
The Yankees piled up 10 groundouts against the Texas Rangers last night before getting their first hit off Kevin Brown.
Brown threw a sinker and it was promptly hammered into the ground.
Then he threw another sinker and it quickly became another groundout.
The sequence was monotonous and continued almost uninterrupted.
The Yankees mixed in some fly balls and even threatened to tie the score with a run in the ninth, but they wound up withno runs and three hits against Brown and two relievers.


Economic Scene; Fun, Games, Bankruptcy
IMPERIAL Graham Cracker's troubles really began years ago, when management decided to coat with melt-resistant chocolate.
The mega-losses came, though, only after hasty decisions to recoup falling revenues by diversifying into insecticides and laundromats.
And now Imperial's heralded foray into the adult drinks market, a graham-flavored malt liquor called Macho Baby, is under fire from regulators.
With the creditors howling for their money, one might expect Imperial Graham to crumble.
But thanks to the Chapter 11 provisions in the 1978 bankruptcy law, Imperial's managers may still live to make a few thousand more urgent business trips on the company's Gulfstream IV.
Indeed, with a little luck in the draw of bankruptcy judges, the president may get the chance to invest Imperial's remaining cash on a scheme to recycle cookie crumbs.


Shift of Funds From Schools Is Protested
School officials yesterday accused Mayor David N. Dinkins of diverting $67 million that the New York Legislature had pledged for education, and they warned that the lost money would force a harmful increase in class size in the early grades.
Their criticism was the first to come on the New York City budget, which was unveiled Monday by the Mayor.
Much of the sniping across the East River between City Hall and the board's headquarters at 110 Livingston Street in Brooklyn is part of a traditional springtime exercise.
But it takes on added significance this year, school officials contend, because the size of elementary-school classes is at stake.


Geography Prizes Go To a Study of Culture
Five 12th graders from a small Catholic school in Miami were awarded one of three top prizes today in a national geography competition.
The students, who are seniors at Our Lady of Lourdes Academy, won $15,000 for an analysis of how the forbidding terrain of the Everglades helped an Indian tribe in Florida retain its culture.


I.B.M. Triples Speed of Its Data Servers
I.B.M. said yesterday that it was tripling the performance of its top-of-the-line personal computers used as high-speed data librarians in office computer networks.
The machines, known as server computers, are increasingly used for tasks previously performed exclusively by mainframe or mini-computers operated by data-processing technicians.
The new approach, called client-server computing, centralizes data on server systems that deliver information to networks of dozens to hundreds of personal computers.


First-Quarter Profit Up 18% At Pepsico
First-quarter profits at Pepsico Inc. jumped 18 percent, fueled by a rebound in its Frito Lay snack-food business and strong results from overseas businesses.
First-quarter earnings rose to $241.5 million, or 30 cents a share, compared with $205.4 million, or 26 cents a share, for the period a year earlier.


Groups Vow To Battle Incinerator
Brooklyn neighborhood groups, with the support of Borough President Howard Golden and City Comptroller Elizabeth Holtzman, stepped up a campaign yesterday against the Dinkins administration's 20-year plan for managing New York City's garbage-disposal crisis, which calls for the construction of a large incinerator in the Brooklyn Navy Yard.
At a news conference at Borough Hall, Mr.
Golden vowed to fight a program that he charged could ultimately place four of seven city incinerators in Brooklyn.
"The two and a half million people of Brooklyn do not appreciate being dumped on by City Hall," Mr.
Golden said.
"We will not accept these garbage-burning, smoke-belching, air-poisoning, health-threatening environmental monsters."


22 Tons of Cocaine Seized in Raids


At Home Abroad; The End of Ideology
Thirty years ago Daniel Bell, the Harvard sociologist, published his book "The End of Ideology." It is time for a new edition with Britain as a striking example.
Through this century the Labor Party has brought a heavy element of ideology to British politics.
Labor based itself on egalitarian Socialist principles.
In office, it nationalized leading industries, built massive public housing and established the National Health Service.


Fotiu Picked to Coach a Nashville Team
NICK FOTIU, the former Ranger, has been named coach of the Nashville Knights of the East Coast Hockey League.
Fotiu, who replaces FRANK ANZALONE, who was fired, agreed to a two-year contract and may need it.
He is the team's fourth coach in five seasons.


Joan Garrett-Goodyear, English Professor, 50
Joan Hickcox Garrett-Goodyear, an associate professor of English at Smith College, died last Thursday at her home in South Hadley, Mass.
She was 50 years old.
She committed suicide by asphyxiation, said her husband, Harold Garrett-Goodyear, a history professor at Mount Holyoke College.


More Power for Trustee of Teamsters Local
A former Federal prosecutor, Thomas P. Puccio, was given broad powers by a court yesterday to supervise the operations of Local 295 of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters.


As Goes Germany
The squabbling among Free Democrats about who would succeed Hans-Dietrich Genscher as Germany's foreign minister creates an unbecoming distraction from a pivotal point in postwar European history.
For 18 years Mr.
Genscher was a master builder of German bridges to East and West.
He departs just as Germany, having cast off the anchor of the cold war, is free again to set its own course.
In Mr.
Genscher's view, Germany must continue on the course he originally charted: Help strengthen the European Community, aid Eastern European reconstruction and promote trans-Atlantic partnership.
In his resignation speech, he described this course as irreversible.


Long-Awaited Saberhagen Shows Up in All His Glory
The game ended as it had begun, with Houston batters staring at what they could not hit.
Their looks were of wonder and anger, awe and helplessness.
The looks were of defeat.
Bret Saberhagen, with one pitiless fastball after another, one mean curveball on top of the next, overwhelmed the Astros last night in a 1-0 victory by the Mets.
It was a performance that was as much terrorizing mind game as physical marvel.


School Has St. Ann and Patron From Wall Street
O VER the entrance to St.
Ann's Roman Catholic School in East Harlem are two symbols.
One is a painted statue of St.
Ann, the mother of the Virgin Mary, and the other is a plaque honoring Peter M. Flanigan.
Both the saint and Mr.
Flanigan, an investment banker, might be said to be guardian angels of the school, which is on a tough and rundown 110th Street, between First and Second Avenues.


Steinberg's 2d Appeal in Beating Death of Child
A lawyer for Joel B. Steinberg, who in 1989 was convicted of killing his illegally adopted 6-year-old daughter, Lisa, argued before the New York State Court of Appeals today that Mr.
Steinberg should be granted a new trial or at least given a reduced sentence.
Mr.
Steinberg has been serving an 8 1/3-to-25 year sentence since 1989 for first-degree manslaughter in the death of Lisa, who was beaten and left unconscious for 12 hours in the Greenwich Village apartment he shared with her and his companion, Hedda Nussbaum.
Lisa died four days later of a brain hemorrhage.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Young Gods  Limelight
Intentional humor didn't play a big part in the Young Gods' performance at Limelight on Tuesday; nor did sunshine and happiness.
Dourness was the point, and the group's lead singer, Franz Reise, milked it.
The band, from Switzerland, merges guitar rock with sample-heavy industrial experimention.
But more than anything, it was there to sell bad news and alienation.


McDonald's Closes in Taiwan After String of Bomb Attacks
McDonald's closed all of its 57 restaurants in Taiwan today in response to bombings that have killed one person and wounded several others.
On Tuesday, the police said, an unidentified man called Quanta Foods, which runs McDonald's restaurants in Taiwan, and demanded $240,000 shortly before the attacks began.


EXECUTIVES
*
Assured Health Systems Inc., Burlington, Mass., a unit of American Biodyne, appointed David B. Stone president. *
Bausch &amp; Lomb Inc., Rochester, promoted Ronald L. Zarella, head of its overseas division, to executive vice president, making him heir apparent to Thomas C. McDermott, president and chief operating officer.


Events: Plant Sales, Gardening Workshops
Plant Sale
Brooklyn Botanic Garden, 1000 Washington Avenue off Eastern Parkway, Crown Heights; (718) 622-4433.
A sale of more than 15,000 plants, including perennials, traditional roses, vegetables, bonsai, shrubs, aquatic plants and African violets will be held from 9 A.M. to 7 P.M. on May 6 and from 9 A.M. to 3 P.M. on May 7.
Free admission.
Urban Gardens
Wave Hill, Independence Avenue and West 249th Street, Riverdale, the Bronx; (212) 549-3200.
Seven gardeners, including Stephen Scanniello, Mike Ruggiero and Susan Taylor Moody, will speak about plants suitable for urban conditions from 7 to 9 P.M. on Wednesday.
Tickets, $10; $8, students and those ages 62 and older; $7, members.
Reservations are recommended.
Beating Bugs
Cornell Cooperative Extension of New York City, 280 Broadway at Chambers Street, Room 701; (212) 340-2900.
Linda Amoroso, an entomologist, will talk about environmentally sound approaches to managing insects and disease in vegetable gardens, from 6 to 8 tonight.
Admission: $3.
Tours and Sale
New Jersey State Botanical Gardens at Skylands, Ringwood State Park, Morris Avenue off Sloatsburg Road; (201) 962-9534.
A plant sale will be held from 10 A.M. to 3 P.M. on Saturday and Sunday.
May 9 and 10 is Crabapple Weekend.
Hours: noon to 5 P.M.
There will be lectures at 1 and 3 P.M. and garden tours at 2 and 4 P.M. both days.
Free.
Landscaping Workshop
Clark Botanic Garden, 193 I. U. Willets Road off Glen Cove Road, Albertson, L.I.; (516) 621-7568.
A workshop on the use of trees and shrubs in suburban landscape design will be taught by Urte Schaedle, a horticulturist at the garden, on May 23 from 10:30 A.M. to noon.
Fee, $11.
Advance registration is required.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
LYING is a skill all children learn.
It is a tool for avoiding blame or punishment, and for shoring up a poor self-image.
While all children lie, some do so much more than others.
Psychologists who study lying have found patterns that help them predict which children will lie the most.
"The key difference is the emotional well-being of the child," said Dr.
Carolyn Saarni, a professor of counseling at Sonoma State University, in Rohnert Park, Calif.
"Children who are chronic liars don't feel good about themselves."


Canadian Is Leading in Bid for Daily News
The management, unions and creditors of The Daily News have designated Conrad M. Black, owner of The Daily Telegraph in London, as the leading prospective buyer for the bankrupt paper.
Two weeks ago, Mr.
Black, a Canadian who also owns a chain of small papers in the United States, and Mortimer B. Zuckerman, a real-estate developer and owner of U.S.
News &amp; World Report, submitted tentative offers for The News.


Accounts
*
The Virgina Lottery, Richmond, to Earle Palmer Brown, Richmond and Norfolk, Va., for a two-year contract for advertising and public relations.
The agency, which had previously handled the account, won in a review that included Bozell Inc., Alexandria; W. B. Doner &amp; Co., Baltimore, in a joint venture with Siddall, Matus &amp; Coughter Inc., Richmond, and Hawley Martin Partners Inc., Richmond.


Warner And I.B.M. In Talks
Time Warner Inc., the largest entertainment company in the nation, and I.B.M., the largest computer company, are in negotiations to join Time Warner's vast library of movies and other material, and cable television systems with I.B.M.'s computer technology.
Under the plans being explored, cable subscribers could call up whole libraries of material on television screens.
In addition, the two companies are seeking to create a generation of "smart" television that would allow viewers to interact with services on their TV screens, using a remote control or computer.
The new services could offer educational material and commercial transactions as well as entertainment.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about the Bush Administration's policy on controlling the emission of gases believed to contribute to global warming misstated the focus of the international accord called the Montreal Protocol.
It sets a timetable for phasing out chlorofluorocarbons and other chemicals associated with destruction of the earth's ozone layer; it does not cover "greenhouse gases" linked to global warming.


Anti-Sears Stance by Pension Fund
California's influential public pension fund said yesterday that it had voted against the three members of Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company's nine-person board who are up for re-election this year.
The move was another display of shareholder discontent with the management of the retailing and financial services company.
The fund, the California Public Employees Retirement System, holds only six-tenths of 1 percent of Sears's stock, so there is little chance the board members will be ousted at the annual meeting on May 14 in Atlanta.


Viola Squares His Boston Ledger
Red Sox 6, White Sox 1
BOSTON, April 29 (AP) -- Frank Viola allowed five hits in eight and two-thirds innings for his second consecutive victory and Phil Plantier drove in three runs with two doubles as Boston defeated Chicago, 6-1, tonight.
Viola (2-2), signed by Boston as a free agent for $13.9 million over three years, allowed one unearned run, struck out two and walked three.
Jeff Reardon relieved with the bases loaded in the ninth and retired pinch-hitter Matt Merullo on a foul pop for his fourth save.
Blue Jays 1, Angels 0


Pop and Jazz in Review
Lyle Lovett and his Large Band  The Bottom Line 15 West Fourth Street Through May 3
There's an ache in Lyle Lovett's voice, a sweet melancholy where country and blues singing converge.
It's the sound of yearning, tenderness, unspoken pain, the tone of utter sincerity.
In Mr.
Lovett's songs, it's not to be trusted.
Sincerity, he calmly demonstrates, is a sometime thing.


Reviews/Dance; A San Francisco Troupe's Self-Guided Exploration
Alonzo King makes dances that are peculiar, uncomfortable to watch and oddly static, all things that ballets are not supposed to be.
Mr.
King is an extremely popular, nationally known ballet teacher, but there are no lyrical effusions or star pyrotechnics of the sort beloved by dancers.
However, by the time the program of dance presented by his Lines Contemporary Ballet group wound to an end on Tuesday at the Joyce Theater, where the company performs through Sunday, it was clear that Mr.
King is an original.
His work has a look of rough, self-guided exploration similar to the earliest modern dance pieces of Garth Fagan.
The program got off to an abysmal start with the 1991 "Cante," set to a Spanish-flavored score compiled and composed by Donald Ivan Fontowitz.
Wearing black and bathed in red light, the dancers in this 10-year-old San Francisco-based troupe looked awkward as they spun and stretched in stop-and-start posturing voyages back and forth across the stage.


Underground Art Scene
ARTS FOR TRANSIT, the same people who bring you music in the New York City subway system (the official programs, anyway), are making the stations more congenial in other ways.
Laura Bradley, an artist hired by Arts for Transit, part of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, has designed two motifs for subway grillwork: a medallion and waves.


Miscellany
*
Two Washington-based environmental groups, Americans for the Ancient Forests and the Wilderness Society, accused the Providence Journal Co., Providence, R.I., of censoring commercials about rain forests submitted to its television stations in cities including Seattle and Spokane, Wash.
The Journal Co. questioned the accuracy of the spots, which have run on stations owned by other companies.


A Hot Dudley Gets The 'Cold Treatment'
He made three huge plays down the stretch of his team's first playoff victory since 1984, and now Chris Dudley was about to receive a bandage of honor for each of them.
When the door to the New Jersey Nets' locker room opened after their season-preserving 109-104 victory over the Cleveland Cavaliers on Tuesday night, trainer Fritz Massmann was found standing over a seated Dudley, strapping an ice pack to the reserve center's lower back.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.25-6.5
6.25-6.5
9.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.00
3.50
5.92
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.70
3.70
5.54
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.83
3.81
5.58
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.24
7.19
7.85
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.05
8.04
8.16
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.01
9.00
9.22
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.75
6.74
7.24
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Theeeeere Goes Johnny; Heeeeere's Big Money!
If you listen carefully amid the applause for Johnny Carson as he prepares to leave late-night television after 30 years, you might hear the sound of cash registers ringing.
Between now and May 22, when the final "Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson" will run, NBC will raise its rates for a 30-second commercial, in stages, about fivefold -- yes, fivefold -- to almost $200,000 for the finale.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  LAWYER CONVICTED OF FRAUD
Harvey Myerson, a lawyer widely known for his flamboyant style in and out of court, was convicted of defrauding some of his clients of more than $2 million but was acquitted of defrauding his law firm of an additional $1 million.
Mr.
Myerson who acted as his own defense lawyer, could face a maximum of 20 years in prison and a $1 million fine when sentenced.
B3.
BACK IN JAIL
He fled the United States after pleading guilty to running what New York officials called one of the largest gasoline bootlegging schemes in the nation.
Then he emerged as an entrepreneur in post-Communist Poland.
But now David Bogatin is back in New York and in jail.
B4.
DELAY AT KENNEDY


Home Video
The Indian director Satyajit Ray, who died last week, was among the finest film makers.
The question with him is the same as it is with many artists whose work is not in the American mainstream.
Where are his films on videocassette?
"It's a shame nobody has tried to get more of his stuff out, because it would sell," said Milos Stehlik, a co-director of Facets Multimedia of Chicago, a store and mail-order company with some 15,000 titles.
Dating from the mid-50's, Mr.
Ray's films, which number about two dozen, are simply mounted, exquisitely crafted studies of Indian life.
At present, say dealers who specialize in foreign titles, only seven of them are available on tape.


Israel Offers to Let Arabs Run Territory Hospitals
Israel offered today to allow the Palestinians to run their own hospitals in the West Bank and Gaza Strip and hold pilot municipal elections in order to give the Palestinians experience in running their own affairs and Israelis experience in adjusting to it.
The Palestinians, while not rejecting the Israeli proposals, said they fell far short of the full self-rule they are seeking and also had a certain racist overtone to them, in that they suggested that the Palestinians somehow could not handle democracy and self-rule all at once and could only deal with it a step at a time.


Koch Picks Up Speed And Slips Past Conner
Dennis Conner's relentless drive to win the right to defend the America's Cup hit an inevitable roadblock today: a race victory by Bill Koch's more powerful cup machine, America .
The outcome moved America
into a 5-4 advantage in the 7-of-13-race defense finals.
America  defeated Stars &amp; Stripes by 1 minute 8 seconds, a finish that reflects the extra speed in the Koch boat when the wind picks up.
The race, sailed in a 5- to 9-knot southwesterly breeze, was a heart-stopper by yacht racing standards, with at least six lead changes.
Koch said later that he had "tweaked" America
Tuesday night to make the yacht faster.


The Woman Who Sued State Farm and Won
Muriel Kraszewski said she never intended to sue the State Farm Insurance Companies when she filed a sex discrimination complaint in 1975 with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission.
"I did it just basically to scare them," she said yesterday.
But her complaint helped 814 women exact a more tangible result on Tuesday: a $157 million settlement from State Farm, the largest damage recovery in any case brought under the Civil Rights Act of 1964.
Her suit has also prodded State Farm to greatly step up its goals for hiring women.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  ROMANOV IS LAID TO REST  Three-quarters of a century after his family lost the Russian throne, the late scion of the Romanovs was brought back to St.
Petersburg for a funeral befitting a king.
A1  UNDER PINOCHET'S SHADOW  Patricio Aylwin is often asked what life is like as President of Chile with the country's previous leader, Gen.
Augusto Pinochet, still the head of the army.
Mr.
Aylwin has walked a careful path, but relations with the armed forces are tense.
A3  ISRAELI GESTURE TO PALESTINIANS  Israel offered to allow the Palestinians to run their own hospitals in the West Bank and Gaza Strip and hold pilot municipal elections so they could gain experience in running their own affairs.
A7  Four Israeli Arabs are sentenced to life for killing three soldiers.
A6  CHAOS TEMPERS AFGHANS' JOY  Forces loyal to the new Afghan Islamic Government appeared to secure their control of Kabul, but the capital they inherit is without water, electricity or an organizational blueprint for the administration.
A10  THE CRATERED ROAD TO KABUL  For the new leadership of Afghanistan, the road to final victory was the crumbling, two-lane blacktop that runs to Kabul from the guerrillas' longtime base at Peshawar.
The route offers a glimpse into the devastation that the triumphant coalition been entrusted to repair.
A10  ALARM OVER POPULATION GROWTH  The United Nations called for concerted efforts to curb the expansion of the world's population, warning that action is needed to reduce poverty and hunger and to protect the earth's natural resources.
A12  STRIKE SWELLS IN GERMANY  Western Germany's labor troubles grew as thousands of metalworkers staged warning strikes and striking public service employees expanded their walkout to include hospitals in Munich and other cities.
A5  ARC OF FIGHTING ACROSS BOSNIA  Heavy fighting continued in Bosnia and Herzegovina, dimming hopes that Serbia will honor pledges to allow Bosnia's future to be settled in negotiations under European Community sponsorship.A13  Kerepestarcsa Journal: Stalled in an odyssey toward a better life.
A4  National A14-19, B9-11, D22  HOUSE BANK FIGHT HEATS UP  After a day of hand-wringing and nose-counting, the House rejected an attempt by Democrats to mount a challenge in Federal court to the Justice Department's subpoena for House bank records.
A1  ACQUITTALS IN BEATING CASE  After deliberating for a week, a jury in Simi Valley, Calif., cleared four Los Angeles police officers whose videotaped beating of a black motorist brought a national debate about the authorities' use of force.
Within hours, pockets of violence broke out in south-central Los Angeles.
A1  On virtually all the charges, the jurors decided quickly.D22  The verdicts stunned and angered many in Los Angeles.
D22  CLINTON GOES COURTING  One day after rolling to victory in Pennsylvania, Governor Clinton visited Congress, a frequent target of his campaign criticism, to ask Democratic lawmakers for their votes at the party's national convention.
And he won the backing of many.
A1  The Pennsylvania vote enhanced the notion of a "women's year." A18  BUSH ADDRESSES THE VISION THING  Administration officials say the President has recognized what many Republican strategists concluded long ago: that he has not given Americans a good reason why he deserves a second term.
As a result, he has instructed his staff to focus on defining a broad agenda for the next five years.
A1  At a Rose Garden ceremony, unscheduled criticism of Bush.
A18  FOR THE PRESS, TWIN PRESSURES  The recent disclosure that Arthur Ashe had AIDS was yet another reminder that it is not easy for the nation's editors to reconcile the American passions for both information -- including large quantities of gossip -- and privacy.
B11  NUCLEAR WASTES AND HIGH COSTS  The Energy Department's reliance on private contractors to clean up the nation's nuclear weapons plants has resulted in cost estimates that are inflated by hundreds of millions of dollars a year, the White House Office of Management and Budget said.
A14  AMTRAK TRAIN DERAILS  An Amtrak train bound for New York slammed into a truck at a crossing in Newport News, Va., and hurtled into a ravine.
The truck's driver was killed, and 53 people on the train were hurt.
A14  Golden Journal: Where the nation's quakes are pinpointed.
A14  Milk researchers found either too much or too little vitamin D.  B9  Metropolitan Digest, B1 ABORTION PROTEST SUSPENDED  Afer announcing a day of "prayer and fasting," members of Operation Rescue suspended their protest in Buffalo and sank into a tense debate over how, or whether, to proceed with demonstrations scheduled to end on Saturday.
The debate that followed revealed a split between local and national leaders of the anti-abortion group.
A1  Business Digest D1  Arts/Entertainment C13-24  BATTLE ON PUBLIC TV  With a Senate appropriations bill as the battleground, public television is facing the most bitter political opposition in its history.
A1  BROADWAY IS BOOMING  Box-office receipts for the four weeks that ended last Sunday were the highest of any month in Broadway history, giving the long-troubled New York theater a sense of dramatic recovery from its doldrums.
A1  Theater: "Falsettos." C17  Dance: Harlem company gala.
C17  Word and Image: "Cosby Show" ends.
C17  The Home Section C1-12  To make the 90's fade away, try the retro-life.
C1  A man's child-care crusade.
C1  On the Lower East Side with Jim Jarmusch.
C1  Parsons design students graduate to applause.
C8  Parent &amp; Child C12  Sports B12-19  Baseball: Injuries are monting.
B13  Saberhagen wins with three-hitter.
B13  Column: Anderson on the Rangers.
B13 Hockey: Devils forces Game 7 against Rangers.
B13  Obituaries D23  Dr.
Paul V. Lemkau; promoted mental health clinics.
Editorials/Op-Ed A22-23  Editorials A22  The blank-blank '92 ticket.
As goes Germany.
Women candidates arrive.
The cost of the food pyramid.
Letters A22  William Safire: Clinton's "The" speech.
A23  Anthony Lewis: The end of ideology.
A23  Robert F. Wagner Jr.: Can school boards be saved?
A23  Tad Ames: Meet your Government.
A23


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Front-Runner; Clinton Goes to the Capitol Seeking Democrats' Favor
He has castigated them for giving themselves a pay raise, chastised them for being part of Washington's policy gridlock and proudly declared himself a virtuous outsider.
But today, Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas came to Capitol Hill to call on the Democratic Senators and Representatives and seek the votes of those who are guaranteed positions as superdelegates to the national convention.
And from many quarters, he received their support.


Outsider Steals Bush's Rose Garden Scene
In its drive to convey the image of a President offering an agenda for the future, the White House sent President Bush into the Rose Garden today for a much-advertised announcement on what he called "one of my top priorities" -- Government deregulation.
Mr.
Bush spoke at a sparsely attended ceremony, railing against the hazards of step stools as an example of over-regulation as he raced through his speech in a virtual monotone.


Conservatives Call for PBS To Go Private or Go Dark
With a Senate appropriations bill as the battleground, public television is facing the bitterest political opposition in its history in a struggle that public television executives say could threaten the future of the Public Broadcasting Service.
In the last six months, public television has come under a well-organized attack by conservative politicians and organizations who charge that public-affairs programs on PBS have exhibited what they call a "liberal tilt." More recently, the charges have evolved into a suggestion that PBS is no longer a necessary or even worthwhile source of programming, because cable networks have arisen that offer the same kinds of programs.
The Possibilities
The possible outcomes range from a cut in the requested appropriation, which is significantly higher than it was in the last two amendments, to adding some form of Governmental editorial oversight, to a delay that would put off consideration of the financing until next year, effectively hobbling the system.


Estimates of Weapons Cleanup Inflated
The Energy Department's reliance on private contractors to clean up the nation's nuclear-weapons plants has resulted in estimates for the projects being inflated by hundreds of millions of dollars a year, according to an audit released today by the White House.
The audit, conducted by the White House Office of Management and Budget with help from the Army Corps of Engineers, offers the first detailed look at how well the Energy Department is managing the most expensive environmental public works program ever undertaken.


Dr. Rosa L. Nemir, 86, Specialist In Pulmonary and Pediatric Fields
Dr.
Rosa Lee Nemir Audi, a pulmonary and pediatrics specialist who worked 60 years as a doctor, teacher and researcher, died on Monday at Tisch Hospital at New York University in Manhattan.
She was 86 years old and lived in Brooklyn.
Dr.
Nemir, who used her maiden name professionally, died of lung fibrosis, her family said.


Don't Make Serbian the Yugoslav Villain
To the Editor:
"Stop the Butcher of the Balkans" (editorial, April 15) is anything but helpful to someone who is trying to fathom what is happening in the tragic land that once was Yugoslavia.
You call the Serbian leader Slobodan Milosevic the "wrecker" of Yugoslavia.
But it was the breakaway republics of Slovenia and Croatia that took the first steps to destroy the nation.


Two Are Picked to Help Out Schultz
DICK SCHULTZ, the executive director of the National Collegiate Athletic Association, announced a significant restructuring of the association staff yesterday, naming the organization's first deputy executive director, TOM JERNSTEDT, and its highest-ranking female administrator, TRICIA BORK.
The new setup consolidates the N.C.A.A.'s 10 departments into four separate units.
Jernstedt, 47 years old, joined the N.C.A.A. in 1972 and has been the associate director of championships since 1988 but now will have overall authority, reporting only to Schultz.
Bork, 37 years old, who had been director of championships, will be group executive director in charge of championships and event management.


Los Angeles Policemen Acquitted in Taped Beating
Four Los Angeles police officers were acquitted of assault today in the videotaped beating of a black motorist that stunned the nation.
The verdicts immediately touched off a storm of anger and scattered violence in the city.
As residents set scores of fires, looted stores and beat passing motorists in the downtown area and pockets of predominantly black south-central Los Angeles, Mayor Tom Bradley declared a state of emergency, and Gov.
Pete Wilson said he would send in the National Guard.


Growing
I USED to love daffodils more than tulips.
Tulips have that waxy, artificial look, I'd say.
And they're so fussy.
They often don't come up a second year (or even the first year) if you have moles or mice and a lazy, good-for-nothing cat.
Then I went to the Netherlands and realized I didn't know what I was talking about.
Anyone who can stare down into the face of Tulipa greigii Fanfarella -- creamy white with a blush of red on every petal and a yellow throat -- without falling in love has got to be repressing something. (Like rage. When your tulips die in clay soil you tell yourself tulips are fickle and untrustworthy.)


Ayer and Gumpertz Join in Los Angeles
Ayer Inc. has combined its troubled Los Angeles office, Ayer Tuttle, with Gumpertz/Bentley/Fried, another Los Angeles agency.
The new shop, known as GBF/Ayer, is headed by Dick Fried, who had been president at Gumpertz/Bentley/Fried.
He succeeds Donna F. Tuttle, who will serve as a consultant.
Combined billings are expected to exceed $40 million.
The two agencies said that all current clients, including Doubletree Hotels, the Los Angeles Water and Power Department and Malaysia Airlines, would be retained.


Review/Television; Last 'Cosby' Episode Brings the Huxtables A Happy Ending
Dancing to a Miles Davis rendition of Frank Loesser's "If I Were a Bell," Cliff and Clair Huxtable glide right out into the studio audience and past the other cast members, all of whom are standing and cheering.
Without looking back or hesitating for an instant, the couple head straight for a stage exit door and simply disappear.
Shared beautifully by Phylicia Rashad, it's a vintage Bill Cosby moment: no fuss, unassuming and brilliantly calculated.
That's the way "The Cosby Show" ends in an hourlong special tonight at 8 on NBC.
The family, including Cliff's and Clair's parents, gathers for the graduation of Theo (Malcolm-Jamal Warner) from New York University.
Bursting with pride, Cliff is determined to have everyone attend, no matter the scarcity of tickets.


Magnetic Personalities
TREKKIES forced to spend any time away from their beloved "Star Trek" can carry a token along with them: a magnet picturing dolls of the four main "Star Trek" characters (far right).
For "Flintstones" fans, there's a magnet showing Wilma Flintstone and Betty Rubble.
The same goes for Sonny and Cher groupies, and always-hungry-for-Hollywood-memorabilia folks.


People
*
Len Fink joined Creative Artists Agency, Beverly Hills, Calif., to work on marketing strategies for Coca-Cola Co.
Mr.
Fink, a creative executive at agencies like Chiat/Day/Mojo Inc. and Wells, Rich, Greene, is the second advertising executive to join Creative Artists since the talent agency was named to work on Coke's marketing.


CHRONICLE
More than 300 captains of government and finance in New York gathered for a breakfast given by the Association for a Better New York yesterday at the Sheraton New York to watch a videotape called "New York: A Really Great City."
The 30-minute valentine to the city roams from the Statue of Liberty to the Cloisters, pausing for the financial district, Broadway, zoos, parks, sports arenas and dozens of other sites, amid testimonials by the man (and woman) in the street.


Sheena Easton Faints During Performance
Sheena Easton, who plays the roles of Aldonza and Dulcinea in the Broadway production of "Man of La Mancha," fainted during yesterday's matinee at the Marquis Theater.


Review/Dance; Harlem Troupe Celebrates Itself, in Brooklyn
Where there is a will there is a way.
It may be trite but it is also true.
Refusing to lie down and die, Dance Theater of Harlem returned on Tuesday night for its first full-scale season in New York since 1989 and a festive opening.
The engagement, which includes four different programs through May 10, is the first for the company at the Brooklyn Academy of Music (30 Lafayette Avenue, at Ashland Place, Fort Greene).
A highly supportive segment of the Brooklyn community turned out for a program that included two recent ballets set to music by Alberto Ginastera as well as a 20th-century classic by George Balanchine.


Verdict Hinged on Whether Brutality Crossed Line
The defense challenge was to convince the jury that the videotaped beating of a black motorist last year amounted to responsible police work.
The jurors said it took only one day to decide that on all but one charge the beating of the motorist, Rodney G. King, on March 3, 1991, did not cross the line into criminal behavior.
The prosecutor, Deputy District Attorney Terry White, had appealed to each juror to find a moment in the 81-second videotape of the beating at which they said, "Enough is enough." The six men and six women, including 10 whites, one Hispanic and one Asian juror, apparently never found such a point.
Acquittal Decision on First Day
But the forewoman said the jury had decided on the acquittals within one day.
The jurors then argued for nearly six days on one count, failing to reach a verdict on it.


Corrections
The "At the Bar" column on the Law page on Friday referred impreciselyto the authors of a brief submitted by 250 historians as "friend of the court" in Planned Parenthood of Southern Pennsylvania v.
Casey, the abortion rights case now before the United States Supreme Court.
It was written jointly by Clyde Spillenger of the University of Wisconsin Law School, Jane E. Larson of Northwestern University Law School and Sylvia A. Law of New York University Law School.


Want the 90's To Fade Away? Try Retro-Life
A LOT of people make the mistake of thinking they were born in the wrong decade, Diana Vreeland once pointed out.
From her crinolined dresses and flip wigs ("and always,
always
, a slash of black cake eyeliner") to her "bachelorette pad" with its hot-pink fake-fur sofa and aluminum-leg coffee table, Tara Solomon is in major denial that the 90's are even happening.


Recycled Pencil In Hand
EBERHARD FABER is introducing the first structural change in pencils in a century.
Most pencil barrels are made from cedar slats, but the barrel of the new pencil (above) will be made from recycled newspaper and cardboard.
About two billion pencils are produced each year in the United States, and Eberhard Faber makes about a third of them.


Afghanistan: Healing a Broken Land
Forces loyal to the new Afghan Islamic Government appeared to secure their control of Kabul today, but the capital they have inherited is without water, electricity or an organizational blueprint for the new administration.
The speed with which mundane administrative problems intruded into the haze of euphoria that still suffuses the guerrillas who control this city, and the Government's inability to remedy them, suggested that the road to full peace and recovery in this country will be not be easy.


Corrections
A chart in the sports pages on Wednesday about St.
John's basketball coaches misstated the tenure and record of Joe Lapchick.
He coached 20 seasons and compiled a 334-130 won-lost record.
John Shanley was the captain in 1936-37 and Lapchick the coach.


Essay; Clinton's 'The' Speech
Old speechwriters wait for
the
speech one that a politician knows by heart and believes moves his audiences -- to see if candidates grasp the dynamic of their own campaigns.
Voters don't get to see it in full on television.
George Bush has only just hired Peggy Noonan to put his together.
But Bill Clinton has been out on the stump hammering his message out, and The New York Times published the text just before his Pennsylvania victory.


4 ISRAELI ARABS GIVEN LIFE TERMS
Waving copies of the Koran and declaring their commitment to Muslim "holy war," four Israeli Arabs were sentenced to life in prison today for hacking and stabbing three soldiers to death at an army camp in February.
A court in Nazareth sentenced each of the four defendants to three consecutive life sentencesto insure that they would remain in prison.
Judges declared the crimes to be "barbaric" and "animalistic." The attackers used axes, knives and a pitchfork to kill the soldiers after slipping into a lightly guarded Israeli Army camp on Feb. 15 near the village of Ein Ibrahim, about 20 miles southeast of Haifa in northern Israel.
The killings occurred shortly after midnight as most of the soldiers slept.


Court Bars Order Placing Prisoners in County Jails
A state appeals court judge said today that New Jersey governors can no longer justify placing state prisoners in county jails merely by issuing executive orders declaring an emergency.
The court gave officials a year to come up with a plan to cope with crowded state prisons, so the ruling has no immediate consequences.


Blasts Kill 13 in Old Delhi
At least 13 people were killed and 24 wounded today when a series of explosions ripped through a building in the crowded old city.
The police said drums of chemicals exploded as they were being unloaded.


BUSINESS DIGEST
COMPANIES
Ford Motor posted a profit, reversing a string of five money-losing quarters.
It said it earned $338 million, compared with a loss of $884.4 million last year.
The swing to a profit reflected a jump in car sales as well as a more profitable mix of vehicles.  [ Page D1. ]


Campeau Sues Olympia for $1 Billion
Robert Campeau, whose retailing and real estate empire collapsed at the end of the 1980's, has sued his former partner, the real estate conglomerate owned by the Reichmann brothers of Toronto.
He is seeking damages of $1.25 billion (Canadian), or $1.01 billion (American).
The target of the suit, filed late on Tuesday in the Ontario Court General Division, the highest court in the province, is Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd., which is trying to stave off its own bankruptcy.


The Blank-Blank '92 Ticket
The Bush Administration, confronted with a huge loss of popularity and wide disgust over the political power of money, had a problem.
Now, behold, a brilliant rescue!
The loss of popularity reverberated in Tuesday's Pennsylvania primary.
Although Republican voters gave President Bush an easy victory, nearly half said in exit polls they wished there were someone else to vote for.
And everywhere, voters voice disgust over the pernicious influence of political money.
A Kettering Foundation study last summer found a widespread belief that "campaign contributions seem to determine political outcomes more than voting . . . so why bother?"


Devils, Inspired and Angry, Force a 7th Game
The Devils, inspired by remarks the Rangers made during New York's victory two nights earlier, put the Rangers precisely where they did not want to be tonight with a 5-3 victory at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
The triumph by New Jersey set up a seventh game at Madison Square Garden on Friday night to determine the winner of this first-round Patrick Division playoff.
The Rangers, seeking their first Stanley Cup in 52 years, have never won a seventh game in the playoffs.


Can School Boards Be Saved?
New Yorkers were supposed to go to the polls next week to choose representatives to their 32 community school boards.
But the vote was postponed pending action on two bills in the state Legislature that would overhaul the way our schools are run.
Even if the election were held, it is safe to assume that fewer than 8 percent of New Yorkers would have voted.
Why are so few of us interested in school board politics?


Lloyd Daniels's Next Stop: Long Island
LLOYD DANIELS, the peripatetic onetime wonder of the Queens high school courts, has signed to play for the Long Island Surf of the United States Basketball League.
Since his ill-fated recruitment by Nevada-Las Vegas and a series of brushes with drugs, Daniels, who was wounded in a shooting three years ago, has played for several Continental Basketball Association teams and in Europe and for Miami of the U.S.B.L. last summer.
Over the winter, he averaged 24.3 points a game for Greensboro of the new Global Basketball Association and was named the league's most valuable player.


Golden Journal; If Ground Rattles, They Jump To Work
As the earth danced beneath the feet of Californians on Saturday, an alarm shrieked in the control room at the National Earthquake Information Center here.
The computer terminals and the helicorders, which chart the epicenter and intensity of earthquakes around the world, flashed the dimensions of the gyrations.
The entire staff was called in for emergency work.


HOUSE TO GIVE UP RECORDS ON CHECKS TO A PROSECUTOR
In a resounding defeat for the Democratic leadership, the House tonight voted to comply with a Justice Department subpoena for House bank records.
The Democratic leaders who control the chamber had tried to construct a strategy that would have resisted what they called a politically inspired investigation without appearing to cover up a scandal that has enraged many voters.
But in two separate votes tonight, they failed.


Parsons Seniors Show Off in Style
IT was one of those celebrations the fashion industry holds periodically to renew itself and accomplish some good works.
There was plenty to celebrate at the party, held Tuesday night under the aegis of the Parsons School of Design.
Most important were the school's 98 graduating seniors who designed the 130 styles in the fashion show, a rite of passage for would-be designers.
Then there was the award, a small brass Parsons table, presented to Federated Department Stores and accepted by Allen I. Questrom, the chairman and chief executive, for guiding the department store chain out of bankruptcy proceedings.
Bloomingdale's, Jordan Marsh and Burdine's are among the 217 stores that belong to the chain.


Fumes and Complaints, a Noxious Battle and a Closed Factory
Two versions of the American dream homeownership and entrepreneurial success -- have collided in this affluent central Connecticut town, where complaints over noxious fumes have led the state to shut a plastics factory temporarily.
The battle, between a company called Polymer Resources and hundreds of Farmington residents who say they have suffered headaches, nausea and respiratory problems, began last year.
But it reached a turning point this month, when the state issued the order to close the plant.


The Boardwalk That Never Ends; In Cold, Quiet Months, 2 Men Renew a Summer Promenade
Board by board, nail by nail, Bob Arnold and Bob Kaminski have toiled side by side for 20 years in a crablike crawl northward, building a boardwalk.
It is a Sisyphean labor, one never completed.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Dave Douglas Group and Ben Monder-Pat Zimmerli Duo  The Knitting Factory
The Knitting Factory's annual Corner Store Festival, which started on Tuesday and runs through tonight, has been putting on shows by the most marginal of the marginal, run by musicians and featuring a low cover charge for the last three years.
Performers who don't quite fit in the jazz world or the downtown new-music scene fit right in; all sorts of genres have their stylistic seams examined.
Judging from the nearly full house on Tuesday night, there's a constituency out there willing to spend an evening listening to the music.


CHRONICLE
Whom would you get to entertain if you invited MIKHAIL GORBACHEV to dinner?
Yeshiva University decided on JACKIE MASON, and Mr.
Mason is both pleased and baffled.
He said yesterday that he was in a panic at the prospect of trying to amuse Mr.
Gorbachev at a banquet being given at the Hotel Pierre by the university's Benjamin N. Cardozo School of Law on May 13.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo; Despite Grip on Nomination, Bush Still Gropes for Agenda
Although President Bush claimed his party's nomination Tuesday night, Administration officials say he has recognized what many Republican strategists concluded long ago: that he has not given the rest of America a good reason why he deserves a second term.
That is why the President has instructed his staff to focus on defining a broad agenda for the next five years, the officials say, an order that came as Mr.
Bush shifted his attention to the general election and away from a primary season that had been much meaner than any of his advisers had predicted.


Lawyer Convicted of Defrauding Clients
Harvey Myerson, a lawyer widely known for his flamboyant style in and out of court, was convicted yesterday of defrauding some of his clients of more than $2 million but was acquitted of defrauding his law firm of an additional $1 million.
Mr.
Myerson, a short, stocky 52-year-old corporate lawyer who acted as his own defense attorney, was found guilty of five charges and not guilty of five others at the end of his six-week trial in Federal District Court in Brooklyn.


Quotation of the Day
"We used to give a speech once and never came back to it. We never give the 'why' of things. We're just getting around to the 'why' now." -- MARLIN FITZWATER, President Bush's spokesman.  [ A18:6. ]


The Year of the Woman
The voting in Pennsylvania enhanced the notion that 1992 might be the year for women to gain many election victories.
Page A18.


U.S. to Stop Making Arms-Grade Uranium
The Energy Department said today that it would no longer produce highly enriched uranium for the building of nuclear weapons.
The step, which Energy Secretary James D. Watkins said would bring an immediate saving of $84 million, means the permanent shutdown of two nuclear processing plants whose task was to produce the uranium by reprocessing spent nuclear fuel.
One is at the Savannah River Plant near Aiken, S.C.; the other is at the Idaho National Engineering Laboratory near Idaho Falls.


On The Lower East Side With: Jim Jarmusch; Film as Life, and Vice Versa
JIM Jarmusch's planet is the Lower East Side.
Its bars, its bodegas and its pavement make up his home, his office and his hangout.
On a recent night on planet Jarmusch, the streets are quiet and bright.
Walking down Prince Street west of the Bowery, the director passes local landmarks like Buffa's Luncheonette, sometime haven for colleagues like Jonathan Demme and Martin Scorsese, and St.
Patrick's School, where Mr.
Scorsese attended grade school.
He turns down Mulberry Street, past one of John Gotti's social clubs.
With his sharp gray near-pompadour and lanky frame, Mr.
Jarmusch cuts quite a figure.
His shimmery maroon coat falls down upon skinny black jeans and combat boots.
People recognize him.
A group of guys on a corner teases him: "Hey, isn't that Jim Jarmusch, famous film director?" They cackle, and he smiles.


Curb on Population Growth Needed Urgently, U.N. Says
After revising upward its forecasts for world population growth, a United Nations agency called today for "a sustained and concerted program starting immediately" to curb the expansion.
It said such action was needed to reduce poverty and hunger and to protect the earth's natural resources.
Releasing its latest population projections, the United Nations Population Fund said the world's population would probably rise from 5.48 billion in mid-1992 to 10 billion in 2050 before leveling off at 11.6 billion after the year 2150.


Hartford Senate Passes Bill To Legalize Slot Machines
The state Senate voted 24 to 11 tonight to legalize slot machine gambling.
The bill would concentrate thousands of machines at six sites across Connecticut on a scale to rival Atlantic City or Las Vegas.
The existing jai alai gambling hall in Bridgeport, for instance, could have up to 1,750 machines set up and whirring by this fall, with a portion of the profits directed into a fund to provide local municipal aid.
Hartford could have up to 1,000 machines and Milford 1,250, according to the bill the Senate approved.


Ford Turns Profitable In Quarter
The Ford Motor Company, reversing a string of five money-losing quarters, today became the second Big Three auto maker to post a quarterly profit.
Ford said it earned $338 million, or 60 cents a share, for the first quarter, compared with a loss of $884.4 million last year.
The big swing to a profit reflected a 33 percent jump in sales of cars from Ford to its dealers in the United States as well as a more profitable mix of vehicles like the popular Ford Explorer utility vehicle and light- truck models.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Women; With Outsiders In, Female Candidates Come Forward
Harriett Woods, president of the National Women's Political Caucus, asserted today that Lynn H. Yeakel is only the latest in a string of "stealth women candidates" who are primed to shock the male-dominated political establishment this year.
"This is a unique year for the outsider," said Ms.
Woods, who described a political climate that has changed dramatically since her two failed bids for the Senate from Missouri in the 1980's.
"And women are seen as the outsiders -- even when they're inside."


Review/Dance; With Movements, Tudor's Short Stories
Antony Tudor is rightfully revered for his ambitious psychological dance-dramas.
But this great English choreographer, who died in 1987, also created small-scale works that could be called short stories in movement.
The New York Theater Ballet revived three on Sunday night at Gould Hall.
Each viewed some aspect of life as a competition and, like a good short story, each was terse, entertaining and emotionally potent.
Tudor choreographed "Judgment of Paris" in London in 1938.
Two years later, Ballet Theater introduced it to New York during its first season.
The title refers to the Greek myth that tells how a youth named Paris is asked to choose between three goddesses.


Results Plus
TENNIS  South Africa Wins  South Africa returned to Davis Cup competition yesterday for the first time since 1978, beating Cameroon in two singles matches at the start of a six-nation qualifying event in Tunis.
Christo Van Rensberg defeated Lionel Kemajou, 6-0, 6-0, and Wayne Ferreira beat Angelin Muogo, 7-5, 6-2.
In other matches, Algeria won its opening two singles against Tunisia and Senegal did the same against Congo.
South Africa was readmitted by the International Tennis Federation last year after President F. W. de Klerk's moves to dismantle apartheid. (AP) Lendl Is Upset: Gabriel Markus, an unseeded 22-year-old from Argentina, upset Ivan Lendl, the world's No. 10 player, 1-6, 7-5, 7-6 (7-3), yesterday in the first round of the City of Madrid Grand Prize tournament.
Markus, ranked 53d in the world, raised his fist in glee after his startling victory over the tournament favorite.
Lendl's play suffered from repeated unforced errors, as Markus sent him from corner to corner with solid ground strokes on the clay surface.
In another match, No. 8 seeded Jordi Arrese of Spain defeated Thierry Champion of France, 6-2, 4-6, 6-1. (AP)


'Grand Hotel' Closes
"Grand Hotel," the musical by Luther Davis, Robert Wright and George Forrest, closed after Sunday's matinee at the Gershwin Theater, 1633 Broadway, at 51st Street.
The show, directed by Tommy Tune and based on Vicki Baum's novel, ran for 1,018 regular performances and 31 previews.


House Move On Mutual Funds Begun
The House Committee on Energy and Commerce, which oversees the financial markets, has initiated an examination of how well the Securities and Exchange Commission is monitoring the use of insider information in the mutual fund industry.
In a letter sent to the agency early this week, John D. Dingell, Democrat of Michigan, chairman of the oversight committee, asked the S.E.C. to advise his panel by the end of next month on what it has done, or intends to do, to insure that mutual funds and other investment companies have installed adequate barriers to prevent the misuse of sensitive information.


Sports of The Times; 7th-Game Hex Haunts Rangers Now
YOU hear it everywhere: Aren't the playoffs terrific?
Will the Devils eliminate the Rangers?
How did the Knicks beat the Pistons out there in overtime?
Can the Nets pull it out?
Over the regular-season schedules of pro basketball and hockey, teams occasionally play a "crucial game" or a "crucial series" because not every game is that meaningful.
But in the playoffs, the word "crucial" is superfluous.
Just "the playoffs" is enough.
In the playoffs, every game is meaningful.


Corporations Must Police Executive Salaries; Greeding of America
To the Editor:
Roberto C. Goizueta, chairman of the Coca-Cola Company, defends his 1991 pay and stock bonus package of $86 million on ground of his company's growth and increase in value (Business Day, April 16).
Nonsense.
If the growth of the company was double or even triple the figures given, neither Mr.
Goizueta nor any other public company chairman would be entitled to $86 million.


Garden Q. &amp; A.
High and Dry
Q.
I keep hearing the word "xeriscaping." Just what does this mean? -- Helen R. Lord, Brooklyn.
A.
It's water-sensible gardening, or, using plants that survive on reduced water rations.
Xeriscaping is derived from the Greek word "xeros," which means dry.
A xeriscaping movement began several years ago in Denver, where landscapers worked with the Water Department to develop more conservation-oriented plantings.
Plants with minimal water needs are becoming increasingly important in communities where water shortages are a concern.
But these plants are also superb for containers on sunny rooftops, terraces, patios and decks.
Xeriscape plants include Bar Harbor junipers, Russian olives and honey locust trees, as well as dusty miller, goldenrod, lavender, mullein, portulaca, Queen Anne's lace, Russian sage, sedum, thyme, yarrow and yucca.
Mulching is also stressed by xeriscape gardeners, as is good soil preparation with the addition of organic matter and the use of the most efficient irrigation system, like a soaker hose or low-volume dripper.
Brightening a Shady Sill
Q.
I am determined to have a window box garden, so could you run though the setup procedure and suggest plants for part shade? -- Douglas S. Owens, Fort Lee, N.J.
A.
Select a window box of fiberglass, wood, terra cotta or plastic, and check that there are at least three holes in the bottom for drainage; you can drill them yourself if they don't exist.
Then, add a half-inch layer of broken crockery or styrofoam chips, and cover it either with a screen, burlap strips, or one or two sheets of shredded newsprint.
Fill the box about three-quarters full with any all-purpose potting mix, then stir in several trowels of perlite and organic matter.
Leaf mold, aged horse manure or compost is great if you can get it.
If not, you can buy a five-pound box of odorless, aged cow manure from Merrill's Manure, P.O.
Box 708, Millerton, N.Y. 12546; phone, (518) 789-4123.
It costs $9.95.
Plants for partly sunny sills include ageratum, basil, bay, bee-balm (Monarda didyma), begonia, browallia, caladium, cigar plant (Cuphea ignea), dwarf Chinese Astilbe chinensis Pumila), ferns, four o'clocks, fringed bleeding heart (Dicentra eximia), Lady's Mantle, lantana, lobelia, wishbone flower (Torenia) and English ivy, mint or vinca to trail over the side. Fill in around the plants with extra soil if needed, and then water well. Pets and Plants
Q.
How do I prevent the dog and cat waste that damages lawns and flowers?
I've tried camphor balls as a repellent with no success. -- Lila Knoll, Wantagh, L.I..
A.
I've experimented with applying two herbal-based products that have some repelling effect, at least for a while.
But first the site must be hosed free of all droppings and odor.
One product is called Scent-off.
It consists of small pellets containing oil of lemon grass and citronella.
It is made by Plantabbs Products in Timonium, Md., and a 12-ounce package is about $7.
If you can't find it at a nursery or hardware store, call Plantabbs at (800) 227-4340.
The second product, Rescue!, is a liquid containing oil of anise.
It is made by Sterling International of Liberty Lake, Wash., and a 16-ounce bottle is about $7.
If you can't find it, call Sterling at (800) 666-6766.
Address questions to Garden
Q. &amp; A., The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York 10036.
Those of general interest will be published.
Unpublished questions cannot be answered individually.


Notes and Bonds Decline in Price
Prices of Treasury notes and bonds moved lower yesterday after the Government announced it will sell $36 billion worth of new securities at next week's quarterly refunding auctions.
The size of the auctions was unchanged from the February auctions but it was a bit smaller than most analysts had anticipated, and prices of outstanding securities moved higher for a few minutes after the announcement was made.


Yields on Tax-Exempts Up, But Taxable Funds Are Off
Yields on money market funds monitored by IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report were mixed in the latest week.
Analysts do not expect to see any significant change in yield over the next few months as the economy continues to emit varying signals about the strength of the recovery.
For the week ended Monday, tax-exempt money fund yields were up smartly for the second consecutive survey period, following two weeks of declines.
Analysts said the rise in yields was connected to the heavy supply of new tax-exempt issues.
Yields on taxable funds were down slightly.


Corrections
An article on Tuesday about the proclamation of a smaller Yugoslav federation misstated the date for the formal adoption of the name Yugoslavia.
It was 1929.


U.S. Warns On Threats To Wiretaps
Sophisticated defenses against wiretapping are outpacing the Government's ability to monitor telephone communications for intelligence gathering and law enforcement purposes, senior Administration officials told a Congressional panel today.
The warning came at a hearing on foreign espionage against American companies.
The Federal Bureau of Investigation relies heavily on court-ordered wiretaps in its pursuit of mob leaders and drug traffickers, while the highly secretive National Security Agency gathers military, political and economic intelligence by monitoring international calls.


INSIDE
Splitting the Pie in Kabul
The new Afghan Islamic Government appears to be in control of Kabul, but its tasks are complicated by dissension among ethnic groups.
Page A10.
Twin Pressures on the Press
The Arthur Ashe episode is a reminder of the difficulty editors face in reconciling American passions for information and privacy.
Page B11.
Transit Contract Agreement
Transit officials and leaders of New York City's transit workers' union reached a agreement they said would prevent a strike.
Page B1.


News Media Torn Two Ways in Debate on Privacy
It is not easy for the nation's editors to reconcile the twin American passions for both information -- including quantities of gossip -- and privacy.
On the one hand is an apparent rising tide of advocacy for personal privacy; on the other is a glut of publications and television programs devoted to the most intimate details of people's lives.
The public derides the press for revealing the details and yet gives high ratings to the tabloid television shows.


Bridge
Many of those who learned the game young in a family setting were plied with absolute rules of thumb that derive from the early days of bridge, or even from whist.
All of them, like "third hand high," "second hand low" and "through strength up to weakness," have so many exceptions as to be largely worthless unless further defined.
That generalization itself has an exception, since "never trump your partner's ace" is very nearly true.
Another "rule" that leads frequently to error is, "Always return your partner's suit." It would be more accurate, but also more difficult, to say that you should generally return your partner's suit, but should consider whether a shift is likely to be productive.


With Old-World Pageantry, Russians Bury a Romanov
Three-quarters of a century after his family lost the Russian imperial throne, the late scion of the Romanovs was brought back to St.
Petersburg for a funeral befitting a king and for eventual interment alongside his ancestors in the Fortress of SS.
Peter and Paul.
Grand Duke Vladimir Kirillovich Romanov, eulogized as the head of the Russian dynastic house by Patriarch Aleksy II of the Russian Orthodox Church, died in Florida last Thursday while working to encourage American businessmen to invest in Russia.
A Glorious Heritage
With virtually no debate, President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia and Mayor Anatoly A. Sobchak of St.
Petersburg quickly cleared the way for his burial in a special vault for Romanovs, though not in the church where all Romanov emperors from Peter the Great through Alexander II were interred.


Dinkins Admits Tax Plan Faces Uphill Albany Battle
After a cool reception from skeptical lawmakers here today, Mayor David N. Dinkins conceded that it would be difficult to win legislative authorization for a tax package he needs to balance New York City's budget.
But Mr.
Dinkins said he would continue to lobby for the $115 tax package, which includes the first increase in the commuter-earnings tax in 21 years.
And the Mayor said the only alternative to the tax increases he has requested would be to make cuts in popular spending measures, like the expansion of library hours and after-school programs proposed in his budget this week.


Namath Forced to Have Surgery on Knees
His arthritic condition worsening, JOE NAMATH, a former Jets quarterback, had both knees replaced by a surgical procedure yesterday in a four-hour operation at the Hospital for Special Surgery in Manhattan.
The surgery was performed by Dr.
CHITRANJAN RANAWAT, an internationally recognized leader in joint replacement surgery.
The operation was necessitated by advanced arthritis compounded by the strenuous activity of pro football.
Namath, who will turn 49 next month, will be hospitalized for 10 days and then will need crutches for at least a month.


Delta to Reduce Spending, Cutting Orders for Planes
Delta Air Lines, which has tried to hold firm to its original expansion plan, gave in to economic realities yesterday, announcing that it would cut its capital spending by $5 billion.
The saving will come mainly from reducing its orders for new planes by about 100.
For the consumer, the decision will mean that Delta will be flying older airplanes longer and will not be increasing the frequency of flights on some routes as quickly as it had planned.


Ruling in 'Six Degrees' Suit
A State Supreme Court justice in Manhattan ruled yesterday that David Hampton, whose real-life confidence scheme inspired John Guare's play "Six Degrees of Separation," was not entitled to civil damages for the fictional use of his story.
In a civil suit filed last fall, Mr.
Hampton argued that because the play made use of incidents from his life, he was entitled to compensatory and punitive damages amounting to $100 million from Mr.
Guare and his co-defendants: Lincoln Center Theater and Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts, where the play was performed; Bernard Gersten, the play's producer; Random House, which published the text of the play, and MGM-Pathe Communications, which bought the film rights to the play.


Abrams Cuts Campaign Staff
About one-third of Attorney General Robert Abrams's campaign staff has been dismissed in his bid for the United States Senate because of the need to use limited funds for television commercials, campaign workers said yesterday.
But Mr.
Abrams's campaign manager, John Burke, insisted that fund raising was on target and that the dismissals were made "to put the campaign on the right footing."


Mahoney's Allegiance Pays Off
Bill Melchionni.
John Roche.
Brian Taylor.
Those are the names Brian Mahoney remembered yesterday morning, teammates on the New York Nets of the old American Basketball Association whose injuries created opportunities for his coach, Lou Carnesecca, to keep bringing Mahoney back onto the active roster.
Who could have known the possibilities that association would help create?
Mahoney was named the 14th head coach in St.
John's history yesterday, the culmination of 16 seasons as an assistant on Carnesecca's staff.


Niagara Falls Revenue Bonds
The Niagara Falls Bridge Commission priced $115 million in toll-bridge-system revenue bonds yesterday through underwriters led by Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Company.
Underwriters said the maximum yield offered to the public was 6.55 percent for a bond due in 2019.
Another long-term bond due 2011 is priced to yield 6.5 percent.


Du Pont's Earnings Fell By 18% in First Quarter
E.I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Company reported yesterday that its quarterly earnings were off 18 percent from the comparable period a year earlier, and it announced a 2-cent dividend increase, to 44 cents a share.
The earnings report exceeded analysts' expectations, and trading in the company's stock was brisk, with 2.3 million shares changing hands, as the price on the New York Stock Exchange rose $1.625, to $52.625, its high for the year.


Review/Opera; A Bustling 'Turandot' by Philadelphia Troupe
It did not help, in approaching a production of "Turandot" by the Opera Company of Philadelphia at the Academy of Music on Friday evening, to have heard Luciano Pavarotti sing Calaf's big aria, "Nessun dorma," on the same stage two nights earlier.
Still less did it help to have seen authentic Chinese opera in New York on Thursday.
Mr.
Pavarotti has been something of a patron saint to the company in recent years.
But his ringing "Nessun dorma," in the Philadelphia Orchestra's farewell tribute to its music director, Riccardo Muti, put the vocal shortcomings of the production's Calaf, Ermanno Mauro, into sharp relief.
This upstaging by the orchestra also pointed up a larger problem: in the overworked, overstuffed academy, which is owned and operated by the orchestra, the opera company cannot establish a permanent presence or even find room over short periods for sizable sets.


Wells Fargo Notes Will Yield 8.81%
Wells Fargo &amp; Company, a bank holding company, is offering to the public $200 million in 10-year notes through underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.
The notes have an 8 3/4 percent coupon and are priced at 99.603 to yield 8.81 percent, or about 125 basis points more than the Treasury 10-year note, according to the underwriter.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
MOST wooden-door problems crop up suddenly in humid spring and summer weather; they should be let alone to see if they go away when drier conditions return.
But if a wooden door has squeaked or rattled for months, or has been hard to open or close, there is probably an easy remedy for the complaint.
To quiet a squeaking door, clean and lubricate the hinge pins.
Remove, service and replace them one at a time to keep the door from falling.


Kim Recital Canceled
The violinist Young Uck Kim has canceled his May 9 recital at the 92d Street Y because of illness.
In his place, Kyoko Takezawa, a violinist, accompanied by Akira Eguchi, a pianist, will perform Debussy's Sonata in G minor, Saint-Saens' Sonata in D minor, Ravel's Sonata in G and Sarasate's "Carmen" Fantasy.
Tickets are $25.
Tickets for Mr.
Kim's concert will be honored at the door.
Information: (212) 996-1100.


Calendar: Inside, Outside, New, Old
Benefit Tour
New York Metropolitan Chapter of the American Society of Interior Designers, 200 Lexington Avenue (32d Street); (212) 685-3480.
A tour of seven residences and two business interiors, including a triplex apartment overlooking the East River, a combination office/one-bedroom apartment and a town house, will be held from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M. on Saturday.
Proceeds will benefit the chapter, the American Cancer Society and God's Love We Deliver, an organization that takes meals to people with AIDS.
Tickets, $50.
A Model City
Urban Center Galleries of the Municipal Art Society, 457 Madison Avenue (51st Street); (212) 935-3960.
An exhibition of plans, maps and photographs of Curitiba, a planned city in southern Brazil, runs through May 13.
In the past two decades, Curitiba has built a surface transit system, preserved open space with 15 large parks, planted 1.5 million trees and developed a program to recycle 80 percent of the city's trash.
Hours: 11 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Monday through Saturday (closed Thursday).
Free.
Also on display in the galleries are models, plans and drawings by seven architects who won an annual design contest sponsored by the Architectural League of New York.
Through May 15.
Some of the architects will be featured in lectures at 6:30 P.M. today and May 7.
Admission: $5.
Cultural Artifacts
I.B.M. Gallery of Science and Art, 590 Madison Avenue (56th Street); (212) 745-6100.
Two exhibitions will be at the gallery through June 13.
The first features drawings, scale models, photographs and costume and set designs from the Russian theater between 1913 and 1935.
Woven, dyed and embroidered Korean costumes and textiles and beaded accessories and jewelry from the 18th to the early 20th century are featured in a second exhibition.
Hours: 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Tuesday through Saturday.
Free.
Preservation Conference
Stouffer Rochester Plaza Hotel, 70 State Street off Main Street, Rochester; (518) 462-5658.
The Preservation League of New York State and the Landmark Society of Western New York are sponsoring a preservation conference from May 8 to 10.
It will include lectures, workshops and tours of historic sites.
Fee for all lectures, $35.
Tours and other events are extra.
Call for schedules and registration information.
Queens History
Queens Historical Society, 143-35 37th Avenue between Parsons Boulevard and Bowne
Street, Flushing, N.Y.; (718) 939-0647.
An exhibition of artifacts, photographs and maps about the 350-year history of the borough continues through May 31.
There will be tours of landmark buildings on May 2, 9, 16 and 30; call for a schedule.
Exhibition hours: 2:30 to 4:30 P.M.
Tuesday, Saturday and Sunday.
Admission: $2; $1 for those 60 and older, students and children under 17.
Celebrity Plates
Neuberger Museum, State University of New York at Purchase, 735 Anderson Hill Road off Route 287, Purchase, N.Y.; (914) 251-6100.
Ceramic plates designed by Nancy Graves, Red Grooms, Alison Saar and William Wegman, among others, will be auctioned along with paintings, jewelry and art books on May 9 starting at 7 P.M.
Tickets, including reception, $100.
Proceeds will benefit the museum.
The items will be on display through May 8.
Hours: 10 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Tuesday-Friday; 11 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Saturday and Sunday.


CREDIT MARKETS;
Norsk Hydro A.S., one of the largest industrial corporations in Norway, priced $300 million in 20-year debentures yesterday for sale in the United States debt market through underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.
The debentures have a 9 percent coupon and are priced at 100, to yield investors about 95 basis points more than the Treasury's 30-year bond.
A basis point is one-hundredth of a percentage point.


Architecture as Icon
THE farmhouse, that embattled symbol of rural America, has left the cornfields behind and now hangs in midair in Queens.
It is part of the "Springworks" exhibition on display through Sunday at the New York Hall of Science in Flushing Meadows-Corona Park.
Barry Holden's "Levittation (the Floating Building Project)" (above) carries a whiff of Levittown in its title, he said, so that people from suburbs, farms and cities can all relate to it.


Transit Union Reaches Deal On a Contract
Transit officials and leaders of the transit workers' union, whose 32,000 members rejected a contract last month, said yesterday that they had reached a new agreement that would prevent a threatened strike by New York City's subway and bus workers.
"The strike threat is gone," said Sonny Hall, president of Local 100 of the Transport Workers Union.
"There is not going to be a strike." The agreement contains a provision that both sides will agree to binding arbitration should the rank and file reject the new contract.


It's 'Henry's Show,' at Kissinger-Beijing Event
In the 20 years since President Richard M. Nixon made his breakthrough trip to Beijing, the scenery and the players in the diplomatic drama between the United States and China have almost all been recast.
But the framework for the Chinese-American relationship, as it was spelled out in a piece of paper called the Shanghai Communique, has remained standing, if a bit battered, since it was devised in 1972 by Mr.
Nixon and his foreign-affairs adviser, Henry A. Kissinger, and their Chinese counterparts.


Here Come Women Candidates
Money has been a Catch-22 for women who've run for office.
They haven't been able to win because they couldn't get enough of it; they couldn't get enough of it because fund-raisers thought they couldn't win.
But the time of women candidates seems to be at hand.
Twice in two months, women have surged out of nowhere, winning Democratic Senate primaries in Illinois and Pennsylvania against well-financed, well-organized men.


Corrections
A picture caption in some editions yesterday misidentified the man to whom Gov.
Bill Clinton was speaking at a rally on Tuesday night in Boston.
He was a television reporter.


U.S. Further Eases Its Restrictions on Trade With Vietnam
The United States further relaxed its 28-year-old economic embargo against Vietnam today, saying it would allow commercial sales of items like food, medicine and farm machinery that meet basic human needs.
The State Department said that Washington would also lift restrictions on projects sponsored by American non-governmental and nonprofit groups.


Speaker Backs Cuomo Plan to Take On Medicaid Costs
Assembly Speaker Saul Weprin today gave his unqualified endorsement to Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's complex and potentially expensive proposal for the state to assume the local share of Medicaid costs.
Mr.
Weprin's announcement, in an interview with New York City reporters, was the first significant display of legislative support for a proposal aimed at protecting New York City's and other local governments from the explosive growth in the cost of Medicaid, the primary health-care program for the poor.


Market Place; Excellent Quarter For Mutual Funds
ALTHOUGH the hectic pace slowed a bit in March, mutual funds had their best quarter in nearly five years during the first three months of 1992, figures released yesterday by the Investment Company Institute indicate, because of the huge torrents of cash that poured into stock funds.
Some $20.8 billion of new assets, net of redemptions and transfers, went into stock funds in the quarter, far surpassing the $15.7 billion record set the previous quarter.
It was also the best quarter for three of the more speculative categories of equity products -- aggressive growth funds, growth funds and growth and income funds.


Jordan Scores 56 Points, Finishing Sweep of Heat
Bulls 119, Heat 114
MIAMI, April 29 (AP) -- The Miami Heat took an 18-point lead.
Then Michael Jordan took over.
Jordan scored no points in the first 10 minutes and then scored 56 after that tonight to help the Chicago Bulls beat the Heat, 119-114, and complete a sweep of their first-round playoff series.


Mayor Said to Plan 5-Day Trip
Mayor David N. Dinkins is planning to travel to Western Europe for about five days in June to explore economic opportunities for New York City in a trip sponsored by local civic and business groups, officials familiar with the plans said yesterday.
The Mayor will be accompanied by Barry F. Sullivan, Deputy Mayor for finance and economic development, and business leaders, said the officials, who spoke on condition of anonymity.


Verdict Sets Off a Wave of Shock and Anger
Governor Pete Wilson mobilized the National Guard tonight as angry rioters rampaged through the streets of the city, smashing and looting stores, beating passing motorists and setting scores of fires.
The violence was ignited by the acquittals of four Los Angeles Police officers who were shown on videotape beating and kicking a black motorist, Rodney G. King, in what has become a symbol here of the antagonisms between the city's minorities and its peacekeepers.


The Boss Didn't Renege; He Walked Out
GEORGE STEINBRENNER is upset over a story that he reneged on a pledge to donate $10,000 to help the Ocala/Marion Chamber of Commerce sponsor next week's modern pentathlon olympic trials and national championships in Ocala, Fla.
"I never reneged on a pledge in my life," said Steinbrenner, a United States Olympic Committee vice president who figures he has donated $300,000 to the Olympics over the last few years.
Steinbrenner conceded that he had once promised $10,000 to the chamber, but said that was before a woman, who had previously made an unrelated deal with a hotel he owns in Ocala to give discounts to athletes and pentathalon officials, tried to "hammer my hotel people," into giving even deeper discounts by contending other hotels had offered better deals.
"I just told my people to walk away from it and let the other hotels do it," he said.
Steinbrenner said that instead of giving the $10,000 to the chamber he was sending the money directly to the association.


Corporations Must Police Executive Salaries
To the Editor:
There's something terribly wrong on the executive compensation scene these days, and it's not just the horde of overpaid chief executive officers portrayed in the news media.
The problem is the effort by some legislators and consultants, wielding some slippery statistics, to micromanage a compensation system that has largely fulfilled its goal of spurring good performance and profits from American business.


Plan Is Cut For Plants In Converting Of Sludge
Saying they had been persuaded by community opposition, Dinkins administration officials said yesterday that they had cut back a plan to build a string of plants that would convert sewage sludge to fertilizer and similar products.
Instead of eight plants, as originally proposed, they now propose to build five.
Two of the three that were dropped --in Red Hook in Brooklyn and Maspeth in Queens -- were among the proposed plants most vehemently resisted by neighboring residents and business people, who said they feared the proposed plants would bring noxious odors and greatly increased truck traffic.


Loss Is Trimmed at McCaw
McCaw Cellular Communications Inc., the nation's largest provider of cellular telephone service, reported a narrower loss in the first quarter of $118.8 million compared with a loss of $169.1 million a year earlier.
First-quarter revenue rose 27.7 percent, to $374.7 million, from $293.4 million.
Bradford L. Peery, who founded a telecommunications investment banking firm that bears his name, said that the results were within his expectations and that cash flow and operating margins were excellent.


Computer Flaw Suspected in Test-Plane Crash
The Air Force Chief of Staff said today that he suspected that an error in computerized flight controls was responsible for the crash of the only working test model of the service's most advanced radar-evading fighter.
The Chief of Staff, Gen.
Merrill A. McPeak, told the House Armed Services Committee that the accident, which occurred at Edwards Air Force Base, Calif., last Saturday and was disclosed by the service on Tuesday, would not slow development of the aircraft, the F-22.


A Walk on a Bridge


Lemieux Proves Penguins Can Fly -- Right Into Game 7
The Pittsburgh Penguins are still the defending Stanley Cup champions, at least for one more game.
With his team facing elimination in the first round tonight, Mario Lemieux put on a spectacular performance and led Pittsburgh to a 6-4 victory over the Washington Capitals.
Lemieux scored two goals and had three assists before a roaring, standing, stomping crowd of 16,164 at the Civic Arena.


Brazil Fails to Act In Agrarian Violence
To the Editor:
For many members of rural trade unions in Brazil, living with death threats is a common occurrence.
What is also common is the blatant failure of Brazilian authorities to take action to protect unionists from being murdered.
Such intransigence is fueling the giant machinery of violence operating in Brazil today.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt *
North Dakota is offering $53.2 million in student-loan-refunding revenue bonds through underwriters led by Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Co.
The tax-exempt issue is priced to yield from 3.75 percent in 1993 to 6.10 percent in 2001 and is rated Aa by Moody's and AA- by S.&amp; P.


Review/Film; The Details Of a Life As It Ends
"I'm very old and a little bit sick, but I
love
life and I
love
young people!" That gallant half-truth comes from the central figure in "A Woman's Tale," Martha (Sheila Florance), who is in fact much more ill than she lets on. In Paul Cox's new film about Martha, Miss Florance is quite literally a haunting presence.Playing a character whose history and attitudes are modeled on her own, Miss Florance was dying of cancer when this film was made. She died just after accepting the Australian Film Institute's best-actress award for this performance.


Knicks Glad to Have 'Real' McDaniel Back
Xavier McDaniel and his teammates were given today off by Coach Pat Riley.
They needed it.
And they deserved it.
The 90-87 overtime victory on Tuesday over the Detroit Pistons was the Knicks' most emotional and their most important victory of the season.
Holding a 2-1 lead in the three-of-five-game series, New York can end the series by winning Game 4 here on Friday night.


Iran Struggles to Attract Investors
For more than a year, Mohammed Hussein Adeli, who heads Iran's central bank, has painted a rosy portrait of his country's economic future, one that is filled with stable currency exchange rates, double-digit growth, single-digit inflation, a balanced budget, foreign investment and loans, even credit cards.
First comes his profit pitch: "There are lots of opportunities now, because Iran is emerging as one of the economic magnets of the region with the wealth it has and the new policies and economic opportunities it can create."


TRUCE COLLAPSING IN YUGOSLAV AREA
Almost a week after Western pressure produced a new cease-fire agreement in Bosnia and Herzegovina, heavy fighting is continuing in the former Yugoslav republic, dimming hopes that Serbia and the Serbian guerrillas it supports in Bosnia will honor pledges to allow Bosnia's future to be settled in newly resumed negotiations under European Community sponsorship.
Across Bosnia today, there was fighting in at least five different towns in a wide arc across the republic's northern, eastern and southern regions, as well as a major battle in the center of Sarajevo, the Bosnian capital, that began after dusk and featured artillery, mortar and rifle fire, some of it by the Serb-led Yugoslav Army.
In another big battle, at the southern town of Mostar, Serbian gunners and Yugoslav Army units continued to pour artillery, mortar and rocket fire into the center of the predominantly Muslim Slav and Croat town, killing at least three people and heavily damaging a hospital.


Dinkins and His Tax Package Get a Cool Reception in Albany


Penderecki Wins Music Award
The Polish composer Krzysztof Penderecki has won the $150,000 Grawemeyer Award for Music Composition, a prestigious prize named for Charles Grawemeyer, a retired Kentucky industrialist, and awarded annually by the University of Louisville.
Mr.
Penderecki, who is 58 years old, won the prize for his Adagio for Large Orchestra, a 33-minute movement from his Fourth Symphony.
Like many of Mr.
Penderecki's recent scores, the work is in an essentially tonal, neo-Romantic language and has a political subtext.
It was commissioned by Radio France and the French Secretary of State to commemorate the 200th anniversary of the Declaration of the Rights of Man.
It was given its premiere by Lorin Maazel and the National Orchestra of France on Nov. 26, 1989.


Kevin Kennedy Dies; Ad Executive Was 67
Kevin Kennedy, a former advertising executive in Manhattan and a longtime resident of Princeton, N.J., and Vineyard Haven, Mass., died of a heart attack last Thursday while working in the garden of his home on Martha's Vineyard.
He was 67 years old.
A native of Buffalo, Mr.
Kennedy graduated from the Hill School in Pottstown, Pa., in 1943.
He deferred his entrance into Princeton University to serve in the South Pacific with the United States Navy during World War II and then returned to graduate from Princeton.


Down and Divided in Buffalo, Abortion Foes Suspend Siege
Floundering and dispirited after 10 days of protests that neither closed abortion clinics nor generated a groundswell of local support, members of Operation Rescue suspended their protest in Buffalo yesterday and sank into a tense debate over how -- or whether -- to proceed with demonstrations scheduled to end on Saturday.
The unexpected hiatus, and the debate that followed, revealed a split between Operation Rescue's local and national leaders.


One Killed and 53 Hurt in Virginia Train Crash
An Amtrak train bound for New York slammed into a dump truck at a crossing and derailed into a ravine this morning, killing the truck driver and injuring 53 passengers, officials said.
The crash occurred at an intersection that, like more than half of those in the United States, had no stop sign, lights, bells or gates.
But it does have warning signs known as cross bucks.


Bandages Instead of Bats and Balls
Mike Pagliarulo laughed at his plight and said: "I laugh now, but that day when I hurt my hand, I was sitting in the trainer's room in disbelief. I couldn't believe it happened."
Because it happened, Dr.
Charles Melone, a noted hand surgeon, successfully operated on Pagliarulo's right hand at New York University Medical Center on Tuesday.
Only six weeks earlier, a surgeon in Minneapolis repaired Pagliarulo's right eardrum.


A Winter Invalid, Broadway Revives For a Busy Spring
Broadway has roared out of its slump.
Last week, 27 productions attracted more than 222,000 theatergoers, more than in any single week since Christmas 1981.
These attendance figures closed out a month in which Broadway attracted more than 830,000 theatergoers and box-office receipts were the highest of any four-week period in New York theater history, according to figures from the League of American Theaters and Producers.
The total four-week take -- which reflects today's higher ticket prices -- was $30,108,322, more than $3 million higher than the previous four-week record, set in December 1989.


Entrepreneur Who Left U.S. Is Back, Awaiting Sentence
First he fled the United States after pleading guilty to running what New York officials called one of the largest gasoline bootlegging schemes in the nation.
Then he emerged as an entrepreneur in post-Communist Poland, founding a successful frozen-fruit exporting business and a private bank.


A Man's Child-Care Crusade
IN his long, adventure-filled career in journalism, Richard B. Stolley has often been preoccupied with great events of the day: the fledgling civil rights movement, the assassination of a President, political upheavals in foreign countries.
Child care was never a story, much less an issue that even crossed his mind.
"My ex-wife stayed home and took care of the children," said Mr.
Stolley, who now oversees People and two other weekly publications as the second-ranking editor in the Time Inc.
Magazine Company.
"It was her problem. My awareness of child care was, you picked up the baby sitter, you took the baby sitter home and sometimes you couldn't get a baby sitter."


Notes and Bonds Decline in Price
Prices of Treasury notes and bonds moved lower yesterday after the Government announced it will sell $36 billion worth of new securities at next week's quarterly refunding auctions.
The size of the auctions was unchanged from the February auctions but it was a bit smaller than most analysts had anticipated, and prices of outstanding securities moved higher for a few minutes after the announcement was made.


Former Ashton-Tate Chief Will Head a Xerox Spinoff
William P. Lyons, who was president and chief executive of the Ashton-Tate Corporation before its acquisition by Borland International Inc. last year, has joined Parc Place Systems as president and chief executive.
Based in Mountain View, Calif., Parc Place is a privately held company spun off from the Xerox Corporation to develop object-oriented software technology.
Mr.
Lyons, 47, succeeds Adele Goldberg, Parc Place's founder, who continues as chairwoman.
While at Xerox, Ms.
Goldberg was co-inventor of the Smalltalk software language, a pioneering effort in object-oriented programming, which allows computer users to create programs by linking reusable "building blocks" of software code.


Fire Dept. Bribe Charged
A civilian employee of the New York City Fire Department was arrested in Brooklyn last night and charged with soliciting a bribe from the pastor of a Bedford-Stuyvesant church, the police said.
The employee, Charles Souvenir, 36 years old, of 833 Quincy Street, in Bedford-Stuyvesant, told the pastor early last night that in exchange for an undisclosed sum of money, he would overlook building violations at the King Emmanuel Missionary Baptist Church, at 340 Malcolm X Boulevard.


Large Study Will Test Whether Drug Prevents Breast Cancer
The National Cancer Institute today began the first large-scale trial to see if a drug used to treat breast cancer can prevent it in women at high risk of developing the disease.
Researchers said the project, which will study 16,000 women at more than 270 sites in the United States and Canada, would also determine if the drug, tamoxifen, helps reduce two other disorders that afflict older women, heart disease and osteoporosis, a bone-thinning condition.


At City Hall, a Ceremony to Honor Crime Victims


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
NEW YORK YANKEES -- Activated Scott Kamieniecki, pitcher, from the 15-day disabled list.
Optioned Russ Springer, pitcher, to Columbus of the International League.
National League


Car-Alarm Law Needs Ticket-Writing Power
To the Editor:
Legislation pending in the New York City Council to reduce the annoyance of car alarms is a welcome response to their late-night interruptions (news article, April 21).


ACE Computer Standard Suffering
The ACE initiative, a once-ambitious plan to redefine desktop computing, has bit by bit been scaled back to little more than a marketing organization for one company's technology.
When it was announced a year ago, ACE, or the Advanced Computing Environment, aspired to do for computing in the 1990's what the I.B.M. personal computer did in the 1980's: set a standard that other computer makers would adopt.
Five of the computer industry's leading companies, and a host of smaller ones, came together in an effort to establish the dominant hardware and software architectures that would compete with I.B.M.'s standard for years to come.


Yanks Come Up Cold, And Just Above Zero
The zeros for the home team remained on the Yankee Stadium scoreboard for what seemed like hours last night, looking orderly and sweet to the Texas Rangers and demeaning and dirty to the Yankees.
But inning after scary inning, Jose Guzman insured their presence by not allowing the Yankees a run or a hit.
They walked to the plate on a cold and windy evening and were quickly mesmerized by an assortment of sinking fastballs, sliders and changeups.
If a Yankee hit the ball, it was caught, and he trudged back to the dugout with the zeros still hovering over him.


For Long Island Motorists, Help Is on the Way
To the Editor:
Your April 11 news article on Long Island's crowded highways states some of the conditions that commuters face on their daily auto trips.
New York's Nassau and Suffolk counties are home to 2.6 million people living on a long, slender island and, as you point out, many believe there are too many cars on Long Island.


Worley Is Ejected Under the Drug Policy
TIM WORLEY, the Pittsburgh Steeler running back who missed two mandatory drug tests in February, has received an automatic one-year suspension under the National Football League drug policy.
Worley, who was suspended for six weeks last fall after a second positive test for cocaine, said he missed the tests because he joined a group of N.F.L. players at the National Basketball Association All-Star Game in Florida.


Submarine Tankers Would Be a Form of Welfare
To the Editor:
"Perhaps now is the time," Lawrence Mollot writes in "Submarine Tankers" (letter, April 15), "to reconsider the use of submarine transport not only for oil but also as an all-purpose cargo vehicle for carrying the goods of the world."


Hibernians Expel Parade Chief
The annual brouhaha surrounding New York City's St.
Patrick's Day parade has started 11 months early, as the parade's longtime chairman was expelled last week from the Ancient Order of Hibernians, which runs the traditional Irish celebration.
The state chapter of the Hibernians, which wrested the parade permit from the local county chapter in a court settlement in February, sent a letter to Francis P. Beirne, the controversial chairman, informing him of his ouster.
The letter was read to local Hibernian leaders at a meeting in Brooklyn on Friday, a Hibernian who was at the meeting said in an interview yesterday.


BRIEFS
*
Federated Department Stores Inc., Cincinnati, and I.B.M., Armonk, N.Y., signed a letter of intent to provide systems applications and solutions to the retail industry. *
Invacare Corp., Elyria, Ohio, a manufacturer of home medical equipment, authorized the purchase of up to 200,000 shares of its common stock for part of the company's contribution to an employee profit-sharing program.


Dr. Paul V. Lemkau Dies at 82; Promoted Mental Health Clinics
Dr.
Paul V. Lemkau, a psychiatrist and health administrator who was a leading advocate of treating mental health problems in community settings, died on Sunday at his home in the Chesapeake Bay town of Lusby, Md.
He was 82 years old.
He died of pneumonia, his family said.


Exxon Executive Disappears on Way to Work in New Jersey
A high-ranking Exxon executive disappeared yesterday after saying goodbye to his wife and leaving for his office in Florham Park, N.J.
The F.B.I. and local law-enforcement agencies are investigating.
The executive, Sidney J. Reso, the head of the division of Exxon that is responsible for the company's operations outside North America, was reported missing about 90 minutes after he said goodbye.
The Morris County Prosecutor, W. Michael Murphy Jr., said a neighbor noticed his car at the end of his driveway in Morris Township, the door open and the engine running.


Building Lags on Kennedy Control Tower
In another setback to a sweeping modernization plan for Kennedy International Airport, construction of a new control tower has slipped more than a year behind schedule, making the tower unlikely to begin operations before early next year, transportation officials said yesterday.
Officials of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, which operates the area's airports, attributed the delay to redesign and contractor problems but said that there were no structural problems in the slender, 321-foot tower.
Meanwhile, the existing 150-foot tower remains in service and can continue to handle existing air traffic, officials said, so the delay is not expected to hamper safety.


Pinochet Is 'My Franco,' Chile's Chief Says, Going His Own Way (Carefully)
President Patricio Aylwin says that when he meets other heads of state these days one of the first things they ask him is what life is like as President of Chile with Gen.
Augusto Pinochet still head of the army.
"John Major asked me that," Mr.
Aylwin said in an interview on Monday, referring to the British Prime Minister.
"It's a unique experience. I said to Felipe Gonzalez once: 'Imagine what it would be like to be President of Spain with Franco still alive. I am with my Franco. It's General Pinochet.' "


Norwest No. 2 Named To Take Over in 1993
Lloyd P. Johnson, the architect for the emergence of the Norwest Corporation as one of the nation's strongest banking companies, said yesterday that he planned to turn control of the company over to his second in command, Richard M. Kovacevich, at the start of next year.
Mr.
Johnson, who is 62 years old, and has been the chief executive for seven years, will be a tough act to follow.
Since he joined the Minneapolis company in 1985, problems with farm loans and mortgage lending have been cleaned up, profits increased nearly sixfold, to $398.5 million in 1991, and the company doubled in size.


Surprise at Magellan Fund: Lynch Successor Is Leaving
In a surprise announcement, Morris J. Smith, the quiet prodigy who two years ago succeeded the famed Peter Lynch as head of the Magellan Fund at Fidelity Investments, said yesterday that he planned to resign on July 1.
And the reason he gave was much the same as Mr.
Lynch's.
After a demanding time buying and selling stocks for the nation's largest, and at times most successful, mutual fund, they both wanted to spend more time with their families.
Jeffrey N. Vinik, the 33-year-old portfolio manager of the Fidelity Growth and Income Fund, with $3.7 billion in assets, will succeed Mr.
Smith, 34, as manager of Magellan, with $19.7 billion in assets.


At Derby, Watch for An Angel In Disguise
"Arazi?" asked Leroy Jolley, uttering the name on everybody's lips.
"He's obviously a very good horse."
"But," he added, uttering the grain of skepticism lurking in everybody's mind, "I don't know how they get the saddle on him over the wings."


Official in Teheran Reaffirms Backing for Lebanese Group
The Iranian Foreign Minister met with the leadership of the Party of God today in Teheran and reaffirmed his country's support for the group's activities in southern Lebanon, the Teheran radio reported.
The Foreign Minister, Ali Akbar Velayati, told the leader of the Party of God, Sheik Hassan Nasrallah, and his colleagues at a meeting in Teheran that Iran "seriously supports the Muslim struggle in the western Bekaa and southern Lebanon," the radio said.


The Cost of the Food Pyramid
Agriculture Secretary Edward Madigan earned criticism a year ago when, in an apparent bow to the cattlemen's lobby, he postponed publication of a new food pyramid chart designed to teach sound nutrition.
Nearly a million research dollars later, Mr.
Madigan has done what good sense called for in the first place: approved it.
The Food Guide Pyramid replaces the food-wheel charts used in schools since the 1950's.
They divided foods into four groups.
Each occupied substantial space, thus exaggerating the recommended consumption of meat and dairy products.
The pyramid, by contrast, graphically demonstrates the desirability of lowering dietary fat.


Corrections
An obituary on April 18 about Peter Jay Sharp, a hotelier and developer, included an erroneous reference to his role in the Abacus Fund, supplied by Mr.
Sharp's firm.
He was a shareholder and director, not chairman and chief executive.


Restoring a Glow With French Polish
FRENCH polish is among the most overused -- and misused -- terms in the lexicon of furniture finishes.
To begin, it is not a material but a technique: shellac is rubbed by hand onto a wood surface in a circular motion with a cloth pad to create a smooth, glassy finish.
"People mistakenly call anything rubbed on with a pad French polish," said James Boorstein, president of Traditional Line, an architectural restoration company that does French polishing.
Lacquers, synthetic varnishes and polyurethanes, for example, can make a furniture surface glisten, but they are not used in a proper French polish.


Debris of War and Politics on Road to Kabul
For the new Islamic leadership of Afghanistan, the road to final victory was the crumbling, two-lane blacktop that runs from Peshawar, Pakistan, to Kabul.
And the route that brought Sibgatullah Mojadedi, and the guerrilla coalition he now heads, to formally take power from the remnants of the Najibullah Government offered a glimpse into the devastation and divisions they have been entrusted to repair.


Books of The Times; The Problems of a Father's Fame
The Plagiarist  By Benjamin Cheever 322 pages. Atheneum. $20.
Arthur South Prentice, the 24-year-old protagonist of Benjamin Cheever's charming, funny first novel, "The Plagiarist," is tormented from every side.
His well-built wife, Faith, equates sexual potency with financial liquidity.
Because Arthur makes only $6,800 a year (it's 1974) as a reporter for The High Cliff Bugler, he is forced to sleep in the sewing room of their Westchester County house in New York with a gerbil named Count Fosco who gnaws on the inside of his Habitrail.


Channel 13 Picks Bergelt
Bergelt Litchfield Inc. in New York was named to handle advertising and marketing services for WNET, Channel 13, Newark and New York.
Billings were not yet set, said Lisa DeAndrade, the PBS station's director of advertising services.
The account had previously been at Young &amp; Rubicam New York, she said, which declined to participate in a review.
Eight agencies were involved in the review, and the finalists were Bergelt and Ketchum Advertising New York.


Rangers and Devils Fight It Out Until the Messy End
The game was over.
The Devils had beaten the Rangers, 5-3, in Game 6 tonight at Byrne Meadowlands Arena, but the brawl and the ill will would not end.
The fists and then the recriminations were everywhere, from the red line to the locker room.
"We have gotten to the point," said Mike Gartner, "where these two teams really don't like each other."


Review/Theater: Falsettos; Broadway Boundary Falls Amid Reunions
Last night's opening of William Finn's exhilarating and heartbreaking musical "Falsettos" at the John Golden Theater marked the official end of the Broadway season, and what more perfect end to this season could there be?
In a theater year marked by signs of an American musical renaissance on Broadway and an explosion of American playwriting off Broadway, "Falsettos" is a show in which the boundary separating Off Broadway and Broadway is obliterated, a show in which the most stylish avatars of the new American musical embrace the same thorny urban landscape of embattled men and women to be found in so many new American plays.
The evening also brings this highly charged season to a close with the charged emotions of an eagerly awaited reunion.
"Falsettos" is the seamless merging of two one-act musicals, "March of the Falsettos" and "Falsettoland," that were produced individually in 1981 and 1990.
All three original leading men -- Michael Rupert, Stephen Bogardus and Chip Zien -- are back, as is the original director, James Lapine (who is also co-author of the book).
A lot has happened to them since they and "Falsettos" first came together.
A lot has happened to the audience.
Like any reunion worth attending, this one tempers its feelings of joy with those of deep loss.
The wave of euphoria "Falsettos" evokes is inseparable from the wave of tears that rises audibly through the house once Mr.
Finn raises the ghosts of those Falsettoland loved ones no longer here to join the party.


